THE BIBLE
with the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical Books

ZAINE RIDLING, Ph.D.
Editor

New Revised Standard Version

Copyright ©1989, Division of Christian Education of the National Council of the Churches
of Christ in the United States of America. Used by permission. All rights reserved.

Bible Document Statistics:
Pages:
3,060
Paragraphs:
39,904
Lines:
114,010
Words:
1,054,957

THE HEBREW BIBLE
with the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical Books

ZAINE RIDLING, Ph.D.
Editor

New Revised Standard Version

Copyright ©1989, Division of Christian Education of the National Council of the Churches
of Christ in the United States of America. Used by permission. All rights reserved.

HEBREW BIBLE, TABLE OF CONTENTS 1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
to the Hebrew Bible

Foreword ……………………………......................................
To the Reader ………………………………...........................
Abbreviations ………………………………...........................

3
7
15

Introduction to the Pentateuch ……………………………….
Genesis …………………………………………………………….
Exodus ……………………………………………………………..
Leviticus ……………………………………………………………
Numbers ……………………………………….……..……………
Deuteronomy ……………………………………………………..

19
28
124
207
266
348

Introduction to the Historical Books ………………………….
Joshua ………………………………………………………………
Judges ………………………………………………………………
Ruth ………………………………………………………………...
1 Samuel ……………………………………………………………
2 Samuel ……………………………………………………………
1 Kings ……………………………………………………………...
2 Kings ……………………………………………………………...
1 Chronicles ………………………………………………………..
2 Chronicles …………………………………………….………….
Ezra ……………………………………………………….…………
Nehemiah ………………………………………………………..…
Esther ……………………………………………………………..…

426
435
486
536
544
605
657
717
773
828
892
914
941

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

TH

HT

HT

TH

TH

HT

HT

TH

1

HEBREW BIBLE, TABLE OF CONTENTS 2

Introduction to the Poetical and Wisdom Books …….……….
Job …………………………………………………………………….
Psalms ………………………………………………………………...
Proverbs ………………………………………………………………
Ecclesiastes …………………………………………………………..
Song of Solomon ……………………………………………………

958
967
1038
1231
1290
1308

Introduction to the Prophetic Books …………..………………..
Isaiah ………………………………………………………………….
Jeremiah ……………………………………………………………..
Lamentations ………………………………………………………..
Ezekiel ………………………………………………………………..
Daniel …………………………………………………………………
Hosea …………………………………………………………………
Joel ……………………………………………………………………
Amos ………………………………………………………………….
Obadiah ………………………………………………………………
Jonah …………………………………………………………………
Micah …………………………………………………………………
Nahum ………………………………………………………………..
Habakkuk …………………………………………………………….
Zephaniah ……………………………………………………………
Haggai ………………………………………………………………..
Zechariah …………………………………………………………….
Malachi ……………………………………………………………….

1324
1332
1486
1625
1646
1754
1787
1814
1825
1847
1852
1858
1874
1882
1890
1900
1905
1925

TH

HT

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

TH

TH

HT

HT

HT

TH

TH

TH

HT

HT

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

TH

HT

HT

TH

TH

HT

HT

TH

2

FOREWORD 3

FOREWORD
The Bible is the single most important influence in the imaginative
tradition of Western literature. The Bible redeems history with a
visionary, poetic perspective, which complements science in the
understanding of human nature. It is encyclopedic in character,
stretching from creation to the end of the world. It is violently partisan,
abstract rather than objective or representational, with a
multidimensional theme and variations rather than a linear exposition.
The Bible can be read as literally as any fundamentalist could desire,
but the real literal meaning is an imaginative and poetic one, brought
forth through myth and metaphor.
The Bible's deep influence on Western literature makes it one of the
first literary classics, but my own reading of the Bible is expansive, open
to resonances of contextual meaning. The book is a double mirror,
revealing a unified structure of narrative and recurrent imagery that
ultimately reflects itself: the old is transformed and given new
meaning; and the story ends back where it all began. Given this, there
is a rich interaction between biblical and secular knowledge. Indeed,
there is an imaginative energy flowing from the Bible to creative minds
for centuries. A student of English literature who does not know the
Bible does not understand a good deal of what is going on in what he
reads: the most conscientious student would be continually
misconstruing the implications, even the meaning.
I recommend reading the Bible straight through to form a conceptual
unity that corresponds to the imaginative unity of the text, but the
Bible is a very long and miscellaneous book, and many of those who
have tried to read it straight though have bogged down very soon,
generally around the middle of Leviticus. One reason for this is that the
Bible is more like a small library than a real book: it almost seems that
it has come to be thought of as a book only because it is contained for
convenience within two covers. In fact what the word "Bible" itself
primarily means is ta biblia, the little books.

3

FOREWORD 4

Those who do succeed in reading the Bible from beginning to end will
discover that at least it has a beginning and an end, and some traces of
a total structure. It begins where time begins, with the creation of the
world; it ends where time ends, with the Apocalypse, and it surveys
human history in between, or the aspect of history it is interested in,
under the symbolic names of Adam and Israel. There is also a body of
concrete images: city, mountain, river, garden, tree, oil, fountain,
bread, wine, bride, sheep, and many others, which recur so often that
they clearly indicate some kind of unifying principle. The Bible's
disregard for unity is quite as impressive as its exhibition of it.
The Quran is the earliest and by far the finest work of Classical Arabic
prose. For Muslims it is the infallible Word of God, a transcript of a
tablet preserved in heaven, revealed to the Prophet Muhammad by the
Angel Gabriel. The Quran in itself is a literary masterpiece, but is also
one of the most influential books in the history of prophetic literature.
My effort here, with the aid of several Arabic scholars, is to provide a
meaningful translation of the Quran for the modern English reader,
written in standard (American) English.
More often than not, when reading English translations of the Qur'an,
one gets the sense of reading a foreign language translated literally,
and thus sentences come across in English in strange contortions,
leading the reader to scratch his head and reread the surah over and
over in frustration. Until now, the Quran's contents has frustrated
English readers simply because of poor translation efforts to date. The
Standard English Version (SEV) translation directly addresses the
problem of historical distance between past and present, between
tradition and the needs of the contemporary generation, between
revelation and interpretation. Part of the continuing relevance of the
Quran in translation is that it does not permit itself to be read literally
or passively. It challenges its readers actively to confront the problem
of the relation between revelation and interpretation and breaks
down conventional boundaries between scripture and tradition amidst
the language divide that will always exist between Arabic and, for
example, English. With that in mind, those who have not read the
Quran will see that it is a capstone to all the Scriptures of the West:

4

FOREWORD 5

Jewish, Christian, and Muslim; all of which share the same God, but use
different metaphors by which to worship YHWH, the Trinity, or Allah.
In the end, my aim is for readers to see what the subject of these
Scriptures mean, not to accept or reject them. Belief and disbelief, as
ordinarily understood, are so often and so intensely anxious and
insecure. The reason is that they are actually closely connected, being
two sides of the same coin.
Much of my critical thinking has turned on the double meaning of
Aristotle's term anagnorisis, which can mean "discovery" or
"recognition," depending on whether the emphasis falls on the
novelty of the appearance or on its reappearance. Of course, every true
discovery must in some sense relate to what has always been true, and
so all genuine knowledge includes recognition, however interpreted. In
any case, at my age discovery can come only from reversing one's
direction, going upstream to one's source, like the fisherman in Yeat's
"Tower." The negative form of the Greek work for truth, aletheia,
which means something like "unforgetting," suggests that at a certain
point searching for the unknown gives place to trying to remove the
impediments to seeing what is there already. I hope that the retracing
process of rereading the Bible, whatever its success, will be profitable
for some readers, as it has been for me.
Nevertheless, I have often felt during its reading like Milton's Satan
journeying through chaos, where every step, which may not be a step
but a burrowing or flying or swimming, is surrounded by endless vistas
of unknown territory.
The New Revised Standard Version (NRSV) was chosen for this site due
to its scholarly and ecumenical approach along with its accuracy,
readability, and clarity. The list of excellent Jewish, Catholic, and
Protestant scholars who worked on the NRSV translation makes this
translation by far the most robust and apt for scholarly biblical studies
in the 21st century. The Scripture quotations contained herein are from
the New Revised Standard Version Bible, copyright 1989, by the
Division of Christian Education of the National Council of the Churches
of Christ in the U.S.A. Used by permission. All rights reserved. The New

5

FOREWORD 6

Revised Standard Version Bible may be quoted and/or reprinted up to
and inclusive of five hundred (500) verses without express written
permission of the publisher, provided the verses quoted do not amount
to a complete book of the Bible or account for fifty percent (50%) of
the total work in which they are quoted. All introductory content is
found in the New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha: New
Revised Standard Version. Ed. Michael D. Coogan. 3rd ed. (New York:
Oxford University Press, 2001). All text is used by permission from
Oxford University Press. The New Revised Standard Version is copyright
1989, by the Division of Christian Education of the National Council of
the Churches of Christ in the United States of America, and its text is
used by permission. The Standard English Version (SEV) translation is
copyright © 2002 by Zaine Ridling, Ph.D. and is published with
permission of Access Foundation.
HT

TH

Zaine Ridling, Ph.D.

6

TO THE READER 7

TO THE READER
This preface is addressed to you by the Committee of translators, who
wish to explain, as briefly as possible, the origin and character of our
work. The publication of our revision is yet another step in the long,
continual process of making the Bible available in the form of the
English language that is most widely current in our day. To summarize
in a single sentence: the New Revised Standard Version of the Bible is
an authorized revision of the Revised Standard Version, published in
1952, which was a revision of the American Standard Version, published
in 1901, which, in turn, embodied earlier revisions of the King James
Version, published in 1611.
In the course of time, the King James Version came to be regarded as
"the Authorized Version." With good reason it has been termed "the
noblest monument of English prose," and it has entered, as no other
book has, into the making of the personal character and the public
institutions of the English speaking peoples. We owe to it an
incalculable debt.
Yet the King James Version has serious defects. By the middle of the
nineteenth century, the development of biblical studies and the
discovery of many biblical manuscripts more ancient than those on
which the King James Version was based made it apparent that these
defects were so many as to call for revision. The task was begun, by
authority of the Church of England, in 1870. The (British) revised
Version of the Bible was published in 1881-1885; and the American
Standard Version, its variant embodying the preferences of the
American scholars associated with the work, was published, as was
mentioned above, in 1901. In 1928 the copyright of the latter was
acquired by the International Council of Religious Education and thus
passed into the ownership of the churches of the United States and
Canada that were associated in this Council through their boards of
education and publication.

7

TO THE READER 8

The Council appointed a committee of scholars to have charge of the
text of the American Standard Version and to undertake inquiry
concerning the need for further revision. After studying the questions
whether or not revision should be undertaken, and if so, what its
nature and extent should be, in 1937 the Council authorized a revision.
The scholars who served as members of the Committee worked in two
sections, one dealing with the Old Testament and one with the New
Testament. In 1946 the Revised Standard Version of the New Testament
was published. The publication of the Revised Standard Version of the
Bible, containing the Old and New Testaments, took place on
September 30, 1952. A translation of the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical
Books of the Old Testament followed in 1957. In 1977 this collection was
issued in an expanded edition, containing three additional texts
received by Eastern Orthodox communions (3 and 4 Maccabees and
Psalm 151). Thereafter the Revised Standard Version gained the
distinction of being officially authorized for use by all major Christian
churches: Protestant, Anglican, Roman Catholic, and Eastern Orthodox.
The Revised Standard Version Bible Committee is a continuing body,
comprising about thirty members, both men and women. Ecumenical
in representation, it includes scholars affiliated with various Protestant
denominations, as well as several Roman Catholic members, an Eastern
Orthodox member, and a Jewish member who serves in the Old
Testament section. For a period of time the Committee included several
members from Canada and from England.
Because no translation of the Bible is perfect or is acceptable to all
groups of readers, and because discoveries of older manuscripts and
further investigation of linguistic features of text continue to become
available, renderings of the Bible have proliferated. During the years
following the publication of the Revised Standard Version, twenty-six
other English translations and revisions of the Bible were produced by
committees and by individual scholars — not to mention twenty-five
other translations and revisions of the New Testament alone. One of
the latter was the second edition of the RSV New Testament, issued in
1971, twenty-five years after its initial publication.

8

TO THE READER 9

Following the publication of the RSV Old Testament in 1952, significant
advances were made in the discovery and interpretation of documents
in Semitic languages related to Hebrew. In addition to the information
that had become available in the late 1940s from the Dead Sea texts of
Isaiah and Habakkuk, subsequent acquisitions from the same area
brought to light many other early copies of all the books of the
Hebrew Scriptures (except Esther), though most of these copies are
fragmentary. During the same period early Greek manuscript copies of
books of the New Testament also became available.
In order to take these discoveries into account, along with recent
studies of documents in Semitic languages related to Hebrew, in 1974
the Policies Committee of the Revised Standard Version, which is
standing committee of the National Council of the Churches of Christ
in the U.S.A., authorized the preparation of a revision of the entire RSV
Bible.
For the Old Testament the Committee has made use of the Biblia
Hebraica Stuttgartensia (1977; ed. sec. emendata, 1983). This is an
edition of the Hebrew and Aramaic text as current early in the
Christian era and fixed by Jewish scholars (the "Masoretes") of the
sixth to the ninth centuries. The vowel signs, which were added by the
Masoretes, are accepted in the main, but where a more probable and
convincing reading can be obtained by assuming different vowels, this
has been done. No notes are given in such cases, because the vowel
points are less ancient and reliable than the consonants. When an
alternative reading given by the Masoretes is translated in a footnote,
this is identified by the words "Another reading is."
Departures from the consonantal text of the best manuscripts have
been made only where it seems clear that errors in copying had been
made before the text was standardized. Most of the corrections
adopted are based on the ancient versions (translations into Greek,
Aramaic, Syriac, and Latin), which were made prior to the time of the
work of the Masoretes and which therefore may reflect earlier forms of
Hebrew text. In such instances a footnote specifies the version or
versions from which the correction has been derived and also gives a
translation of the Masoretic Text. Where it was deemed appropriate to

9

TO THE READER 10

do so, information is supplied in footnotes from subsidiary Jewish
traditions concerning other textual readings (the Tiqqune Sopherim,
"emendations of the scribes"). These are identified in the footnotes as
"Ancient Heb tradition."
Occasionally it is evident that the text has suffered in transmission and
that none of the versions provides a satisfactory restoration. Here we
can only follow the best judgment of competent scholars as to the
most probably reconstruction of the original text. Such reconstructions
are indicated in footnotes by the abbreviation Cn ("Correction"), and a
translation of the Masoretic Text is added.
For the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical Books of the Old Testament the
Committee has made use of a number of texts. For most of these books
the basic Greek text from which the present translation was made is
the edition of the Septuagint prepared by Alfred Rahlfs and published
by the Württemberg Bible Society (Stuttgart, 1935). For several of the
books the more recently published individual volumes of the Göttingen
Septuagint project were utilized. For the book of Tobit it was decided
to follow the form of the Greek text found in codex Sinaiticus
(supported as it is by evidence from Qumran); where this text is
defective, it was supplemented and corrected by other Greek
manuscripts. For the three Additions to Daniel (namely, Susanna, the
Prayer of Azariah and the Song of the Three Jews, and Bel and the
Dragon) the Committee continued to use the Greek version attributed
to Theodotion (the so-called "Theodotion-Daniel"). In translating
Ecclesiasticus (Sirach), while constant reference was made to the
Hebrew fragments of a large portion of this book (those discovered at
Qumran and Masada as well as those recovered from the Cairo Geniza),
the Committee generally followed the Greek text (including verse
numbers) published by Joseph Ziegler in the Göttingen Septuagint
(1965). But in many places the Committee has translated the Hebrew
text when this provides a reading that is clearly superior to the Greek;
the Syriac and Latin versions were also consulted throughout and
occasionally adopted. The basic text adopted in rendering 2 Esdras is
the Latin version given in Biblia Sacra, edited by Robert Weber
(Stuttgart, 1971). This was supplemented by consulting the Latin text as
edited by R.L. Bensly (1895) and by Bruno Violet (1910), as well as by

10

TO THE READER 11

taking into account the several Oriental versions of 2 Esdras, namely
the Syriac, Ethiopic, Arabic (two forms, referred to as Arabic 1 and
Arabic 2), Armenian, and Georgian versions. Finally, since the Additions
to the Book of Esther are disjointed and quite unintelligible as they
stand in most editions of the Apocrypha, we have provided them with
their original context by translating the whole of the Greek version of
Esther from Robert Hanhart's Göttingen edition (1983).
For the New Testament the Committee has based its work on the most
recent edition of The Greek New Testament, prepared by an
interconfessional and international committee and published by the
United Bible Societies (1966; 3rd ed. corrected, 1983; information
concerning changes to be introduced into the critical apparatus of the
forthcoming 4th edition was available to the Committee). As in that
edition, double brackets are used to enclose a few passages that are
generally regarded to be later additions to the text, but which we have
retained because of their evident antiquity and their importance in the
textual tradition. Only in very rare instances have we replaced the text
or the punctuation of the Bible Societies' edition by an alternative that
seemed to us to be superior. Here and there in the footnotes the
phrase, "Other ancient authorities read," identifies alternative
readings preserved by Greek manuscripts and early versions. In both
Testaments, alternative renderings of the text are indicated by the
word "Or."
As for the style of English adopted for the present revision, among the
mandates given to the Committee in 1980 by the Division of Education
and Ministry of the National Council of Churches of Christ (which now
holds the copyright of the RSV Bible) was the directive to continue in
the tradition of the King James Bible, but to introduce such changes as
are warranted on the basis of accuracy, clarity, euphony, and current
English usage. Within the constraints set by the original text and by the
mandates of the Division, the Committee has followed the maxim, "As
literal as possible, as free as necessary." As a consequence, the New
Revised Standard Version (NRSV) remains essentially a literal
translation. Paraphrastic renderings have been adopted only sparingly,
and then chiefly to compensate for a deficiency in the English

11

TO THE READER 12

language — the lack of common gender third person singular
pronoun.
During the almost half a century since the publication of the RSV, many
in the churches have become sensitive to the danger of linguistic
sexism arising from the inherent bias of the English language towards
the masculine gender, a bias that in the case of the Bible has often
restricted or obscured the meaning of the original text. The mandates
from the Division specified that, in references to men and women,
masculine-oriented language should be eliminated as far as this can be
done without altering passages that reflect the historical situation of
ancient patriarchal culture. As can be appreciated, more than once the
Committee found that the several mandates stood in tension and even
in conflict. The various concerns had to be balanced case by case in
order to provide a faithful and acceptable rendering without using
contrived English. Only very occasionally has the pronoun "he" or
"him" been retained in passages where the reference may have been
to a woman as well as to a man; for example, in several legal texts in
Leviticus and Deuteronomy. In such instances of formal, legal
language, the options of either putting the passage in the plural or of
introducing additional nouns to avoid masculine pronouns in English
seemed to the Committee to obscure the historic structure and literary
character of the original. In the vast majority of cases, however,
inclusiveness has been attained by simple rephrasing or by introducing
plural forms when this does not distort the meaning of the passage. Of
course, in narrative and in parable no attempt was made to generalize
the sex of individual persons.
Another aspect of style will be detected by readers who compare the
more stately English rendering of the Old Testament with the less
formal rendering adopted for the New Testament. For example, the
traditional distinction between shall and will in English has been
retained in the Old Testament as appropriate in rendering a document
that embodies what may be termed the classic form of Hebrew, while
in the New Testament the abandonment of such distinctions in the
usage of the future tense in English reflects the more colloquial nature
of the koine Greek used by most New Testament authors except when
they are quoting the Old Testament.

12

TO THE READER 13

Careful readers will notice that here and there in the Old Testament
the work LORD (or in certain cases GOD) is printed in capital letters. This
represents the traditional manner in English versions of rendering the
Divine Name, the "Tetragrammaton" (see the notes on Exodus 3:14, 15),
following the practice in the reading of the Hebrew Scriptures in the
synagogue. While it is almost if not quite certain that the Name was
originally pronounced "Yahweh," this pronunciation was not indicated
when the Masoretes added vowel sounds to the consonantal Hebrew
text. To the four consonants YHWH of the Name, which had come to
be regarded as too sacred to be pronounced, they attached vowel signs
indicating that in its place should be read the Hebrew word Adonai
meaning "Lord" (or Elohim meaning "God"). Ancient Greek translators
employed the word Kyrios ("Lord") for the Name. The Vulgate likewise
used the Latin word Dominus ("Lord"). The form "Jehovah" is of late
medieval origin; it is a combination of the consonants of the Divine
Name and the vowels attached to it by the Masoretes but belonging to
an entirely different word. Although the American Standard Version
(1901) had used "Jehovah" to render the Tetragrammaton (the sound
of Y being represented by J and the sound of W by V, as in Latin), for
two reasons the Committees that produced the RSV and the NRSV
returned to the more familiar usage of the King James Version. (1) The
word "Jehovah" does not accurately represent any form of the Name
ever used in Hebrew. (2) The use of any proper name for the one and
only God, as though there were other gods from whom the true God
had to be distinguished, began to be discontinued in Judaism before
the Christian era and is inappropriate for the universal faith of the
Christian Church.
It will be seen that in the Psalms and in other prayers addressed to God
the archaic second person singular pronouns (thee, thou, thine) and
verb forms (art, hast, hadst) are no longer used. Although some readers
may regret this change, it should be pointed out that in the original
languages neither the Old Testament nor the New makes any linguistic
distinction between addressing a human being and addressing the
Deity. Furthermore, in the tradition of the King James Version one will
not expect to find the use of capital letters for pronouns that refer to
the Deity — such capitalization is an unnecessary innovation that has
only recently been introduced into a few English translations of the

13

TO THE READER 14

Bible. Finally, we have left to the discretion of the licensed publishers
such matters as section headings, cross-references, and clues to the
pronunciation of proper names.
This new version seeks to preserve all that is best in the English Bible as
it has been known and used through the years. It is intended for use in
public reading and congregational worship, as well as in private study,
instruction, and meditation. We have resisted the temptation to
introduce terms and phrases that merely reflect current moods, and
have tried to put the message of the Scriptures in simple, enduring
words and expressions that are worthy to stand in the great tradition
of the King James Bible and its predecessors.
In traditional Judaism and Christianity, the Bible has been more than a
historical document to be preserved or a classic of literature to be
cherished and admired; it is recognized as the unique record of God's
dealing with people over the ages. The Old Testament sets forth the
call of a special people to enter into covenant relation with the God of
justice and steadfast love and to bring God's law to the nations. The
New Testament records the life and work of Jesus Christ, the one in
whom "the Word became flesh," as well as describes the rise and
spread of the early Christian Church. The Bible carries its full message,
not tot hose who regard it simply as a noble literary heritage of the
past or who wish to use it to enhance political purposes and advance
otherwise desirable goals, but to all persons and communities who
read it so that they may discern and understand what God is saying to
them. That message must not be disguised in phrases that are no
longer clear, or hidden under words that have changed or lost their
meaning; it must be presented in language that is direct and plain and
meaningful to people today. It is the hope and prayer of the
translators that this version of the Bible may continue to hold a large
place in congregational life and to speak to all readers, young and old
alike, helping them to understand and believe and respond to its
message.
For the Committee,
Bruce M. Metzger

14

ABBREVIATIONS 15

ABBREVIATIONS
The following abbreviations are used for the books of the Bible:
HEBREW BIBLE
Gen
Ex
Lev
Num
Deut
Josh
Judg
Ruth
1 Sam
2 Sam
1 Kings
2 Kings
1 Chr
2 Chr
Ezra
Neh
Esth
Job
Ps
Prov
Eccl
Song
Isa
Jer
Lam
Ezek
Dan
Hos
Joel
Am
Ob
Jon
Mic
Nah
Hab
Zeph
Hag
Zech
Mal

Genesis
Exodus
Leviticus
Numbers
Deuteronomy
Joshua
Judges
Ruth
1 Samuel
2 Samuel
1 Kings
2 Kings
1 Chronicles
2 Chronicles
Ezra
Nehemiah
Esther
Job
Psalms
Proverbs
Ecclesiastes
Song of Solomon
Isaiah
Jeremiah
Lamentations
Ezekiel
Daniel
Hosea
Joel
Amos
Obadiah
Jonah
Micah
Nahum
Habakkuk
Zephaniah
Haggai
Zechariah
Malachi

15

ABBREVIATIONS 16

APOCRYPHAL/DEUTEROCANONICAL BOOKS
Tob
Jdt
Add Esth
Wis
Sir
Bar
1 Esd
2 Esd
Let Jer
Song of Thr
Sus
Bel
1 Macc
2 Macc
3 Macc
4 Macc
Pr Man

Tobit
Judith
Additions to Esther
Wisdom of Solomon
Sirach (Ecclesiasticus)
Baruch
1 Esdras
2 Esdras
Letter of Jeremiah
Prayer of Azariah and the Song of the Three Jews
Susanna
Bel and the Dragon
1 Maccabees
2 Maccabees
3 Maccabees
4 Maccabees
Prayer of Manasseh

NEW TESTAMENT
Mt
Mk
Lk
Jn
Acts
Rom
1 Cor
2 Cor
Gal
Eph
Phil
Col
1 Thess
2 Thess
1 Tim
2 Tim
Titus
Philem
Heb
Jas
1 Pet
2 Pet
1 Jn
2 Jn
3 Jn
Jude
Rev

Matthew
Mark
Luke
John
Acts of the Apostles
Romans
1 Corinthians
2 Corinthians
Galatians
Ephesians
Philippians
Colossians
1 Thessalonians
2 Thessalonians
1 Timothy
2 Timothy
Titus
Philemon
Hebrews
James
1 Peter
2 Peter
1 John
2 John
3 John
Jude
Revelation

16

ABBREVIATIONS 17

In the notes to the books of the Hebrew Bible the following abbreviations are used:
Ant.
Aram
Ch, chs
Cn

Gk
Heb
Josephus
Macc
Ms(s)
MT
OL
Q Ms(s)
Sam
Syr
Syr H
Tg
Vg

Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews
Aramaic
Chapter, chapters
Correction; made where the text has suffered in transmission
and the versions provide no satisfactory restoration but where
the Standard Bible Committee agrees with the judgment of
competent scholars as to the most probable reconstruction of
the original text.
Septuagint, Greek version of the Hebrew Bible
Hebrew of the consonantal Masoretic Text of the Hebrew Bible
Flavius Josephus (Jewish historian, ca. 37-95 CE)
The book(s) of the Maccabees
Manuscript(s)
The Hebrew of the pointed Masoretic Text of the Hebrew Bible
Old Latin
Manuscript(s) found at Qumran by the Dead Sea
Samaritan Hebrew text of the Hebrew Bible
Syriac Version of the Hebrew Bible
Syriac Version of Origen's Hexapla
Targum
Vulgate, Latin Version of the Hebrew Bible

The following abbreviations of additional ancient works are used in the introductions and
annotations to the biblical books:
Ag. Ap.
Apoc. Bar.
Apoc. Zeph.
b. Ber.
b. Eruv.
b. Git.
b. Ned.
b. San.
b. Shabb
b. Yoma
b. Meg.
CD
1 Clem
Ep. Arist.
Gen. Rab.
Hermas, Mand.
Ignatius, Philad.
Irenaeus, Adv. Haer.
Jer. Sot.
Josephus, Ag. Ap.
Jub.
Lam. Rab.
m. Ketub.
m. Ned.
m. Ohalot

Josephus, Against Apion
Apocalypse of Baruch
Apocalypse of Zephaniah
Babylonian Talmud, Tractate Berakot
Babylonian Talmud, Tractate Eruvin
Babylonian Talmud, Tractate Gittin
Babylonian Talmud, Tractate Nedarim
Babylonian Talmud, Tractate Sanhedrin
Babylonian Talmud, Tractate Shabbat
Babylonian Talmud, Tractate Yoma
Babylonian Talmud, Tractate Megillah
Cairo Genizah, Damascus Document
1 Clement (First Epistle of Clement)
Letter of Aristeas
Genesis Rabbah
Shepherd of Hermas, Mandate
Ignatius, Epistle to the Philadelphians
Irenaeus, Adversus omnes Haereses
Jerusalem Talmud, Sotah (see y. Sot.)
Josephus, Against Apion
Jubilees
Lamentations Rabbah
Mishnah Ketubim
Mishnah Nedarim
Mishnah Ohalot

17

ABBREVIATIONS 18

Midr.
Midr. Pss.
P. Oxy.
Philo, De Conf. Ling.
Philo, De spec. leg.
Philo, Leg. all.
Philo, Leg. Gai.
Philo, Rer. div. her.
Pliny, Nat. Hist.
11QTemple
1QH
1QM
11QMelch
1QpHab
11QPs
1QS
Seder Olam R.
Shab.
Sifre Num.
Sib. Or.
T. Jud. (Test. Jud.)
T. Moses
Tr. Eruv.
y.
y. Sot.
Q

Note:

Midrash
Midrash Psalms
Oxyrhynchus Papyri
Philo, De Confusione Linguarum
Philo, De specialibus Legibus
Philo, Legum allegoriae
Philo, Legatio ad Gaium
Philo, Quis rerum divinarum heres sit
Philo, Naturalis Historia
The Temple Scroll from Qumran Cave 11 (11Q19)
Hodayot (Thanksgiving Hymns) from Qumran Cave 1
Milhamah (War Scroll) from Qumran Cave 1
Melchizedek Scroll from Qumran Cave 11 (11Q13)
Pesher to Habakkuk from Qumran Cave 1
The Psalms Scroll from Qumran Cave 11 (11Q5)
Rule of the Community (Serek Hayahad) from Qumran Cave 1
Seder Olam Rabbah
Shabbat
Sifre Numbers
Sibylline Oracles
Testament of Judah
Testament of Moses
Babylonian Talmud, Tractate Eruvin (see b. Eruv.)
Jerusalem Talmud
Jerusalem Talmud, Sotah
Quelle ("Source") see note below

The abbreviation "Q," unless specified as "Quelle" ("Source) for the
posited New Testament document of non-Markan common material
in Matthew and Luke, refers to Qumran, and manuscripts from Qumran
are identified by the cave number, which precedes the Q, and the official
manuscript number, which follows it; thus 1Q34 = Manuscript 34 from
Cave 1 at Qumran; 4Q174 = Manuscript 174 from Cave 4; etc.

Copyright ©1989, Division of Christian Education of the National Council of the Churches of Christ in the United States of
America. Used by permission. All rights reserved.

18

INTRO TO THE PENTATEUCH 19

INTRODUCTION TO THE
PENTATEUCH
Terminology, Contents, and Traditional Views of Authorship
The word "PENTATEUCH," from the Greek for "five (penta) books
(teuchos)," has entered English by way of Latin as the designation for
the first group of books in the Hebrew Bible, comprising Genesis,
Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy. Unlike other canonical
divisions, where there is significant debate within and between
different religious traditions, both Jewish and Christian tradition view
these five books in this order as a single unit, introducing the Bible.
The unanimity of tradition and the initial placement of these five
books reflect their significant place within both Judaism and
Christianity.
Despite this unanimity of tradition, it is not so obvious how these five
books cohere. They certainly do not form a single book in the modern
sense, with a single author; modern scholarship has persuasively
argued that each of these books is composite, reflecting many
traditions and sources (see below). Nor is there complete coherence of
plot among them. Without any question, Moses is the central human
character of much of the Pentateuch, but he is only introduced in ch 2
of Exodus, the second book. Nor is the early development of Israel as a
people the Pentateuch's unifying theme, as may be seen from the first
eleven chapters of the Bible, which are concerned with the world from
creation to the birth of Abraham (Gen 11.27). Various other suggested
unifying themes for the Pentateuch, such as covenant, are also
incorrect, since they do not really appear at the beginning of the
Pentateuch and are continued well beyond it. The suggestion that the
promise of the land unifies the Pentateuch is especially problematic,
since this theme, though introduced in Gen 12, is only fulfilled with the
conquest of the land in Joshua, in which case the Hexateuch ("six
19

INTRO TO THE PENTATEUCH 20

books": the Pentateuch plus Joshua) rather than the Pentateuch should
be seen as the decisive unit.
The Hebrew terms torah and torat moshe ("the Torah of Moses"),
already in use in late biblical literature to describe what is later called
the Pentateuch, offer a better clue to the nature and unity of these
books. Torah is often understood as "law," and indeed this is one of
the its frequent meanings in the Bible, as in Ex 12.49; "There shall be
one law [Heb torah] for the native and for the alien who resides
among you." Law is a predominant genre of the Pentateuch, which
contains not only the Ten Commandments in Ex 20 and Deut 5, but
extensive legal collections in Ex 21-23, Lev 17-26, and Deut 12-26, as well
as selected laws within various narratives, such as the law of
circumcision in the narrative about Abraham in Gen 17 and the law
concerning inheritance of the land by women in Num 36, embedded
within a section about the possession of the land. Many narrative
sections also contain material that is of legal significance. For example,
the first creation story in Genesis culminates with the "creation" of the
sabbath (Gen 2.2-3), though this would only be legislated in Exodus,
first in ch 16, and then as part of the Ten Commandments, in Ex 20.8-11.
Similarly, the story of the construction of the tabernacle (Ex 25-40), a
temporary temple for God in the wilderness, is not narrated for its own
sake, but as an introduction to the various laws of sacrifice, narrated at
the beginning of Leviticus, the book that immediately follows these
chapters.
Yet "law" is not the only possible translation of torah, and the
Pentateuch should not be typified as a book of law. The Hebrew term
torah also means "instruction" or "teaching," as in Prov 1.8, "Hear, my
child, your father's instruction, and do not reject your mother's
teaching [Heb torah]." Teaching is not confined to law; indeed
narratives or stories are as effective a medium of instruction. Thus,
given the predominance of narrative in significant portions of the
Pentateuch, especially in Genesis, the beginning of Exodus, and
Numbers, it is best to understand the biblical term torat moshe, the
earliest extant term for these five books, as "the instruction of Moses."
This instruction was realized through narratives and laws, which

20

INTRO TO THE PENTATEUCH 21

together elucidate the proper norms of living and the relationship
between God and the world.
The term torat moshe, found predominantly in various late biblical
sections and books, such as Ezra, Nehemiah, and Chronicles, refers to
the Pentateuch more or less as it now exists, but it is not found in the
Pentateuch itself. In fact, the Torah does not explicitly suggest that it
was compiled by Moses himself. (The phrase "the Torah" in passages
such as Deut 4.44, "This is the law [Heb torah] that Moses set before
the Israelites," never refers to the complete Pentateuch.) It is easy to
see how the tradition ascribing these five books as a whole to Moses
developed. In several places, the Hebrew Scriptures suggest that Moses
stayed on Mount Sinai for forty days and forty nights (Ex 24.18; 34.28;
Deut 9.9; 10.10) Clearly, this was too long a time for short legal
collections such as Ex 21-23 to have been conveyed to him, and thus
traditions developed that Moses received the entire written Torah from
God at that point. According to the classical rabbis, Moses
simultaneously received the oral law, which served as the authoritative
interpretation of the written law. The written Torah would include,
according to all rabbinic sources (which are followed by the early
church), even the book of Genesis, which thus represents God's
narration to Moses of the early history of the world and of Abraham
and his family. Some rabbinic sources even suggest that the final
chapter of the Torah, Deut 34, which narrates the death of Moses, was
dictated to God by Moses, who wrote them with his tears. The view
that the Torah should be understood as the divine word mediated by
Moses was the standard view of church and synagogue through the
Renaissance.
This view is explicitly contradicted by the Torah's narrative, as was
sometimes (though rarely) recognized in the Middle Ages. Thus,
Abraham ibn (son of Ezra), active in the twelfth century CE, noted that
Gen 12.6 states in reference to Abraham that "at that time the
Canaanites were in the land." The words "at that time" suggest that
for the author, the Canaanites were no longer in the land; in other
words, it appears that the text was written after the time of Moses,
because during his time the Canaanites were still in the land. A small
number of other places that suggest authorship later than Moses were

21

INTRO TO THE PENTATEUCH 22

pointed out by a few medieval scholars, but these were not
systematized into a thesis that could challenge the dominant view
concerning Moses' authorship of the Torah.
Modern Source Theories
Slowly, with the rise of rationalism, particularly as associated with
figures such as Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679) and Benedict (Baruch)
Spinoza (1632-1677), the view that the Torah was a unified whole,
written by Moses, began to be questioned. (For additional information
on this development, see the essays on "The Interpretation of the
Bible). This culminated in the development of the model of the
Documentary Hypothesis in the nineteenth century, according to which
the Pentateuch (or Hexateuch) is composed of four main sources or
documents that were edited or redacted together: J, E. P, and D. Each
of these sources or documents is embedded in a (relatively) complete
form in the current Pentateuch, and iss typified by both vocabulary and
theological perspective.
J and E are so called after the names for God that each of them uses in
Genesis: J uses the name "Yahweh" (German "Jahwe," hence "J"),
translated in the NRSV as "Lord," though it is really a personal name,
whose exact meaning is unknown, from the root "to be"; E prefers to
call the deity "Elohim" (translated "God"), an epithet that also serves
as the generic term for God or gods in the Bible. P, which also uses
"Elohim," is an abbreviation for the Priestly material, and D refers to
Deuteronomy.
The difference in divine names, however, is not the main criterion used
by scholars for suggesting that the Torah is not a unified composition.
Much more significant are doublets and contradictions, in both
narrative and legal material. For example, it has long been noted that
chs 1-3 of Genesis twice narrate the creation of the world. People are
created first in 1.27 — "So God created humankind in his image, in the
image of God he created them; male and female he created them" —
and then again in 2.7 — "Then the Lord God formed man from the
dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life;
and the man became a living being." Furthermore, the second creation

22

INTRO TO THE PENTATEUCH 23

account does not simply mirror or repeat the first, but differs from the
first in both outline and detail. Gen 1.1-2.3, the first account, narrates
the creation of a highly symmetrical world by a very powerful deity
who creates through the word. In this story, for example, man and
woman are created together (1.27) after the creation of the land
animals (1.25). In contrast, the second story, in Gen 2.4-3.24, suggest
that man was created (2.7), then the animals (2.19), and then woman
(2.21-22). Its focus is on the creation of humanity, not of the entire
physical world, and God anthropomorphically "forms" various beings,
rather than creating them with the word. Thus, these are two separate
stories, written by two authors, representing different worldviews
about the nature of creation, humanity, and God.
The two creation stories appear as two totally separate blocks of
material in Gen 1.1-2.3 and 2.4-3.24. In several cases, however, such a
clear-cut division of sources is impossible for narrative reasons. For
example, the flood story culminates in a tradition that God will never
again bring a flood on the land (Gen 9.11); for this reason, the J and P
narratives cannot appear as separate and complete narratives, so they
are intertwined. Similarly, the story of the plague of blood (Ex 7.14-24)
contains two intertwined accounts; in one (J), Moses is the protagonist,
and the blood only affects the Nile (e.g., vv. 17-18), while in the other
(P), Aaron appears as well, and the flood affects al Egyptian water
sources (e.g., vv. 19, 24). In such cases, the narratives are combined with
great skill, though careful attention to plot and vocabulary help to
discern the original building blocks or sources of the story.
In addition to narrative, the legal material in the Torah is also the
product of several sources. For example, slave laws concerning the
Hebrew or Israelite slave are found in the Torah in Ex 21.1-6, Lev 25.3946, and Deut 15.12-18. These laws cannot be reconciled in a
straightforward fashion since they represent three different notions of
slavery. Most significant is the way in which Exodus differentiates
between the treatment of a male and female slave, whereas
Deuteronomy insists that they should both be treated similarly. While
Exodus and Deuteronomy agree that a slave who loves his master may
opt to remain a slave "for life" (Ex 21.6) or "forever" (Deut 15.17), Lev
25 insists that slavery does not really exist, since slaves must be treated

23

INTRO TO THE PENTATEUCH 24

"as hired or bound laborers," and they may only serve "until the year
of the jubilee" (v. 40). Such legal differences are not surprising once we
are open to the hypotheses that the Bible is composite, and the
different legal collections reflect norms or ideals of different groups
living in different time periods.
In fact, it is possible to trace distinctive styles and theological notions
that typify individual Pentateuchal sources. For example, the J source is
well-known for its highly anthropomorphic God, who has a close
relationship with humans, as seen in Gen 2.4-3.24, which includes, for
example, a description of God "walking in the garden" (3.8) and says
that God "made garments of skins for the man and for his wife, and
clothed them" (3.21). On the other hand, in E, the Elohist source, God is
more distant from people, typically communicating with them by
dreams or via intermediaries, such as heavenly messengers (NRSV
"angels") and prophets. The P or Priestly source is characterized by a
strong interest in order and boundaries (see Gen 1), as well as an
overriding concern with the priestly family of Aaron and the Templebased religious system. D, or Deuteronomy, is characterized by a
unique hortatory or preaching style, and insists strongly that God
cannot be seen, as in this source's description of revelation: "Then the
Lord spoke to you out of the fire. You heard the sound of words but
saw no form; there was only a voice" (Deut 4.12). This explains why this
source, uniquely, insists that God does not physically dwell in the
temple or tabernacle; rather, the temple is "the place the Lord your
God will choose as a dwelling for his name" (Deut 12.11). D also
emphasizes that this one God must be worshiped in one place only (see
especially Deut 12); this place is later understood to be Jerusalem.
The narrative sources J, E, P, and D also have legal collections
associated with them. The Covenant Collection (see Ex 24.7) in Ex 20.2223.33 is associated with J or E. The Holiness Collection of Lev 17-26 is so
named because of its central injunction, "You shall be holy, for I the
Lord your God am holy" (Lev 19.2). Though not composed by the
Priestly author (P), it represents Priestly theology. The Deuteronomic
law collection appears in Deut 12-26. These blocks of material were
called "codes" by earlier scholars; since the blocks are neither complete

24

INTRO TO THE PENTATEUCH 25

nor organized for the law court, however, as a "code" might be, the
term "collection" is more suitable.
Critical biblical scholarship, through the early part of the twenty-first
century, was quite confident in dating each of these Pentateuchal
sources along with the legal collections they incorporated. Thus, J was
seen as the earliest collection, often dated to the period of David and
Solomon in the tenth century BCE, followed by E, which was often
associated with the Northern Kingdom. D was connected to the reform
of King Josiah in the late seventh century, and P was seen as deriving
from the sixth century. Scholars now agree that the reasons usually
given for assigning these dates are problematic, and a lively debate has
developed concerning such fundamental issues as the relative order of
these sources and the extent to which any of them are as early as
previous scholars had suggested. The existence of E as a complete
source has been questioned as well, especially since E first appears well
after the beginning of the Torah and is very difficult to disentangle
from J after the beginning of Exodus. Thus, many scholars now speak
of JE together as an early narrative source, incorporating diverse
traditions over extended periods of time. Additionally, most scholars
now do not see each source as representative of a single author writing
at one particular time but recognize that each may reflect a long
historical period within a single group or "school." Thus, it is best to
speak of streams or strands of tradition and contrast their basic
underpinnings, rather than to speak of sources reflecting a single
author, period, and locale. For example, despite the unraveling of a
consensus on the exact date of the sources, it is still valid to contrast
the Deuteronomic view of Israel's fundamental, intrinsic holiness — as
seen, for example, in Deut 7.6, "For you are a people holy to the Lord
your God" — with the Priestly view, articulated most clearly in the
Holiness Collection (HC), which suggests that Israel must aspire to
holiness — as in Lev 19.2, "You shall be holy."

25

INTRO TO THE PENTATEUCH 26

Compilation and Redaction of the Pentateuch
It is unclear how these various sources and legal collections, which now
comprise the Torah, came together to form a single book. Scholars
posit an editor or series of editors or redactors, conveniently called R,
who combined the various sources, perhaps in several stages, over a
long time. Certainly not all ancient Israelite legal and narrative
traditions were collected and redacted as part of the Torah. Much was
certainly lost. Without access to this lost material, it is impossible to
suggest in detail how and why the redactor(s), R, functioned in a
particular way. It is sufficient to noticed that in contrast to modern
editing, which is fundamentally concerned with articulating a single
viewpoint, the redaction of the Torah, like the editing of other ancient
works, was not interested in creating purely consistent, singular
perspective but incorporated a variety of voices and perspectives.
The ultimate result of this redaction, which most likely took place
during the Babylonian exile (586-538 BCE) or soon thereafter in the
early Persian period, was the creation of a very long book, narrating
what must have been felt to be the formative period of Israel, from the
period of the creation of the world through the death of Moses.
Perhaps the events narrated in Gen 1-11 were included as a type of
introduction to the choosing of Abraham, describing in detail the
failures of humanity, as seen especially in the flood narrative (Gen 6-9)
and the Tower of Babel episode (Gen 11.1-9), which necessitated the
choosing of a particular nation by God.
No other work of comparable length or inclusiveness, both in terms of
the time covered or the sources systematically incorporated, was
produced in the ancient Near Eastern world. This extensive, inclusive
nature of the Torah has created a fundamental and interesting
problem with which all serious biblical interpreters have either
consciously or subconsciously grappled: Do we concentrate on
interpreting the individual sources, on hearing the voices of the
component parts of the text before redaction took place? Or do we
focus on the final product, an approach that has been called holistic
reading? The annotations of the following New Revised Standard
Version in the Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha will

26

INTRO TO THE PENTATEUCH 27

highlight this issue, showing how meaning may be uncovered by
looking both at the early building blocks of the text, and at the text in
its final, redacted form.

Copyright ©2001, New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha: New Revised Standard
Version. Ed. Michael D. Coogan. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001. Used by
permission. All rights reserved.

27

GENESIS 28

GENESIS
Introduction
Genesis, meaning "origin" (genealogical), covers the time from
creation to the descent of Jacob and his sons into Egypt. The book is
generally divided into a "primeval history" focusing on all of humanity
(chs 1-11) and an "ancestral history" focusing on Abraham and his
descendants (chs 12-50).
The primeval history has two major sections that parallel each other: (1)
the creation of the cosmos and stories of the first humans (1.1-6.4); and
(2) the flood and dispersal of post-flood humanity (6.5-11.9). It features
universal traditions similar to myths in other cultures, particularly in the
ancient Near East and Greece. For example, the Mesopotamian
Atrahasis epic was written hundreds of years before chs 1-11, yet it
parallels numerous particulars of the biblical narrative as it describes
the creation of the world, a flood, and the vow of the gods (here
plural) not to destroy life with a flood again.
The ancestral history picks up where the primeval history left off and
tells the story of God's choice of Abraham and the transmission of the
promise (12.1-3) down to the twelve sons of Jacob/Israel, the
progenitors of the people of Israel. These stories are closest to oral
folklore, so it is often difficult to find ancient textual parallels to chs 1250. Nevertheless, recent scholarship has found similarities between
Israelite tales about the matriarchs and patriarchs and modern legends
told in oral cultures. For example, there are some striking parallels
between the depiction of the clever deceptions of Jacob and others
(e.g., 25.27-34; 27.1-45) and the celebration of wily "tricksters" in Native
American and other traditions.
These different parts of Genesis are united by a set of "toledot"
("descendants") headings, each of which guides the reader in the
28

GENESIS 29

major focus of the section that follows it (2.4; 5.1; 6.9; 10.1; 11.10; 11.27;
25.12; 25.19; 36.1, 9; 37.2). They lead from a focus on the world at the
outset to the final focus of the book on the twelve sons born to Jacob.
In addition, other patterns also characterize these genealogically
defined sections, such as the parallels between the pre-flood and
flood/post-flood stories of chs 1-11 that were noted above. Using these
kinds of guides, we can outline Genesis as follows. The narrative opens
with the pre-flood primeval history, creation and its aftermath
(including Adam and Eve, Cain and Abel, etc.): 2.4-6.8. It then moves to
the flood and post-flood primeval history, the re-creation of the world
and replay of destructive patterns from before the flood (Noah and his
sons, Tower of Babel): 6.9-11.9. Then follows a genealogical bridge to
the ancestral history: 11.10-26. The longest part of the narrative is the
ancestral history, the giving of the promise to the sons of Jacob/Israel:
11.28-50.26. This is in three parts: First, the gift of the promise to
Abraham and divine designation of Isaac (not Ishmael) as heir of the
promise (11.28-25.11); second, the divergent destinies of the descendants
of Ishmael (25.12-18) and Isaac (Esau and Jacob in 25.19-35.29); third, the
divergent destinies of the descendants of Esau (36.1-43) and the sons of
Jacob/Israel (Joseph and his brothers in 37.1-50.26).
Genesis has been a major focus of study for almost every approach in
biblical scholarship. Two hundred and fifty years of historical-critical
scholarship have established that Genesis was written over a long
period of time, using oral and written traditions. In particular, most
scholars now recognize that Genesis is a postexilic combination of two
bodies of material: (1) a "Priestly" editorial layer or source (P)
beginning with the seven-day creation account 1.1-2.3, and (2) a "nonPriestly" source beginning with the garden of Eden story in 2.4-3.24. In
addition to 1.1-2.3, the Priestly layer encompasses most of the
genealogies in Genesis, the above discussed genealogical headings, a
version of the flood narrative that culminated in the Noah covenant of
9.7-17, the covenant of circumcision with Abraham in 17.1-27, and
related promise texts in 26.34-35; 27.46-28.9; 35.9-15; and 48.3-6. The
non-Priestly layer encompasses almost everything else. In its present
form the Priestly layer is integrally related to the non-Priestly material
and forms an editorial framework for much of it. Scholars continue to
debate, however, the exact relationship between the Priestly and non-

29

GENESIS 30

Priestly material, and whether a large position of the present Priestly
layer in Genesis once may have been part of a Priestly source that
originally stood separate from the non-Priestly material and had even
been designed to replace it.
Ever since the work of Graf and Wellhausen in the late nineteenth
century, most scholars have recognized that the earliest origins of
Genesis probably are to be found in the non-Priestly material.
Nevertheless, there is considerable debate about the history of the
formation of that material. Over the last hundred years most scholars
have maintained that the bulk of the non-Priestly material of Genesis
was formed out of the combination of materials from two
hypothesized Pentateuchal sources: a "Yahwistic" document (J) written
in the South during the reign of David or Solomon and an "Elohistic"
document (E) written one or two centuries later in the Northern
kingdom of Israel. Recently, however, many would date crucial
elements of the hypothesized "Yahwistic" document four hundred
years later to the time of the exile. Moreover, many specialists working
with Genesis no longer think there was an "Elohistic" source. Rather
than non-Priestly material being formed out of interwoven "Yahwistic"
and "Elohistic" documents, some scholars think that the earliest
written origins of the non-Priestly material are to be found in
hypothesized preexilic independent documents focusing on different
parts of the story: for instance, a separate, Atrahasis-like "primeval
history" or separate Jacob and Joseph stories. Thus, the early history of
the written formation of Genesis and other Pentateuchal books
remains an unresolved problem in Pentateuchal research.
Recent years have seen a proliferation of other approaches to Genesis,
particularly literary studies of Genesis in its present form and feminist
rereadings of the plentiful narratives in Genesis featuring women. For
example, some feminist scholars have questioned whether the garden
of Eden story in 2.4-3.24 is as critical of women as it is often seen to be.
Others have highlighted the crucial role of matriarchs as actors in the
Genesis drama, especially as determiners of which son of a given
patriarch will inherit the promise (e.g., Sarah and Rebekah) or as
influencers of the levels of privilege among brothers (e.g., Rachel).

30

GENESIS 31

Because of the mythic and legendary character of much material in
Genesis, it is less often used now than it once was as a reliable source
of historical information. Yet, perhaps partly as a result of its long
process of formation, the book of Genesis has proven its ability to
speak to people of varying cultures and times. It is not just a story
about things happening in a bygone age. It is a crystallization of
Israel's most fervent beliefs and hopes as expressed in genealogy and
vivid narrative.

[Genesis 1]
The primeval history; creation culminating in sabbath
1 In the beginning when God created the heavens and the earth, 2 the
earth was a formless void and darkness covered the face of the deep,
while a wind from God swept over the face of the waters. 3 Then God
said, "Let there be light"; and there was light. 4 And God saw that the
light was good; and God separated the light from the darkness. 5 God
called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And there was
evening and there was morning, the first day.
6 And God said, "Let there be a dome in the midst of the waters, and
let it separate the waters from the waters." 7 So God made the dome
and separated the waters that were under the dome from the waters
that were above the dome. And it was so. 8 God called the dome Sky.
And there was evening and there was morning, the second day.
9 And God said, "Let the waters under the sky be gathered together
into one place, and let the dry land appear." And it was so. 10 God
called the dry land Earth, and the waters that were gathered together
he called Seas. And God saw that it was good. 11 Then God said, "Let
the earth put forth vegetation: plants yielding seed, and fruit trees of
every kind on earth that bear fruit with the seed in it." And it was so.
12 The earth brought forth vegetation: plants yielding seed of every
kind, and trees of every kind bearing fruit with the seed in it. And God

31

GENESIS 32

saw that it was good. 13 And there was evening and there was
morning, the third day.
14 And God said, "Let there be lights in the dome of the sky to
separate the day from the night; and let them be for signs and for
seasons and for days and years, 15 and let them be lights in the dome
of the sky to give light upon the earth." And it was so. 16 God made
the two great lights — the greater light to rule the day and the lesser
light to rule the night — and the stars. 17 God set them in the dome of
the sky to give light upon the earth, 18 to rule over the day and over
the night, and to separate the light from the darkness. And God saw
that it was good. 19 And there was evening and there was morning,
the fourth day.
20 And God said, "Let the waters bring forth swarms of living
creatures, and let birds fly above the earth across the dome of the sky."
21 So God created the great sea monsters and every living creature that
moves, of every kind, with which the waters swarm, and every winged
bird of every kind. And God saw that it was good. 22 God blessed
them, saying, "Be fruitful and multiply and fill the waters in the seas,
and let birds multiply on the earth." 23 And there was evening and
there was morning, the fifth day.
24 And God said, "Let the earth bring forth living creatures of every
kind: cattle and creeping things and wild animals of the earth of every
kind." And it was so. 25 God made the wild animals of the earth of
every kind, and the cattle of every kind, and everything that creeps
upon the ground of every kind. And God saw that it was good.
26 Then God said, "Let us make humankind in our image, according to
our likeness; and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and
over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the wild
animals of the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps upon
the earth."
27 So God created humankind in his image,
in the image of God he created them;
male and female he created them.

32

GENESIS 33

28 God blessed them, and God said to them, "Be fruitful and multiply,
and fill the earth and subdue it; and have dominion over the fish of the
sea and over the birds of the air and over every living thing that moves
upon the earth." 29 God said, "See, I have given you every plant
yielding seed that is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree with
seed in its fruit; you shall have them for food. 30 And to every beast of
the earth, and to every bird of the air, and to everything that creeps on
the earth, everything that has the breath of life, I have given every
green plant for food." And it was so. 31 God saw everything that he
had made, and indeed, it was very good. And there was evening and
there was morning, the sixth day.
[Genesis 2]
1 Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all their multitude.
2 And on the seventh day God finished the work that he had done, and
he rested on the seventh day from all the work that he had done. 3 So
God blessed the seventh day and hallowed it, because on it God rested
from all the work that he had done in creation.
4 These are the generations of the heavens and the earth when they
were created.
Creation in the garden
In the day that the LORD God made the earth and the heavens, 5 when
no plant of the field was yet in the earth and no herb of the field had
yet sprung up — for the LORD God had not caused it to rain upon the
earth, and there was no one to till the ground; 6 but a stream would
rise from the earth, and water the whole face of the ground — 7 then
the LORD God formed man from the dust of the ground, and breathed
into his nostrils the breath of life; and the man became a living being.
8 And the LORD God planted a garden in Eden, in the east; and there
he put the man whom he had formed. 9 Out of the ground the LORD
God made to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for
food, the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of
the knowledge of good and evil.

33

GENESIS 34

10 A river flows out of Eden to water the garden, and from there it
divides and becomes four branches. 11 The name of the first is Pishon; it
is the one that flows around the whole land of Havilah, where there is
gold; 12 and the gold of that land is good; bdellium and onyx stone are
there. 13 The name of the second river is Gihon; it is the one that flows
around the whole land of Cush. 14 The name of the third river is Tigris,
which flows east of Assyria. And the fourth river is the Euphrates.
15 The LORD God took the man and put him in the garden of Eden to
till it and keep it. 16 And the LORD God commanded the man, "You may
freely eat of every tree of the garden; 17 but of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat, for in the day that you
eat of it you shall die."
18 Then the LORD God said, "It is not good that the man should be
alone; I will make him a helper as his partner." 19 So out of the ground
the LORD God formed every animal of the field and every bird of the
air, and brought them to the man to see what he would call them; and
whatever the man called every living creature, that was its name. 20
The man gave names to all cattle, and to the birds of the air, and to
every animal of the field; but for the man there was not found a helper
as his partner. 21 So the LORD God caused a deep sleep to fall upon the
man, and he slept; then he took one of his ribs and closed up its place
with flesh. 22 And the rib that the LORD God had taken from the man
he made into a woman and brought her to the man. 23 Then the man
said,
"This at last is bone of my bones
and flesh of my flesh;
this one shall be called Woman,
for out of Man this one was taken."
24 Therefore a man leaves his father and his mother and clings to his
wife, and they become one flesh. 25 And the man and his wife were
both naked, and were not ashamed.

34

GENESIS 35

[Genesis 3]
Garden disobedience and punishment
1 Now the serpent was more crafty than any other wild animal that the
LORD God had made. He said to the woman, "Did God say, 'You shall
not eat from any tree in the garden'?" 2 The woman said to the
serpent, "We may eat of the fruit of the trees in the garden; 3 but God
said, 'You shall not eat of the fruit of the tree that is in the middle of
the garden, nor shall you touch it, or you shall die.'" 4 But the serpent
said to the woman, "You will not die; 5 for God knows that when you
eat of it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing
good and evil." 6 So when the woman saw that the tree was good for
food, and that it was a delight to the eyes, and that the tree was to be
desired to make one wise, she took of its fruit and ate; and she also
gave some to her husband, who was with her, and he ate. 7 Then the
eyes of both were opened, and they knew that they were naked; and
they sewed fig leaves together and made loincloths for themselves.
8 They heard the sound of the LORD God walking in the garden at the
time of the evening breeze, and the man and his wife hid themselves
from the presence of the LORD God among the trees of the garden. 9
But the LORD God called to the man, and said to him, "Where are you?"
10 He said, "I heard the sound of you in the garden, and I was afraid,
because I was naked; and I hid myself." 11 He said, "Who told you that
you were naked? Have you eaten from the tree of which I commanded
you not to eat?" 12 The man said, "The woman whom you gave to be
with me, she gave me fruit from the tree, and I ate." 13 Then the LORD
God said to the woman, "What is this that you have done?" The
woman said, "The serpent tricked me, and I ate." 14 The LORD God said
to the serpent,
"Because you have done this,
cursed are you among all animals
and among all wild creatures;
upon your belly you shall go,
and dust you shall eat
all the days of your life.

35

GENESIS 36

15 I will put enmity between you and the woman,
and between your offspring and hers;
he will strike your head,
and you will strike his heel."
16 To the woman he said,
"I will greatly increase your pangs in childbearing;
in pain you shall bring forth children,
yet your desire shall be for your husband,
and he shall rule over you."
17 And to the man he said,
"Because you have listened to the voice of your wife,
and have eaten of the tree
about which I commanded you,
'You shall not eat of it,'
cursed is the ground because of you;
in toil you shall eat of it all the days of your life;
18 thorns and thistles it shall bring forth for you;
and you shall eat the plants of the field.
19 By the sweat of your face
you shall eat bread
until you return to the ground,
for out of it you were taken;
you are dust,
and to dust you shall return."
20 The man named his wife Eve, because she was the mother of all
living. 21 And the LORD God made garments of skins for the man and
for his wife, and clothed them.
22 Then the LORD God said, "See, the man has become like one of us,
knowing good and evil; and now, he might reach out his hand and
take also from the tree of life, and eat, and live forever" — 23
therefore the LORD God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till
the ground from which he was taken. 24 He drove out the man; and at
the east of the garden of Eden he placed the cherubim, and a sword
flaming and turning to guard the way to the tree of life.

36

GENESIS 37

[Genesis 4]
Cain and Abel
1 Now the man knew his wife Eve, and she conceived and bore Cain,
saying, "I have produced a man with the help of the LORD." 2 Next she
bore his brother Abel. Now Abel was a keeper of sheep, and Cain a
tiller of the ground. 3 In the course of time Cain brought to the LORD
an offering of the fruit of the ground, 4 and Abel for his part brought
of the firstlings of his flock, their fat portions. And the LORD had regard
for Abel and his offering, 5 but for Cain and his offering he had no
regard. So Cain was very angry, and his countenance fell. 6 The LORD
said to Cain, "Why are you angry, and why has your countenance
fallen? 7 If you do well, will you not be accepted? And if you do not do
well, sin is lurking at the door; its desire is for you, but you must master
it."
8 Cain said to his brother Abel, "Let us go out to the field." And when
they were in the field, Cain rose up against his brother Abel, and killed
him. 9 Then the LORD said to Cain, "Where is your brother Abel?" He
said, "I do not know; am I my brother's keeper?" 10 And the LORD said,
"What have you done? Listen; your brother's blood is crying out to me
from the ground! 11 And now you are cursed from the ground, which
has opened its mouth to receive your brother's blood from your hand.
12 When you till the ground, it will no longer yield to you its strength;
you will be a fugitive and a wanderer on the earth." 13 Cain said to the
LORD, "My punishment is greater than I can bear! 14 Today you have
driven me away from the soil, and I shall be hidden from your face; I
shall be a fugitive and a wanderer on the earth, and anyone who
meets me may kill me." 15 Then the LORD said to him, "Not so!
Whoever kills Cain will suffer a sevenfold vengeance." And the LORD
put a mark on Cain, so that no one who came upon him would kill him.
16 Then Cain went away from the presence of the LORD, and settled in
the land of Nod, east of Eden.
First overview of generations from creation to flood
17 Cain knew his wife, and she conceived and bore Enoch; and he built
a city, and named it Enoch after his son Enoch. 18 To Enoch was born

37

GENESIS 38

Irad; and Irad was the father of Mehujael, and Mehujael the father of
Methushael, and Methushael the father of Lamech. 19 Lamech took
two wives; the name of the one was Adah, and the name of the other
Zillah. 20 Adah bore Jabal; he was the ancestor of those who live in
tents and have livestock. 21 His brother's name was Jubal; he was the
ancestor of all those who play the lyre and pipe. 22 Zillah bore Tubalcain, who made all kinds of bronze and iron tools. The sister of Tubalcain was Naamah.
23 Lamech said to his wives:
"Adah and Zillah, hear my voice;
you wives of Lamech, listen to what I say:
I have killed a man for wounding me,
a young man for striking me.
24 If Cain is avenged sevenfold,
truly Lamech seventy-sevenfold."
25 Adam knew his wife again, and she bore a son and named him Seth,
for she said, "God has appointed for me another child instead of Abel,
because Cain killed him." 26 To Seth also a son was born, and he
named him Enosh. At that time people began to invoke the name of
the LORD.
[Genesis 5]
Second overview of generations from creation to flood
1 This is the list of the descendants of Adam. When God created
humankind, he made them in the likeness of God. 2 Male and female
he created them, and he blessed them and named them "Humankind"
when they were created.
3 When Adam had lived one hundred thirty years, he became the
father of a son in his likeness, according to his image, and named him
Seth. 4 The days of Adam after he became the father of Seth were
eight hundred years; and he had other sons and daughters. 5 Thus all
the days that Adam lived were nine hundred thirty years; and he died.

38

GENESIS 39

6 When Seth had lived one hundred five years, he became the father of
Enosh. 7 Seth lived after the birth of Enosh eight hundred seven years,
and had other sons and daughters. 8 Thus all the days of Seth were
nine hundred twelve years; and he died.
9 When Enosh had lived ninety years, he became the father of Kenan.
10 Enosh lived after the birth of Kenan eight hundred fifteen years,
and had other sons and daughters. 11 Thus all the days of Enosh were
nine hundred five years; and he died.
12 When Kenan had lived seventy years, he became the father of
Mahalalel. 13 Kenan lived after the birth of Mahalalel eight hundred
and forty years, and had other sons and daughters. 14 Thus all the days
of Kenan were nine hundred and ten years; and he died.
15 When Mahalalel had lived sixty-five years, he became the father of
Jared. 16 Mahalalel lived after the birth of Jared eight hundred thirty
years, and had other sons and daughters. 17 Thus all the days of
Mahalalel were eight hundred ninety-five years; and he died.
18 When Jared had lived one hundred sixty-two years he became the
father of Enoch. 19 Jared lived after the birth of Enoch eight hundred
years, and had other sons and daughters. 20 Thus all the days of Jared
were nine hundred sixty-two years; and he died.

21 When Enoch had lived sixty-five years, he became the father of
Methuselah. 22 Enoch walked with God after the birth of Methuselah
three hundred years, and had other sons and daughters. 23 Thus all the
days of Enoch were three hundred sixty-five years. 24 Enoch walked
with God; then he was no more, because God took him.
25 When Methuselah had lived one hundred eighty-seven years, he
became the father of Lamech. 26 Methuselah lived after the birth of
Lamech seven hundred eighty-two years, and had other sons and
daughters. 27 Thus all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixtynine years; and he died.

39

GENESIS 40

28 When Lamech had lived one hundred eighty-two years, he became
the father of a son; 29 he named him Noah, saying, "Out of the ground
that the LORD has cursed this one shall bring us relief from our work
and from the toil of our hands." 30 Lamech lived after the birth of
Noah five hundred ninety-five years, and had other sons and
daughters. 31 Thus all the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventyseven years; and he died.
32 After Noah was five hundred years old, Noah became the father of
Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
[Genesis 6]
Divine-human reproduction
1 When people began to multiply on the face of the ground, and
daughters were born to them, 2 the sons of God saw that they were
fair; and they took wives for themselves of all that they chose. 3 Then
the LORD said, "My spirit shall not abide in mortals forever, for they are
flesh; their days shall be one hundred twenty years." 4 The Nephilim
were on the earth in those days — and also afterward — when the
sons of God went in to the daughters of humans, who bore children to
them. These were the heroes that were of old, warriors of renown.
The great flood
5 The LORD saw that the wickedness of humankind was great in the
earth, and that every inclination of the thoughts of their hearts was
only evil continually. 6 And the LORD was sorry that he had made
humankind on the earth, and it grieved him to his heart. 7 So the LORD
said, "I will blot out from the earth the human beings I have created —
people together with animals and creeping things and birds of the air,
for I am sorry that I have made them." 8 But Noah found favor in the
sight of the LORD.
9 These are the descendants of Noah. Noah was a righteous man,
blameless in his generation; Noah walked with God. 10 And Noah had
three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

40

GENESIS 41

11 Now the earth was corrupt in God's sight, and the earth was filled
with violence. 12 And God saw that the earth was corrupt; for all flesh
had corrupted its ways upon the earth. 13 And God said to Noah, "I
have determined to make an end of all flesh, for the earth is filled with
violence because of them; now I am going to destroy them along with
the earth. 14 Make yourself an ark of cypress wood; make rooms in the
ark, and cover it inside and out with pitch. 15 This is how you are to
make it: the length of the ark three hundred cubits, its width fifty
cubits, and its height thirty cubits. 16 Make a roof for the ark, and
finish it to a cubit above; and put the door of the ark in its side; make
it with lower, second, and third decks. 17 For my part, I am going to
bring a flood of waters on the earth, to destroy from under heaven all
flesh in which is the breath of life; everything that is on the earth shall
die. 18 But I will establish my covenant with you; and you shall come
into the ark, you, your sons, your wife, and your sons' wives with you.
19 And of every living thing, of all flesh, you shall bring two of every
kind into the ark, to keep them alive with you; they shall be male and
female. 20 Of the birds according to their kinds, and of the animals
according to their kinds, of every creeping thing of the ground
according to its kind, two of every kind shall come in to you, to keep
them alive. 21 Also take with you every kind of food that is eaten, and
store it up; and it shall serve as food for you and for them." 22 Noah
did this; he did all that God commanded him.
[Genesis 7]
1 Then the LORD said to Noah, "Go into the ark, you and all your
household, for I have seen that you alone are righteous before me in
this generation. 2 Take with you seven pairs of all clean animals, the
male and its mate; and a pair of the animals that are not clean, the
male and its mate; 3 and seven pairs of the birds of the air also, male
and female, to keep their kind alive on the face of all the earth. 4 For
in seven days I will send rain on the earth for forty days and forty
nights; and every living thing that I have made I will blot out from the
face of the ground." 5 And Noah did all that the LORD had commanded
him.

41

GENESIS 42

6 Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters came on
the earth. 7 And Noah with his sons and his wife and his sons' wives
went into the ark to escape the waters of the flood. 8 Of clean animals,
and of animals that are not clean, and of birds, and of everything that
creeps on the ground, 9 two and two, male and female, went into the
ark with Noah, as God had commanded Noah. 10 And after seven days
the waters of the flood came on the earth.
11 In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, on the
seventeenth day of the month, on that day all the fountains of the
great deep burst forth, and the windows of the heavens were opened.
12 The rain fell on the earth forty days and forty nights. 13 On the very
same day Noah with his sons, Shem and Ham and Japheth, and Noah's
wife and the three wives of his sons entered the ark, 14 they and every
wild animal of every kind, and all domestic animals of every kind, and
every creeping thing that creeps on the earth, and every bird of every
kind — every bird, every winged creature. 15 They went into the ark
with Noah, two and two of all flesh in which there was the breath of
life. 16 And those that entered, male and female of all flesh, went in as
God had commanded him; and the LORD shut him in.
17 The flood continued forty days on the earth; and the waters
increased, and bore up the ark, and it rose high above the earth. 18
The waters swelled and increased greatly on the earth; and the ark
floated on the face of the waters. 19 The waters swelled so mightily on
the earth that all the high mountains under the whole heaven were
covered; 20 the waters swelled above the mountains, covering them
fifteen cubits deep. 21 And all flesh died that moved on the earth,
birds, domestic animals, wild animals, all swarming creatures that
swarm on the earth, and all human beings; 22 everything on dry land in
whose nostrils was the breath of life died. 23 He blotted out every
living thing that was on the face of the ground, human beings and
animals and creeping things and birds of the air; they were blotted out
from the earth. Only Noah was left, and those that were with him in
the ark. 24 And the waters swelled on the earth for one hundred fifty
days.

42

GENESIS 43

[Genesis 8]
Divine commitments after the flood
1 But God remembered Noah and all the wild animals and all the
domestic animals that were with him in the ark. And God made a wind
blow over the earth, and the waters subsided; 2 the fountains of the
deep and the windows of the heavens were closed, the rain from the
heavens was restrained, 3 and the waters gradually receded from the
earth. At the end of one hundred fifty days the waters had abated; 4
and in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, the
ark came to rest on the mountains of Ararat. 5 The waters continued to
abate until the tenth month; in the tenth month, on the first day of
the month, the tops of the mountains appeared.
6 At the end of forty days Noah opened the window of the ark that he
had made 7 and sent out the raven; and it went to and fro until the
waters were dried up from the earth. 8 Then he sent out the dove from
him, to see if the waters had subsided from the face of the ground; 9
but the dove found no place to set its foot, and it returned to him to
the ark, for the waters were still on the face of the whole earth. So he
put out his hand and took it and brought it into the ark with him. 10
He waited another seven days, and again he sent out the dove from
the ark; 11 and the dove came back to him in the evening, and there in
its beak was a freshly plucked olive leaf; so Noah knew that the waters
had subsided from the earth. 12 Then he waited another seven days,
and sent out the dove; and it did not return to him any more.
13 In the six hundred first year, in the first month, on the first day of
the month, the waters were dried up from the earth; and Noah
removed the covering of the ark, and looked, and saw that the face of
the ground was drying. 14 In the second month, on the twenty-seventh
day of the month, the earth was dry. 15 Then God said to Noah, 16 "Go
out of the ark, you and your wife, and your sons and your sons' wives
with you. 17 Bring out with you every living thing that is with you of all
flesh — birds and animals and every creeping thing that creeps on the
earth — so that they may abound on the earth, and be fruitful and
multiply on the earth." 18 So Noah went out with his sons and his wife
and his sons' wives. 19 And every animal, every creeping thing, and

43

GENESIS 44

every bird, everything that moves on the earth, went out of the ark by
families.
20 Then Noah built an altar to the LORD, and took of every clean animal
and of every clean bird, and offered burnt offerings on the altar. 21
And when the LORD smelled the pleasing odor, the LORD said in his
heart, "I will never again curse the ground because of humankind, for
the inclination of the human heart is evil from youth; nor will I ever
again destroy every living creature as I have done.
22 As long as the earth endures,
seedtime and harvest, cold and heat,
summer and winter, day and night,
shall not cease."
[Genesis 9]
1 God blessed Noah and his sons, and said to them, "Be fruitful and
multiply, and fill the earth. 2 The fear and dread of you shall rest on
every animal of the earth, and on every bird of the air, on everything
that creeps on the ground, and on all the fish of the sea; into your
hand they are delivered. 3 Every moving thing that lives shall be food
for you; and just as I gave you the green plants, I give you everything. 4
Only, you shall not eat flesh with its life, that is, its blood. 5 For your
own lifeblood I will surely require a reckoning: from every animal I will
require it and from human beings, each one for the blood of another, I
will require a reckoning for human life.
6 Whoever sheds the blood of a human,
by a human shall that person's blood be shed;
for in his own image God made humankind.
7 And you, be fruitful and multiply, abound on the earth and multiply
in it."
8 Then God said to Noah and to his sons with him, 9 "As for me, I am
establishing my covenant with you and your descendants after you, 10
and with every living creature that is with you, the birds, the domestic
animals, and every animal of the earth with you, as many as came out

44

GENESIS 45

of the ark. 11 I establish my covenant with you, that never again shall
all flesh be cut off by the waters of a flood, and never again shall there
be a flood to destroy the earth." 12 God said, "This is the sign of the
covenant that I make between me and you and every living creature
that is with you, for all future generations: 13 I have set my bow in the
clouds, and it shall be a sign of the covenant between me and the
earth. 14 When I bring clouds over the earth and the bow is seen in the
clouds, 15 I will remember my covenant that is between me and you
and every living creature of all flesh; and the waters shall never again
become a flood to destroy all flesh. 16 When the bow is in the clouds, I
will see it and remember the everlasting covenant between God and
every living creature of all flesh that is on the earth." 17 God said to
Noah, "This is the sign of the covenant that I have established between
me and all flesh that is on the earth."
Noah and his sons
18 The sons of Noah who went out of the ark were Shem, Ham, and
Japheth. Ham was the father of Canaan. 19 These three were the sons
of Noah; and from these the whole earth was peopled.
20 Noah, a man of the soil, was the first to plant a vineyard. 21 He
drank some of the wine and became drunk, and he lay uncovered in his
tent. 22 And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his
father, and told his two brothers outside. 23 Then Shem and Japheth
took a garment, laid it on both their shoulders, and walked backward
and covered the nakedness of their father; their faces were turned
away, and they did not see their father's nakedness. 24 When Noah
awoke from his wine and knew what his youngest son had done to
him, 25 he said,
"Cursed be Canaan;
lowest of slaves shall he be to his brothers."
26 He also said,
"Blessed by the LORD my God be Shem;
and let Canaan be his slave.

45

GENESIS 46

27 May God make space for Japheth,
and let him live in the tents of Shem;
and let Canaan be his slave."
28 After the flood Noah lived three hundred fifty years. 29 All the days
of Noah were nine hundred fifty years; and he died.
[Genesis 10]
The table of nations
1 These are the descendants of Noah's sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth;
children were born to them after the flood.
2 The descendants of Japheth: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal,
Meshech, and Tiras. 3 The descendants of Gomer: Ashkenaz, Riphath,
and Togarmah. 4 The descendants of Javan: Elishah, Tarshish, Kittim,
and Rodanim. 5 From these the coastland peoples spread. These are
the descendants of Japheth in their lands, with their own language, by
their families, in their nations.
6 The descendants of Ham: Cush, Egypt, Put, and Canaan. 7 The
descendants of Cush: Seba, Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah, and Sabteca. The
descendants of Raamah: Sheba and Dedan. 8 Cush became the father
of Nimrod; he was the first on earth to become a mighty warrior. 9 He
was a mighty hunter before the LORD; therefore it is said, "Like Nimrod
a mighty hunter before the LORD." 10 The beginning of his kingdom
was Babel, Erech, and Accad, all of them in the land of Shinar. 11 From
that land he went into Assyria, and built Nineveh, Rehoboth-ir, Calah,
and 12 Resen between Nineveh and Calah; that is the great city. 13
Egypt became the father of Ludim, Anamim, Lehabim, Naphtuhim, 14
Pathrusim, Casluhim, and Caphtorim, from which the Philistines come.
15 Canaan became the father of Sidon his firstborn, and Heth, 16 and
the Jebusites, the Amorites, the Girgashites, 17 the Hivites, the Arkites,
the Sinites, 18 the Arvadites, the Zemarites, and the Hamathites.
Afterward the families of the Canaanites spread abroad. 19 And the
territory of the Canaanites extended from Sidon, in the direction of
Gerar, as far as Gaza, and in the direction of Sodom, Gomorrah,

46

GENESIS 47

Admah, and Zeboiim, as far as Lasha. 20 These are the descendants of
Ham, by their families, their languages, their lands, and their nations.
21 To Shem also, the father of all the children of Eber, the elder brother
of Japheth, children were born. 22 The descendants of Shem: Elam,
Asshur, Arpachshad, Lud, and Aram. 23 The descendants of Aram: Uz,
Hul, Gether, and Mash. 24 Arpachshad became the father of Shelah;
and Shelah became the father of Eber. 25 To Eber were born two sons:
the name of the one was Peleg, for in his days the earth was divided,
and his brother's name was Joktan. 26 Joktan became the father of
Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah, 27 Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah, 28
Obal, Abimael, Sheba, 29 Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab; all these were the
descendants of Joktan. 30 The territory in which they lived extended
from Mesha in the direction of Sephar, the hill country of the east. 31
These are the descendants of Shem, by their families, their languages,
their lands, and their nations.
32 These are the families of Noah's sons, according to their
genealogies, in their nations; and from these the nations spread
abroad on the earth after the flood.
[Genesis 11]
The tower of Babel
1 Now the whole earth had one language and the same words. 2 And
as they migrated from the east, they came upon a plain in the land of
Shinar and settled there. 3 And they said to one another, "Come, let us
make bricks, and burn them thoroughly." And they had brick for stone,
and bitumen for mortar. 4 Then they said, "Come, let us build ourselves
a city, and a tower with its top in the heavens, and let us make a name
for ourselves; otherwise we shall be scattered abroad upon the face of
the whole earth." 5 The LORD came down to see the city and the tower,
which mortals had built. 6 And the LORD said, "Look, they are one
people, and they have all one language; and this is only the beginning
of what they will do; nothing that they propose to do will now be
impossible for them. 7 Come, let us go down, and confuse their
language there, so that they will not understand one another's
speech." 8 So the LORD scattered them abroad from there over the face

47

GENESIS 48

of all the earth, and they left off building the city. 9 Therefore it was
called Babel, because there the LORD confused the language of all the
earth; and from there the LORD scattered them abroad over the face of
all the earth.
10 These are the descendants of Shem. When Shem was one hundred
years old, he became the father of Arpachshad two years after the
flood; 11 and Shem lived after the birth of Arpachshad five hundred
years, and had other sons and daughters.
12 When Arpachshad had lived thirty-five years, he became the father
of Shelah; 13 and Arpachshad lived after the birth of Shelah four
hundred three years, and had other sons and daughters.
14 When Shelah had lived thirty years, he became the father of Eber; 15
and Shelah lived after the birth of Eber four hundred three years, and
had other sons and daughters.
16 When Eber had lived thirty-four years, he became the father of
Peleg; 17 and Eber lived after the birth of Peleg four hundred thirty
years, and had other sons and daughters.
18 When Peleg had lived thirty years, he became the father of Reu; 19
and Peleg lived after the birth of Reu two hundred nine years, and had
other sons and daughters.
The descendants of Shem
20 When Reu had lived thirty-two years, he became the father of
Serug; 21 and Reu lived after the birth of Serug two hundred seven
years, and had other sons and daughters.
22 When Serug had lived thirty years, he became the father of Nahor;
23 and Serug lived after the birth of Nahor two hundred years, and had
other sons and daughters.

48

GENESIS 49

24 When Nahor had lived twenty-nine years, he became the father of
Terah; 25 and Nahor lived after the birth of Terah one hundred
nineteen years, and had other sons and daughters.
26 When Terah had lived seventy years, he became the father of
Abram, Nahor, and Haran.
Introduction of the Abraham story
27 Now these are the descendants of Terah. Terah was the father of
Abram, Nahor, and Haran; and Haran was the father of Lot. 28 Haran
died before his father Terah in the land of his birth, in Ur of the
Chaldeans. 29 Abram and Nahor took wives; the name of Abram's wife
was Sarai, and the name of Nahor's wife was Milcah. She was the
daughter of Haran the father of Milcah and Iscah. 30 Now Sarai was
barren; she had no child.
31 Terah took his son Abram and his grandson Lot son of Haran, and his
daughter-in-law Sarai, his son Abram's wife, and they went out
together from Ur of the Chaldeans to go into the land of Canaan; but
when they came to Haran, they settled there. 32 The days of Terah
were two hundred five years; and Terah died in Haran.
[Genesis 12]
The LORD's call and promise to Abraham
1 Now the LORD said to Abram, "Go from your country and your
kindred and your father's house to the land that I will show you. 2 I will
make of you a great nation, and I will bless you, and make your name
great, so that you will be a blessing. 3 I will bless those who bless you,
and the one who curses you I will curse; and in you all the families of
the earth shall be blessed."
Abraham's first journey to the land
4 So Abram went, as the LORD had told him; and Lot went with him.
Abram was seventy-five years old when he departed from Haran. 5
Abram took his wife Sarai and his brother's son Lot, and all the

49

GENESIS 50

possessions that they had gathered, and the persons whom they had
acquired in Haran; and they set forth to go to the land of Canaan.
When they had come to the land of Canaan, 6 Abram passed through
the land to the place at Shechem, to the oak of Moreh. At that time
the Canaanites were in the land. 7 Then the LORD appeared to Abram,
and said, "To your offspring I will give this land." So he built there an
altar to the LORD, who had appeared to him. 8 From there he moved
on to the hill country on the east of Bethel, and pitched his tent, with
Bethel on the west and Ai on the east; and there he built an altar to
the LORD and invoked the name of the LORD. 9 And Abram journeyed
on by stages toward the Negeb.
First story of endangerment of the matriarch
10 Now there was a famine in the land. So Abram went down to Egypt
to reside there as an alien, for the famine was severe in the land. 11
When he was about to enter Egypt, he said to his wife Sarai, "I know
well that you are a woman beautiful in appearance; 12 and when the
Egyptians see you, they will say, 'This is his wife'; then they will kill me,
but they will let you live. 13 Say you are my sister, so that it may go well
with me because of you, and that my life may be spared on your
account." 14 When Abram entered Egypt the Egyptians saw that the
woman was very beautiful. 15 When the officials of Pharaoh saw her,
they praised her to Pharaoh. And the woman was taken into Pharaoh's
house. 16 And for her sake he dealt well with Abram; and he had
sheep, oxen, male donkeys, male and female slaves, female donkeys,
and camels.
17 But the LORD afflicted Pharaoh and his house with great plagues
because of Sarai, Abram's wife. 18 So Pharaoh called Abram, and said,
"What is this you have done to me? Why did you not tell me that she
was your wife? 19 Why did you say, 'She is my sister,' so that I took her
for my wife? Now then, here is your wife, take her, and be gone." 20
And Pharaoh gave his men orders concerning him; and they set him on
the way, with his wife and all that he had.

50

GENESIS 51

[Genesis 13]
Split of Abraham and Lot
1 So Abram went up from Egypt, he and his wife, and all that he had,
and Lot with him, into the Negeb.
2 Now Abram was very rich in livestock, in silver, and in gold. 3 He
journeyed on by stages from the Negeb as far as Bethel, to the place
where his tent had been at the beginning, between Bethel and Ai, 4 to
the place where he had made an altar at the first; and there Abram
called on the name of the LORD. 5 Now Lot, who went with Abram, also
had flocks and herds and tents, 6 so that the land could not support
both of them living together; for their possessions were so great that
they could not live together, 7 and there was strife between the
herders of Abram's livestock and the herders of Lot's livestock. At that
time the Canaanites and the Perizzites lived in the land.
8 Then Abram said to Lot, "Let there be no strife between you and me,
and between your herders and my herders; for we are kindred. 9 Is not
the whole land before you? Separate yourself from me. If you take the
left hand, then I will go to the right; or if you take the right hand, then
I will go to the left." 10 Lot looked about him, and saw that the plain
of the Jordan was well watered everywhere like the garden of the
LORD, like the land of Egypt, in the direction of Zoar; this was before
the LORD had destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah. 11 So Lot chose for
himself all the plain of the Jordan, and Lot journeyed eastward; thus
they separated from each other. 12 Abram settled in the land of
Canaan, while Lot settled among the cities of the Plain and moved his
tent as far as Sodom. 13 Now the people of Sodom were wicked, great
sinners against the LORD.
14 The LORD said to Abram, after Lot had separated from him, "Raise
your eyes now, and look from the place where you are, northward and
southward and eastward and westward; 15 for all the land that you see
I will give to you and to your offspring forever. 16 I will make your
offspring like the dust of the earth; so that if one can count the dust of
the earth, your offspring also can be counted. 17 Rise up, walk through
the length and the breadth of the land, for I will give it to you." 18 So

51

GENESIS 52

Abram moved his tent, and came and settled by the oaks of Mamre,
which are at Hebron; and there he built an altar to the LORD.
[Genesis 14]
Abraham's rescue of Lot from the eastern kings
1 In the days of King Amraphel of Shinar, King Arioch of Ellasar, King
Chedorlaomer of Elam, and King Tidal of Goiim, 2 these kings made
war with King Bera of Sodom, King Birsha of Gomorrah, King Shinab of
Admah, King Shemeber of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (that is, Zoar).
3 All these joined forces in the Valley of Siddim (that is, the Dead Sea).
4 Twelve years they had served Chedorlaomer, but in the thirteenth
year they rebelled. 5 In the fourteenth year Chedorlaomer and the
kings who were with him came and subdued the Rephaim in
Ashteroth-karnaim, the Zuzim in Ham, the Emim in Shaveh-kiriathaim,
6 and the Horites in the hill country of Seir as far as El-paran on the
edge of the wilderness; 7 then they turned back and came to Enmishpat (that is, Kadesh), and subdued all the country of the
Amalekites, and also the Amorites who lived in Hazazon-tamar. 8 Then
the king of Sodom, the king of Gomorrah, the king of Admah, the king
of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (that is, Zoar) went out, and they
joined battle in the Valley of Siddim 9 with King Chedorlaomer of
Elam, King Tidal of Goiim, King Amraphel of Shinar, and King Arioch of
Ellasar, four kings against five. 10 Now the Valley of Siddim was full of
bitumen pits; and as the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, some fell
into them, and the rest fled to the hill country. 11 So the enemy took all
the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their provisions, and went
their way; 12 they also took Lot, the son of Abram's brother, who lived
in Sodom, and his goods, and departed.
13 Then one who had escaped came and told Abram the Hebrew, who
was living by the oaks of Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eshcol and of
Aner; these were allies of Abram. 14 When Abram heard that his
nephew had been taken captive, he led forth his trained men, born in
his house, three hundred eighteen of them, and went in pursuit as far
as Dan. 15 He divided his forces against them by night, he and his
servants, and routed them and pursued them to Hobah, north of

52

GENESIS 53

Damascus. 16 Then he brought back all the goods, and also brought
back his nephew Lot with his goods, and the women and the people.
17 After his return from the defeat of Chedorlaomer and the kings who
were with him, the king of Sodom went out to meet him at the Valley
of Shaveh (that is, the King's Valley). 18 And King Melchizedek of
Salem brought out bread and wine; he was priest of God Most High. 19
He blessed him and said,
"Blessed be Abram by God Most High,
maker of heaven and earth;
20 and blessed be God Most High,
who has delivered your enemies into your hand!"
And Abram gave him one-tenth of everything. 21 Then the king of
Sodom said to Abram, "Give me the persons, but take the goods for
yourself." 22 But Abram said to the king of Sodom, "I have sworn to
the LORD, God Most High, maker of heaven and earth, 23 that I would
not take a thread or a sandal-thong or anything that is yours, so that
you might not say, 'I have made Abram rich.' 24 I will take nothing but
what the young men have eaten, and the share of the men who went
with me — Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre. Let them take their share."
[Genesis 15]
The first covenant with Abraham
1 After these things the word of the LORD came to Abram in a vision,
"Do not be afraid, Abram, I am your shield; your reward shall be very
great." 2 But Abram said, "O Lord GOD, what will you give me, for I
continue childless, and the heir of my house is Eliezer of Damascus?" 3
And Abram said, "You have given me no offspring, and so a slave born
in my house is to be my heir." 4 But the word of the LORD came to him,
"This man shall not be your heir; no one but your very own issue shall
be your heir." 5 He brought him outside and said, "Look toward
heaven and count the stars, if you are able to count them." Then he
said to him, "So shall your descendants be." 6 And he believed the
LORD; and the LORD reckoned it to him as righteousness.
7 Then he said to him, "I am the LORD who brought you from Ur of the
Chaldeans, to give you this land to possess." 8 But he said, "O Lord

53

GENESIS 54

GOD, how am I to know that I shall possess it?" 9 He said to him, "Bring
me a heifer three years old, a female goat three years old, a ram three
years old, a turtledove, and a young pigeon." 10 He brought him all
these and cut them in two, laying each half over against the other; but
he did not cut the birds in two. 11 And when birds of prey came down
on the carcasses, Abram drove them away.
12 As the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram, and a
deep and terrifying darkness descended upon him. 13 Then the LORD
said to Abram, "Know this for certain, that your offspring shall be
aliens in a land that is not theirs, and shall be slaves there, and they
shall be oppressed for four hundred years; 14 but I will bring judgment
on the nation that they serve, and afterward they shall come out with
great possessions. 15 As for yourself, you shall go to your ancestors in
peace; you shall be buried in a good old age. 16 And they shall come
back here in the fourth generation; for the iniquity of the Amorites is
not yet complete."
17 When the sun had gone down and it was dark, a smoking fire pot
and a flaming torch passed between these pieces. 18 On that day the
LORD made a covenant with Abram, saying, "To your descendants I give
this land, from the river of Egypt to the great river, the river Euphrates,
19 the land of the Kenites, the Kenizzites, the Kadmonites, 20 the
Hittites, the Perizzites, the Rephaim, 21 the Amorites, the Canaanites,
the Girgashites, and the Jebusites."
[Genesis 16]
Hagar's encounter with God and the birth of Ishmael
1 Now Sarai, Abram's wife, bore him no children. She had an Egyptian
slave-girl whose name was Hagar, 2 and Sarai said to Abram, "You see
that the LORD has prevented me from bearing children; go in to my
slave-girl; it may be that I shall obtain children by her." And Abram
listened to the voice of Sarai. 3 So, after Abram had lived ten years in
the land of Canaan, Sarai, Abram's wife, took Hagar the Egyptian, her
slave-girl, and gave her to her husband Abram as a wife. 4 He went in
to Hagar, and she conceived; and when she saw that she had
conceived, she looked with contempt on her mistress. 5 Then Sarai said

54

GENESIS 55

to Abram, "May the wrong done to me be on you! I gave my slave-girl
to your embrace, and when she saw that she had conceived, she looked
on me with contempt. May the LORD judge between you and me!" 6
But Abram said to Sarai, "Your slave-girl is in your power; do to her as
you please." Then Sarai dealt harshly with her, and she ran away from
her.
7 The angel of the LORD found her by a spring of water in the
wilderness, the spring on the way to Shur. 8 And he said, "Hagar, slavegirl of Sarai, where have you come from and where are you going?"
She said, "I am running away from my mistress Sarai." 9 The angel of
the LORD said to her, "Return to your mistress, and submit to her." 10
The angel of the LORD also said to her, "I will so greatly multiply your
offspring that they cannot be counted for multitude." 11 And the angel
of the LORD said to her,
"Now you have conceived and shall bear a son;
you shall call him Ishmael,
for the LORD has given heed to your affliction.
12 He shall be a wild ass of a man,
with his hand against everyone,
and everyone's hand against him;
and he shall live at odds with all his kin."
13 So she named the LORD who spoke to her, "You are El-roi"; for she
said, "Have I really seen God and remained alive after seeing him?" 14
Therefore the well was called Beer-lahai-roi; it lies between Kadesh
and Bered.
15 Hagar bore Abram a son; and Abram named his son, whom Hagar
bore, Ishmael. 16 Abram was eighty-six years old when Hagar bore him
Ishmael.
[Genesis 17]
The everlasting covenant and sign of circumcision
1 When Abram was ninety-nine years old, the LORD appeared to Abram,
and said to him, "I am God Almighty; walk before me, and be
blameless. 2 And I will make my covenant between me and you, and
will make you exceedingly numerous." 3 Then Abram fell on his face;

55

GENESIS 56

and God said to him, 4 "As for me, this is my covenant with you: You
shall be the ancestor of a multitude of nations. 5 No longer shall your
name be Abram, but your name shall be Abraham; for I have made you
the ancestor of a multitude of nations. 6 I will make you exceedingly
fruitful; and I will make nations of you, and kings shall come from you.
7 I will establish my covenant between me and you, and your offspring
after you throughout their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to
be God to you and to your offspring after you. 8 And I will give to you,
and to your offspring after you, the land where you are now an alien,
all the land of Canaan, for a perpetual holding; and I will be their
God."
9 God said to Abraham, "As for you, you shall keep my covenant, you
and your offspring after you throughout their generations. 10 This is
my covenant, which you shall keep, between me and you and your
offspring after you: Every male among you shall be circumcised. 11 You
shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskins, and it shall be a sign of the
covenant between me and you. 12 Throughout your generations every
male among you shall be circumcised when he is eight days old,
including the slave born in your house and the one bought with your
money from any foreigner who is not of your offspring. 13 Both the
slave born in your house and the one bought with your money must be
circumcised. So shall my covenant be in your flesh an everlasting
covenant. 14 Any uncircumcised male who is not circumcised in the
flesh of his foreskin shall be cut off from his people; he has broken my
covenant."
15 God said to Abraham, "As for Sarai your wife, you shall not call her
Sarai, but Sarah shall be her name. 16 I will bless her, and moreover I
will give you a son by her. I will bless her, and she shall give rise to
nations; kings of peoples shall come from her." 17 Then Abraham fell
on his face and laughed, and said to himself, "Can a child be born to a
man who is a hundred years old? Can Sarah, who is ninety years old,
bear a child?" 18 And Abraham said to God, "O that Ishmael might live
in your sight!" 19 God said, "No, but your wife Sarah shall bear you a
son, and you shall name him Isaac. I will establish my covenant with
him as an everlasting covenant for his offspring after him. 20 As for
Ishmael, I have heard you; I will bless him and make him fruitful and

56

GENESIS 57

exceedingly numerous; he shall be the father of twelve princes, and I
will make him a great nation. 21 But my covenant I will establish with
Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear to you at this season next year." 22 And
when he had finished talking with him, God went up from Abraham.
23 Then Abraham took his son Ishmael and all the slaves born in his
house or bought with his money, every male among the men of
Abraham's house, and he circumcised the flesh of their foreskins that
very day, as God had said to him. 24 Abraham was ninety-nine years
old when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin. 25 And his son
Ishmael was thirteen years old when he was circumcised in the flesh of
his foreskin. 26 That very day Abraham and his son Ishmael were
circumcised; 27 and all the men of his house, slaves born in the house
and those bought with money from a foreigner, were circumcised with
him.
[Genesis 18]
The LORD's visit to Abraham and Sarah
1 The LORD appeared to Abraham by the oaks of Mamre, as he sat at
the entrance of his tent in the heat of the day. 2 He looked up and saw
three men standing near him. When he saw them, he ran from the tent
entrance to meet them, and bowed down to the ground. 3 He said,
"My lord, if I find favor with you, do not pass by your servant. 4 Let a
little water be brought, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves under
the tree. 5 Let me bring a little bread, that you may refresh yourselves,
and after that you may pass on — since you have come to your
servant." So they said, "Do as you have said." 6 And Abraham hastened
into the tent to Sarah, and said, "Make ready quickly three measures of
choice flour, knead it, and make cakes." 7 Abraham ran to the herd,
and took a calf, tender and good, and gave it to the servant, who
hastened to prepare it. 8 Then he took curds and milk and the calf that
he had prepared, and set it before them; and he stood by them under
the tree while they ate.
9 They said to him, "Where is your wife Sarah?" And he said, "There, in
the tent." 10 Then one said, "I will surely return to you in due season,
and your wife Sarah shall have a son." And Sarah was listening at the

57

GENESIS 58

tent entrance behind him. 11 Now Abraham and Sarah were old,
advanced in age; it had ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of
women. 12 So Sarah laughed to herself, saying, "After I have grown
old, and my husband is old, shall I have pleasure?" 13 The LORD said to
Abraham, "Why did Sarah laugh, and say, 'Shall I indeed bear a child,
now that I am old?' 14 Is anything too wonderful for the LORD? At the
set time I will return to you, in due season, and Sarah shall have a son."
15 But Sarah denied, saying, "I did not laugh"; for she was afraid. He
said, "Oh yes, you did laugh."
Abraham's intercession for Sodom and Gomorrah
16 Then the men set out from there, and they looked toward Sodom;
and Abraham went with them to set them on their way. 17 The LORD
said, "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am about to do, 18 seeing that
Abraham shall become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations
of the earth shall be blessed in him? 19 No, for I have chosen him, that
he may charge his children and his household after him to keep the
way of the LORD by doing righteousness and justice; so that the LORD
may bring about for Abraham what he has promised him." 20 Then the
LORD said, "How great is the outcry against Sodom and Gomorrah and
how very grave their sin! 21 I must go down and see whether they have
done altogether according to the outcry that has come to me; and if
not, I will know."
22 So the men turned from there, and went toward Sodom, while
Abraham remained standing before the LORD. 23 Then Abraham came
near and said, "Will you indeed sweep away the righteous with the
wicked? 24 Suppose there are fifty righteous within the city; will you
then sweep away the place and not forgive it for the fifty righteous
who are in it? 25 Far be it from you to do such a thing, to slay the
righteous with the wicked, so that the righteous fare as the wicked!
Far be that from you! Shall not the Judge of all the earth do what is
just?" 26 And the LORD said, "If I find at Sodom fifty righteous in the
city, I will forgive the whole place for their sake." 27 Abraham
answered, "Let me take it upon myself to speak to the Lord, I who am
but dust and ashes. 28 Suppose five of the fifty righteous are lacking?
Will you destroy the whole city for lack of five?" And he said, "I will

58

GENESIS 59

not destroy it if I find forty-five there." 29 Again he spoke to him,
"Suppose forty are found there." He answered, "For the sake of forty I
will not do it." 30 Then he said, "Oh do not let the Lord be angry if I
speak. Suppose thirty are found there." He answered, "I will not do it,
if I find thirty there." 31 He said, "Let me take it upon myself to speak
to the Lord. Suppose twenty are found there." He answered, "For the
sake of twenty I will not destroy it." 32 Then he said, "Oh do not let
the Lord be angry if I speak just once more. Suppose ten are found
there." He answered, "For the sake of ten I will not destroy it." 33 And
the LORD went his way, when he had finished speaking to Abraham;
and Abraham returned to his place.
[Genesis 19]
The rescue of Lot and his family from the destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah
1 The two angels came to Sodom in the evening, and Lot was sitting in
the gateway of Sodom. When Lot saw them, he rose to meet them,
and bowed down with his face to the ground. 2 He said, "Please, my
lords, turn aside to your servant's house and spend the night, and wash
your feet; then you can rise early and go on your way." They said, "No;
we will spend the night in the square." 3 But he urged them strongly;
so they turned aside to him and entered his house; and he made them
a feast, and baked unleavened bread, and they ate. 4 But before they
lay down, the men of the city, the men of Sodom, both young and old,
all the people to the last man, surrounded the house; 5 and they called
to Lot, "Where are the men who came to you tonight? Bring them out
to us, so that we may know them." 6 Lot went out of the door to the
men, shut the door after him, 7 and said, "I beg you, my brothers, do
not act so wickedly. 8 Look, I have two daughters who have not known
a man; let me bring them out to you, and do to them as you please;
only do nothing to these men, for they have come under the shelter of
my roof." 9 But they replied, "Stand back!" And they said, "This fellow
came here as an alien, and he would play the judge! Now we will deal
worse with you than with them." Then they pressed hard against the
man Lot, and came near the door to break it down. 10 But the men
inside reached out their hands and brought Lot into the house with
them, and shut the door. 11 And they struck with blindness the men

59

GENESIS 60

who were at the door of the house, both small and great, so that they
were unable to find the door.
12 Then the men said to Lot, "Have you anyone else here? Sons-in-law,
sons, daughters, or anyone you have in the city — bring them out of
the place. 13 For we are about to destroy this place, because the outcry
against its people has become great before the LORD, and the LORD has
sent us to destroy it." 14 So Lot went out and said to his sons-in-law,
who were to marry his daughters, "Up, get out of this place; for the
LORD is about to destroy the city." But he seemed to his sons-in-law to
be jesting.
15 When morning dawned, the angels urged Lot, saying, "Get up, take
your wife and your two daughters who are here, or else you will be
consumed in the punishment of the city." 16 But he lingered; so the
men seized him and his wife and his two daughters by the hand, the
LORD being merciful to him, and they brought him out and left him
outside the city. 17 When they had brought them outside, they said,
"Flee for your life; do not look back or stop anywhere in the Plain; flee
to the hills, or else you will be consumed." 18 And Lot said to them,
"Oh, no, my lords; 19 your servant has found favor with you, and you
have shown me great kindness in saving my life; but I cannot flee to
the hills, for fear the disaster will overtake me and I die. 20 Look, that
city is near enough to flee to, and it is a little one. Let me escape there
— is it not a little one? — and my life will be saved!" 21 He said to him,
"Very well, I grant you this favor too, and will not overthrow the city
of which you have spoken. 22 Hurry, escape there, for I can do nothing
until you arrive there." Therefore the city was called Zoar. 23 The sun
had risen on the earth when Lot came to Zoar.
24 Then the LORD rained on Sodom and Gomorrah sulfur and fire from
the LORD out of heaven; 25 and he overthrew those cities, and all the
Plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and what grew on the
ground. 26 But Lot's wife, behind him, looked back, and she became a
pillar of salt.

60

GENESIS 61

27 Abraham went early in the morning to the place where he had
stood before the LORD; 28 and he looked down toward Sodom and
Gomorrah and toward all the land of the Plain and saw the smoke of
the land going up like the smoke of a furnace.
29 So it was that, when God destroyed the cities of the Plain, God
remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow,
when he overthrew the cities in which Lot had settled.
30 Now Lot went up out of Zoar and settled in the hills with his two
daughters, for he was afraid to stay in Zoar; so he lived in a cave with
his two daughters. 31 And the firstborn said to the younger, "Our
father is old, and there is not a man on earth to come in to us after the
manner of all the world. 32 Come, let us make our father drink wine,
and we will lie with him, so that we may preserve offspring through
our father." 33 So they made their father drink wine that night; and
the firstborn went in, and lay with her father; he did not know when
she lay down or when she rose. 34 On the next day, the firstborn said
to the younger, "Look, I lay last night with my father; let us make him
drink wine tonight also; then you go in and lie with him, so that we
may preserve offspring through our father." 35 So they made their
father drink wine that night also; and the younger rose, and lay with
him; and he did not know when she lay down or when she rose. 36
Thus both the daughters of Lot became pregnant by their father. 37
The firstborn bore a son, and named him Moab; he is the ancestor of
the Moabites to this day. 38 The younger also bore a son and named
him Ben-ammi; he is the ancestor of the Ammonites to this day.
[Genesis 20]
The second story of the endangerment of the matriarch
1 From there Abraham journeyed toward the region of the Negeb, and
settled between Kadesh and Shur. While residing in Gerar as an alien, 2
Abraham said of his wife Sarah, "She is my sister." And King Abimelech
of Gerar sent and took Sarah. 3 But God came to Abimelech in a dream
by night, and said to him, "You are about to die because of the woman
whom you have taken; for she is a married woman." 4 Now Abimelech
had not approached her; so he said, "Lord, will you destroy an

61

GENESIS 62

innocent people? 5 Did he not himself say to me, 'She is my sister'? And
she herself said, 'He is my brother.' I did this in the integrity of my
heart and the innocence of my hands." 6 Then God said to him in the
dream, "Yes, I know that you did this in the integrity of your heart;
furthermore it was I who kept you from sinning against me. Therefore I
did not let you touch her. 7 Now then, return the man's wife; for he is
a prophet, and he will pray for you and you shall live. But if you do not
restore her, know that you shall surely die, you and all that are yours."
8 So Abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all his servants
and told them all these things; and the men were very much afraid. 9
Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said to him, "What have you
done to us? How have I sinned against you, that you have brought such
great guilt on me and my kingdom? You have done things to me that
ought not to be done." 10 And Abimelech said to Abraham, "What
were you thinking of, that you did this thing?" 11 Abraham said, "I did
it because I thought, There is no fear of God at all in this place, and
they will kill me because of my wife. 12 Besides, she is indeed my sister,
the daughter of my father but not the daughter of my mother; and she
became my wife. 13 And when God caused me to wander from my
father's house, I said to her, 'This is the kindness you must do me: at
every place to which we come, say of me, He is my brother.'" 14 Then
Abimelech took sheep and oxen, and male and female slaves, and gave
them to Abraham, and restored his wife Sarah to him. 15 Abimelech
said, "My land is before you; settle where it pleases you." 16 To Sarah
he said, "Look, I have given your brother a thousand pieces of silver; it
is your exoneration before all who are with you; you are completely
vindicated." 17 Then Abraham prayed to God; and God healed
Abimelech, and also healed his wife and female slaves so that they
bore children. 18 For the LORD had closed fast all the wombs of the
house of Abimelech because of Sarah, Abraham's wife.
[Genesis 21]
Isaac and Ishmael
1 The LORD dealt with Sarah as he had said, and the LORD did for Sarah
as he had promised. 2 Sarah conceived and bore Abraham a son in his
old age, at the time of which God had spoken to him. 3 Abraham gave

62

GENESIS 63

the name Isaac to his son whom Sarah bore him. 4 And Abraham
circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight days old, as God had
commanded him. 5 Abraham was a hundred years old when his son
Isaac was born to him. 6 Now Sarah said, "God has brought laughter
for me; everyone who hears will laugh with me." 7 And she said, "Who
would ever have said to Abraham that Sarah would nurse children? Yet
I have borne him a son in his old age."
8 The child grew, and was weaned; and Abraham made a great feast
on the day that Isaac was weaned. 9 But Sarah saw the son of Hagar
the Egyptian, whom she had borne to Abraham, playing with her son
Isaac. 10 So she said to Abraham, "Cast out this slave woman with her
son; for the son of this slave woman shall not inherit along with my son
Isaac." 11 The matter was very distressing to Abraham on account of his
son. 12 But God said to Abraham, "Do not be distressed because of the
boy and because of your slave woman; whatever Sarah says to you, do
as she tells you, for it is through Isaac that offspring shall be named for
you. 13 As for the son of the slave woman, I will make a nation of him
also, because he is your offspring." 14 So Abraham rose early in the
morning, and took bread and a skin of water, and gave it to Hagar,
putting it on her shoulder, along with the child, and sent her away.
And she departed, and wandered about in the wilderness of Beersheba.
15 When the water in the skin was gone, she cast the child under one
of the bushes. 16 Then she went and sat down opposite him a good
way off, about the distance of a bowshot; for she said, "Do not let me
look on the death of the child." And as she sat opposite him, she lifted
up her voice and wept. 17 And God heard the voice of the boy; and the
angel of God called to Hagar from heaven, and said to her, "What
troubles you, Hagar? Do not be afraid; for God has heard the voice of
the boy where he is. 18 Come, lift up the boy and hold him fast with
your hand, for I will make a great nation of him." 19 Then God opened
her eyes and she saw a well of water. She went, and filled the skin with
water, and gave the boy a drink.

63

GENESIS 64

20 God was with the boy, and he grew up; he lived in the wilderness,
and became an expert with the bow. 21 He lived in the wilderness of
Paran; and his mother got a wife for him from the land of Egypt.
Abraham's dispute with Abimelech
22 At that time Abimelech, with Phicol the commander of his army,
said to Abraham, "God is with you in all that you do; 23 now therefore
swear to me here by God that you will not deal falsely with me or with
my offspring or with my posterity, but as I have dealt loyally with you,
you will deal with me and with the land where you have resided as an
alien." 24 And Abraham said, "I swear it."
25 When Abraham complained to Abimelech about a well of water
that Abimelech's servants had seized, 26 Abimelech said, "I do not
know who has done this; you did not tell me, and I have not heard of it
until today." 27 So Abraham took sheep and oxen and gave them to
Abimelech, and the two men made a covenant. 28 Abraham set apart
seven ewe lambs of the flock. 29 And Abimelech said to Abraham,
"What is the meaning of these seven ewe lambs that you have set
apart?" 30 He said, "These seven ewe lambs you shall accept from my
hand, in order that you may be a witness for me that I dug this well."
31 Therefore that place was called Beer-sheba; because there both of
them swore an oath. 32 When they had made a covenant at Beersheba, Abimelech, with Phicol the commander of his army, left and
returned to the land of the Philistines. 33 Abraham planted a tamarisk
tree in Beer-sheba, and called there on the name of the LORD, the
Everlasting God. 34 And Abraham resided as an alien many days in the
land of the Philistines.
[Genesis 22]
The testing of Abraham
1 After these things God tested Abraham. He said to him, "Abraham!"
And he said, "Here I am." 2 He said, "Take your son, your only son
Isaac, whom you love, and go to the land of Moriah, and offer him
there as a burnt offering on one of the mountains that I shall show
you." 3 So Abraham rose early in the morning, saddled his donkey, and

64

GENESIS 65

took two of his young men with him, and his son Isaac; he cut the
wood for the burnt offering, and set out and went to the place in the
distance that God had shown him. 4 On the third day Abraham looked
up and saw the place far away. 5 Then Abraham said to his young men,
"Stay here with the donkey; the boy and I will go over there; we will
worship, and then we will come back to you." 6 Abraham took the
wood of the burnt offering and laid it on his son Isaac, and he himself
carried the fire and the knife. So the two of them walked on together.
7 Isaac said to his father Abraham, "Father!" And he said, "Here I am,
my son." He said, "The fire and the wood are here, but where is the
lamb for a burnt offering?" 8 Abraham said, "God himself will provide
the lamb for a burnt offering, my son." So the two of them walked on
together.
9 When they came to the place that God had shown him, Abraham
built an altar there and laid the wood in order. He bound his son Isaac,
and laid him on the altar, on top of the wood. 10 Then Abraham
reached out his hand and took the knife to kill his son. 11 But the angel
of the LORD called to him from heaven, and said, "Abraham,
Abraham!" And he said, "Here I am." 12 He said, "Do not lay your hand
on the boy or do anything to him; for now I know that you fear God,
since you have not withheld your son, your only son, from me." 13 And
Abraham looked up and saw a ram, caught in a thicket by its horns.
Abraham went and took the ram and offered it up as a burnt offering
instead of his son. 14 So Abraham called that place "The LORD will
provide"; as it is said to this day, "On the mount of the LORD it shall be
provided."
15 The angel of the LORD called to Abraham a second time from
heaven, 16 and said, "By myself I have sworn, says the LORD: Because
you have done this, and have not withheld your son, your only son, 17 I
will indeed bless you, and I will make your offspring as numerous as
the stars of heaven and as the sand that is on the seashore. And your
offspring shall possess the gate of their enemies, 18 and by your
offspring shall all the nations of the earth gain blessing for themselves,
because you have obeyed my voice." 19 So Abraham returned to his
young men, and they arose and went together to Beer-sheba; and
Abraham lived at Beer-sheba.

65

GENESIS 66

The descendants of Abraham's brother Nahor
20 Now after these things it was told Abraham, "Milcah also has borne
children, to your brother Nahor: 21 Uz the firstborn, Buz his brother,
Kemuel the father of Aram, 22 Chesed, Hazo, Pildash, Jidlaph, and
Bethuel." 23 Bethuel became the father of Rebekah. These eight
Milcah bore to Nahor, Abraham's brother. 24 Moreover, his concubine,
whose name was Reumah, bore Tebah, Gaham, Tahash, and Maacah.
[Genesis 23]
Abraham's purchase of a family burial place
1 Sarah lived one hundred twenty-seven years; this was the length of
Sarah's life. 2 And Sarah died at Kiriath-arba (that is, Hebron) in the
land of Canaan; and Abraham went in to mourn for Sarah and to weep
for her. 3 Abraham rose up from beside his dead, and said to the
Hittites, 4 "I am a stranger and an alien residing among you; give me
property among you for a burying place, so that I may bury my dead
out of my sight." 5 The Hittites answered Abraham, 6 "Hear us, my
lord; you are a mighty prince among us. Bury your dead in the choicest
of our burial places; none of us will withhold from you any burial
ground for burying your dead." 7 Abraham rose and bowed to the
Hittites, the people of the land. 8 He said to them, "If you are willing
that I should bury my dead out of my sight, hear me, and entreat for
me Ephron son of Zohar, 9 so that he may give me the cave of
Machpelah, which he owns; it is at the end of his field. For the full
price let him give it to me in your presence as a possession for a
burying place." 10 Now Ephron was sitting among the Hittites; and
Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in the hearing of the Hittites, of
all who went in at the gate of his city, 11 "No, my lord, hear me; I give
you the field, and I give you the cave that is in it; in the presence of my
people I give it to you; bury your dead." 12 Then Abraham bowed
down before the people of the land. 13 He said to Ephron in the
hearing of the people of the land, "If you only will listen to me! I will
give the price of the field; accept it from me, so that I may bury my
dead there." 14 Ephron answered Abraham, 15 "My lord, listen to me; a
piece of land worth four hundred shekels of silver — what is that
between you and me? Bury your dead." 16 Abraham agreed with

66

GENESIS 67

Ephron; and Abraham weighed out for Ephron the silver that he had
named in the hearing of the Hittites, four hundred shekels of silver,
according to the weights current among the merchants.
17 So the field of Ephron in Machpelah, which was to the east of
Mamre, the field with the cave that was in it and all the trees that
were in the field, throughout its whole area, passed 18 to Abraham as
a possession in the presence of the Hittites, in the presence of all who
went in at the gate of his city. 19 After this, Abraham buried Sarah his
wife in the cave of the field of Machpelah facing Mamre (that is,
Hebron) in the land of Canaan. 20 The field and the cave that is in it
passed from the Hittites into Abraham's possession as a burying place.
[Genesis 24]
Finding a wife for Isaac
1 Now Abraham was old, well advanced in years; and the LORD had
blessed Abraham in all things. 2 Abraham said to his servant, the oldest
of his house, who had charge of all that he had, "Put your hand under
my thigh 3 and I will make you swear by the LORD, the God of heaven
and earth, that you will not get a wife for my son from the daughters
of the Canaanites, among whom I live, 4 but will go to my country and
to my kindred and get a wife for my son Isaac." 5 The servant said to
him, "Perhaps the woman may not be willing to follow me to this land;
must I then take your son back to the land from which you came?" 6
Abraham said to him, "See to it that you do not take my son back
there. 7 The LORD, the God of heaven, who took me from my father's
house and from the land of my birth, and who spoke to me and swore
to me, 'To your offspring I will give this land,' he will send his angel
before you, and you shall take a wife for my son from there. 8 But if
the woman is not willing to follow you, then you will be free from this
oath of mine; only you must not take my son back there." 9 So the
servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master and swore
to him concerning this matter.
10 Then the servant took ten of his master's camels and departed,
taking all kinds of choice gifts from his master; and he set out and
went to Aram-naharaim, to the city of Nahor. 11 He made the camels

67

GENESIS 68

kneel down outside the city by the well of water; it was toward
evening, the time when women go out to draw water. 12 And he said,
"O LORD, God of my master Abraham, please grant me success today
and show steadfast love to my master Abraham. 13 I am standing here
by the spring of water, and the daughters of the townspeople are
coming out to draw water. 14 Let the girl to whom I shall say, 'Please
offer your jar that I may drink,' and who shall say, 'Drink, and I will
water your camels' — let her be the one whom you have appointed for
your servant Isaac. By this I shall know that you have shown steadfast
love to my master."
15 Before he had finished speaking, there was Rebekah, who was born
to Bethuel son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother,
coming out with her water jar on her shoulder. 16 The girl was very fair
to look upon, a virgin, whom no man had known. She went down to
the spring, filled her jar, and came up. 17 Then the servant ran to meet
her and said, "Please let me sip a little water from your jar." 18 "Drink,
my lord," she said, and quickly lowered her jar upon her hand and
gave him a drink. 19 When she had finished giving him a drink, she
said, "I will draw for your camels also, until they have finished
drinking." 20 So she quickly emptied her jar into the trough and ran
again to the well to draw, and she drew for all his camels. 21 The man
gazed at her in silence to learn whether or not the LORD had made his
journey successful.
22 When the camels had finished drinking, the man took a gold nosering weighing a half shekel, and two bracelets for her arms weighing
ten gold shekels, 23 and said, "Tell me whose daughter you are. Is
there room in your father's house for us to spend the night?" 24 She
said to him, "I am the daughter of Bethuel son of Milcah, whom she
bore to Nahor." 25 She added, "We have plenty of straw and fodder
and a place to spend the night." 26 The man bowed his head and
worshiped the LORD 27 and said, "Blessed be the LORD, the God of my
master Abraham, who has not forsaken his steadfast love and his
faithfulness toward my master. As for me, the LORD has led me on the
way to the house of my master's kin."

68

GENESIS 69

28 Then the girl ran and told her mother's household about these
things. 29 Rebekah had a brother whose name was Laban; and Laban
ran out to the man, to the spring. 30 As soon as he had seen the nosering, and the bracelets on his sister's arms, and when he heard the
words of his sister Rebekah, "Thus the man spoke to me," he went to
the man; and there he was, standing by the camels at the spring. 31 He
said, "Come in, O blessed of the LORD. Why do you stand outside when
I have prepared the house and a place for the camels?" 32 So the man
came into the house; and Laban unloaded the camels, and gave him
straw and fodder for the camels, and water to wash his feet and the
feet of the men who were with him. 33 Then food was set before him
to eat; but he said, "I will not eat until I have told my errand." He said,
"Speak on."
34 So he said, "I am Abraham's servant. 35 The LORD has greatly blessed
my master, and he has become wealthy; he has given him flocks and
herds, silver and gold, male and female slaves, camels and donkeys. 36
And Sarah my master's wife bore a son to my master when she was old;
and he has given him all that he has. 37 My master made me swear,
saying, 'You shall not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the
Canaanites, in whose land I live; 38 but you shall go to my father's
house, to my kindred, and get a wife for my son.' 39 I said to my
master, 'Perhaps the woman will not follow me.' 40 But he said to me,
'The LORD, before whom I walk, will send his angel with you and make
your way successful. You shall get a wife for my son from my kindred,
from my father's house. 41 Then you will be free from my oath, when
you come to my kindred; even if they will not give her to you, you will
be free from my oath.'
42 "I came today to the spring, and said, 'O LORD, the God of my master
Abraham, if now you will only make successful the way I am going! 43 I
am standing here by the spring of water; let the young woman who
comes out to draw, to whom I shall say, "Please give me a little water
from your jar to drink," 44 and who will say to me, "Drink, and I will
draw for your camels also" — let her be the woman whom the LORD
has appointed for my master's son.'

69

GENESIS 70

45 "Before I had finished speaking in my heart, there was Rebekah
coming out with her water jar on her shoulder; and she went down to
the spring, and drew. I said to her, 'Please let me drink.' 46 She quickly
let down her jar from her shoulder, and said, 'Drink, and I will also
water your camels.' So I drank, and she also watered the camels. 47
Then I asked her, 'Whose daughter are you?' She said, 'The daughter of
Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milcah bore to him.' So I put the ring on
her nose, and the bracelets on her arms. 48 Then I bowed my head and
worshiped the LORD, and blessed the LORD, the God of my master
Abraham, who had led me by the right way to obtain the daughter of
my master's kinsman for his son. 49 Now then, if you will deal loyally
and truly with my master, tell me; and if not, tell me, so that I may turn
either to the right hand or to the left."
50 Then Laban and Bethuel answered, "The thing comes from the
LORD; we cannot speak to you anything bad or good. 51 Look, Rebekah
is before you, take her and go, and let her be the wife of your master's
son, as the LORD has spoken."
52 When Abraham's servant heard their words, he bowed himself to
the ground before the LORD. 53 And the servant brought out jewelry of
silver and of gold, and garments, and gave them to Rebekah; he also
gave to her brother and to her mother costly ornaments. 54 Then he
and the men who were with him ate and drank, and they spent the
night there. When they rose in the morning, he said, "Send me back to
my master." 55 Her brother and her mother said, "Let the girl remain
with us a while, at least ten days; after that she may go." 56 But he
said to them, "Do not delay me, since the LORD has made my journey
successful; let me go that I may go to my master." 57 They said, "We
will call the girl, and ask her." 58 And they called Rebekah, and said to
her, "Will you go with this man?" She said, "I will." 59 So they sent
away their sister Rebekah and her nurse along with Abraham's servant
and his men. 60 And they blessed Rebekah and said to her,
"May you, our sister, become
thousands of myriads;
may your offspring gain possession
of the gates of their foes."

70

GENESIS 71

61 Then Rebekah and her maids rose up, mounted the camels, and
followed the man; thus the servant took Rebekah, and went his way.
62 Now Isaac had come from Beer-lahai-roi, and was settled in the
Negeb. 63 Isaac went out in the evening to walk in the field; and
looking up, he saw camels coming. 64 And Rebekah looked up, and
when she saw Isaac, she slipped quickly from the camel, 65 and said to
the servant, "Who is the man over there, walking in the field to meet
us?" The servant said, "It is my master." So she took her veil and
covered herself. 66 And the servant told Isaac all the things that he had
done. 67 Then Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent. He took
Rebekah, and she became his wife; and he loved her. So Isaac was
comforted after his mother's death.
[Genesis 25]
The death of Abraham
1 Abraham took another wife, whose name was Keturah. 2 She bore
him Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah. 3 Jokshan
was the father of Sheba and Dedan. The sons of Dedan were Asshurim,
Letushim, and Leummim. 4 The sons of Midian were Ephah, Epher,
Hanoch, Abida, and Eldaah. All these were the children of Keturah. 5
Abraham gave all he had to Isaac. 6 But to the sons of his concubines
Abraham gave gifts, while he was still living, and he sent them away
from his son Isaac, eastward to the east country.
7 This is the length of Abraham's life, one hundred seventy-five years. 8
Abraham breathed his last and died in a good old age, an old man and
full of years, and was gathered to his people. 9 His sons Isaac and
Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron
son of Zohar the Hittite, east of Mamre, 10 the field that Abraham
purchased from the Hittites. There Abraham was buried, with his wife
Sarah. 11 After the death of Abraham God blessed his son Isaac. And
Isaac settled at Beer-lahai-roi.
Overview of the descendants of Ishmael
12 These are the descendants of Ishmael, Abraham's son, whom Hagar
the Egyptian, Sarah's slave-girl, bore to Abraham. 13 These are the

71

GENESIS 72

names of the sons of Ishmael, named in the order of their birth:
Nebaioth, the firstborn of Ishmael; and Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam, 14
Mishma, Dumah, Massa, 15 Hadad, Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and
Kedemah. 16 These are the sons of Ishmael and these are their names,
by their villages and by their encampments, twelve princes according to
their tribes. 17 (This is the length of the life of Ishmael, one hundred
thirty-seven years; he breathed his last and died, and was gathered to
his people.) 18 They settled from Havilah to Shur, which is opposite
Egypt in the direction of Assyria; he settled down alongside of all his
people.
Introduction of the descendants of Isaac
19 These are the descendants of Isaac, Abraham's son: Abraham was
the father of Isaac, 20 and Isaac was forty years old when he married
Rebekah, daughter of Bethuel the Aramean of Paddan-aram, sister of
Laban the Aramean. 21 Isaac prayed to the LORD for his wife, because
she was barren; and the LORD granted his prayer, and his wife Rebekah
conceived. 22 The children struggled together within her; and she said,
"If it is to be this way, why do I live?" So she went to inquire of the
LORD. 23 And the LORD said to her,
"Two nations are in your womb,
and two peoples born of you shall be divided;
the one shall be stronger than the other,
the elder shall serve the younger."
24 When her time to give birth was at hand, there were twins in her
womb. 25 The first came out red, all his body like a hairy mantle; so
they named him Esau. 26 Afterward his brother came out, with his
hand gripping Esau's heel; so he was named Jacob. Isaac was sixty years
old when she bore them.
27 When the boys grew up, Esau was a skillful hunter, a man of the
field, while Jacob was a quiet man, living in tents. 28 Isaac loved Esau,
because he was fond of game; but Rebekah loved Jacob.

72

GENESIS 73

Jacob buys Esau's birthright
29 Once when Jacob was cooking a stew, Esau came in from the field,
and he was famished. 30 Esau said to Jacob, "Let me eat some of that
red stuff, for I am famished!" (Therefore he was called Edom.) 31 Jacob
said, "First sell me your birthright." 32 Esau said, "I am about to die; of
what use is a birthright to me?" 33 Jacob said, "Swear to me first." So
he swore to him, and sold his birthright to Jacob. 34 Then Jacob gave
Esau bread and lentil stew, and he ate and drank, and rose and went
his way. Thus Esau despised his birthright.
[Genesis 26]
Interlude on Isaac
1 Now there was a famine in the land, besides the former famine that
had occurred in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went to Gerar, to King
Abimelech of the Philistines. 2 The LORD appeared to Isaac and said,
"Do not go down to Egypt; settle in the land that I shall show you. 3
Reside in this land as an alien, and I will be with you, and will bless you;
for to you and to your descendants I will give all these lands, and I will
fulfill the oath that I swore to your father Abraham. 4 I will make your
offspring as numerous as the stars of heaven, and will give to your
offspring all these lands; and all the nations of the earth shall gain
blessing for themselves through your offspring, 5 because Abraham
obeyed my voice and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes,
and my laws."
6 So Isaac settled in Gerar. 7 When the men of the place asked him
about his wife, he said, "She is my sister"; for he was afraid to say, "My
wife," thinking, "or else the men of the place might kill me for the
sake of Rebekah, because she is attractive in appearance." 8 When
Isaac had been there a long time, King Abimelech of the Philistines
looked out of a window and saw him fondling his wife Rebekah. 9 So
Abimelech called for Isaac, and said, "So she is your wife! Why then did
you say, 'She is my sister'?" Isaac said to him, "Because I thought I
might die because of her." 10 Abimelech said, "What is this you have
done to us? One of the people might easily have lain with your wife,
and you would have brought guilt upon us." 11 So Abimelech warned

73

GENESIS 74

all the people, saying, "Whoever touches this man or his wife shall be
put to death."
12 Isaac sowed seed in that land, and in the same year reaped a
hundredfold. The LORD blessed him, 13 and the man became rich; he
prospered more and more until he became very wealthy. 14 He had
possessions of flocks and herds, and a great household, so that the
Philistines envied him. 15 (Now the Philistines had stopped up and filled
with earth all the wells that his father's servants had dug in the days of
his father Abraham.) 16 And Abimelech said to Isaac, "Go away from
us; you have become too powerful for us."
17 So Isaac departed from there and camped in the valley of Gerar and
settled there. 18 Isaac dug again the wells of water that had been dug
in the days of his father Abraham; for the Philistines had stopped them
up after the death of Abraham; and he gave them the names that his
father had given them. 19 But when Isaac's servants dug in the valley
and found there a well of spring water, 20 the herders of Gerar
quarreled with Isaac's herders, saying, "The water is ours." So he called
the well Esek, because they contended with him. 21 Then they dug
another well, and they quarreled over that one also; so he called it
Sitnah. 22 He moved from there and dug another well, and they did
not quarrel over it; so he called it Rehoboth, saying, "Now the LORD has
made room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the land."
23 From there he went up to Beer-sheba. 24 And that very night the
LORD appeared to him and said, "I am the God of your father Abraham;
do not be afraid, for I am with you and will bless you and make your
offspring numerous for my servant Abraham's sake." 25 So he built an
altar there, called on the name of the LORD, and pitched his tent there.
And there Isaac's servants dug a well.
26 Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar, with Ahuzzath his adviser
and Phicol the commander of his army. 27 Isaac said to them, "Why
have you come to me, seeing that you hate me and have sent me away
from you?" 28 They said, "We see plainly that the LORD has been with
you; so we say, let there be an oath between you and us, and let us
make a covenant with you 29 so that you will do us no harm, just as we

74

GENESIS 75

have not touched you and have done to you nothing but good and
have sent you away in peace. You are now the blessed of the LORD." 30
So he made them a feast, and they ate and drank. 31 In the morning
they rose early and exchanged oaths; and Isaac set them on their way,
and they departed from him in peace. 32 That same day Isaac's servants
came and told him about the well that they had dug, and said to him,
"We have found water!" 33 He called it Shibah; therefore the name of
the city is Beer-sheba to this day.
The transfer of blessing to Jacob and not Esau
34 When Esau was forty years old, he married Judith daughter of Beeri
the Hittite, and Basemath daughter of Elon the Hittite; 35 and they
made life bitter for Isaac and Rebekah.
[Genesis 27]
1 When Isaac was old and his eyes were dim so that he could not see,
he called his elder son Esau and said to him, "My son"; and he
answered, "Here I am." 2 He said, "See, I am old; I do not know the day
of my death. 3 Now then, take your weapons, your quiver and your
bow, and go out to the field, and hunt game for me. 4 Then prepare
for me savory food, such as I like, and bring it to me to eat, so that I
may bless you before I die."
5 Now Rebekah was listening when Isaac spoke to his son Esau. So
when Esau went to the field to hunt for game and bring it, 6 Rebekah
said to her son Jacob, "I heard your father say to your brother Esau, 7
'Bring me game, and prepare for me savory food to eat, that I may
bless you before the LORD before I die.' 8 Now therefore, my son, obey
my word as I command you. 9 Go to the flock, and get me two choice
kids, so that I may prepare from them savory food for your father, such
as he likes; 10 and you shall take it to your father to eat, so that he may
bless you before he dies." 11 But Jacob said to his mother Rebekah,
"Look, my brother Esau is a hairy man, and I am a man of smooth skin.
12 Perhaps my father will feel me, and I shall seem to be mocking him,
and bring a curse on myself and not a blessing." 13 His mother said to
him, "Let your curse be on me, my son; only obey my word, and go, get

75

GENESIS 76

them for me." 14 So he went and got them and brought them to his
mother; and his mother prepared savory food, such as his father loved.
15 Then Rebekah took the best garments of her elder son Esau, which
were with her in the house, and put them on her younger son Jacob; 16
and she put the skins of the kids on his hands and on the smooth part
of his neck. 17 Then she handed the savory food, and the bread that
she had prepared, to her son Jacob.
18 So he went in to his father, and said, "My father"; and he said,
"Here I am; who are you, my son?" 19 Jacob said to his father, "I am
Esau your firstborn. I have done as you told me; now sit up and eat of
my game, so that you may bless me." 20 But Isaac said to his son, "How
is it that you have found it so quickly, my son?" He answered, "Because
the LORD your God granted me success." 21 Then Isaac said to Jacob,
"Come near, that I may feel you, my son, to know whether you are
really my son Esau or not." 22 So Jacob went up to his father Isaac, who
felt him and said, "The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the
hands of Esau." 23 He did not recognize him, because his hands were
hairy like his brother Esau's hands; so he blessed him. 24 He said, "Are
you really my son Esau?" He answered, "I am." 25 Then he said, "Bring
it to me, that I may eat of my son's game and bless you." So he
brought it to him, and he ate; and he brought him wine, and he drank.
26 Then his father Isaac said to him, "Come near and kiss me, my son."
27 So he came near and kissed him; and he smelled the smell of his
garments, and blessed him, and said,
"Ah, the smell of my son
is like the smell of a field that the LORD has blessed.
28 May God give you of the dew of heaven,
and of the fatness of the earth,
and plenty of grain and wine.
29 Let peoples serve you,
and nations bow down to you.
Be lord over your brothers,
and may your mother's sons bow down to you.
Cursed be everyone who curses you,
and blessed be everyone who blesses you!"

76

GENESIS 77

30 As soon as Isaac had finished blessing Jacob, when Jacob had
scarcely gone out from the presence of his father Isaac, his brother
Esau came in from his hunting. 31 He also prepared savory food, and
brought it to his father. And he said to his father, "Let my father sit up
and eat of his son's game, so that you may bless me." 32 His father
Isaac said to him, "Who are you?" He answered, "I am your firstborn
son, Esau." 33 Then Isaac trembled violently, and said, "Who was it
then that hunted game and brought it to me, and I ate it all before
you came, and I have blessed him? — yes, and blessed he shall be!" 34
When Esau heard his father's words, he cried out with an exceedingly
great and bitter cry, and said to his father, "Bless me, me also, father!"
35 But he said, "Your brother came deceitfully, and he has taken away
your blessing." 36 Esau said, "Is he not rightly named Jacob? For he has
supplanted me these two times. He took away my birthright; and look,
now he has taken away my blessing." Then he said, "Have you not
reserved a blessing for me?" 37 Isaac answered Esau, "I have already
made him your lord, and I have given him all his brothers as servants,
and with grain and wine I have sustained him. What then can I do for
you, my son?" 38 Esau said to his father, "Have you only one blessing,
father? Bless me, me also, father!" And Esau lifted up his voice and
wept.
39 Then his father Isaac answered him:
"See, away from the fatness of the earth shall your home be,
and away from the dew of heaven on high.
40 By your sword you shall live,
and you shall serve your brother;
but when you break loose,
you shall break his yoke from your neck."
41 Now Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing with which his father
had blessed him, and Esau said to himself, "The days of mourning for
my father are approaching; then I will kill my brother Jacob." 42 But
the words of her elder son Esau were told to Rebekah; so she sent and
called her younger son Jacob and said to him, "Your brother Esau is
consoling himself by planning to kill you. 43 Now therefore, my son,
obey my voice; flee at once to my brother Laban in Haran, 44 and stay
with him a while, until your brother's fury turns away — 45 until your

77

GENESIS 78

brother's anger against you turns away, and he forgets what you have
done to him; then I will send, and bring you back from there. Why
should I lose both of you in one day?"
46 Then Rebekah said to Isaac, "I am weary of my life because of the
Hittite women. If Jacob marries one of the Hittite women such as
these, one of the women of the land, what good will my life be to
me?"
[Genesis 28]
The split between Jacob and Esau
1 Then Isaac called Jacob and blessed him, and charged him, "You shall
not marry one of the Canaanite women. 2 Go at once to Paddan-aram
to the house of Bethuel, your mother's father; and take as wife from
there one of the daughters of Laban, your mother's brother. 3 May
God Almighty bless you and make you fruitful and numerous, that you
may become a company of peoples. 4 May he give to you the blessing
of Abraham, to you and to your offspring with you, so that you may
take possession of the land where you now live as an alien — land that
God gave to Abraham." 5 Thus Isaac sent Jacob away; and he went to
Paddan-aram, to Laban son of Bethuel the Aramean, the brother of
Rebekah, Jacob's and Esau's mother.
6 Now Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and sent him away to
Paddan-aram to take a wife from there, and that as he blessed him he
charged him, "You shall not marry one of the Canaanite women," 7
and that Jacob had obeyed his father and his mother and gone to
Paddan-aram. 8 So when Esau saw that the Canaanite women did not
please his father Isaac, 9 Esau went to Ishmael and took Mahalath
daughter of Abraham's son Ishmael, and sister of Nebaioth, to be his
wife in addition to the wives he had.
10 Jacob left Beer-sheba and went toward Haran. 11 He came to a
certain place and stayed there for the night, because the sun had set.
Taking one of the stones of the place, he put it under his head and lay
down in that place. 12 And he dreamed that there was a ladder set up
on the earth, the top of it reaching to heaven; and the angels of God

78

GENESIS 79

were ascending and descending on it. 13 And the LORD stood beside
him and said, "I am the LORD, the God of Abraham your father and the
God of Isaac; the land on which you lie I will give to you and to your
offspring; 14 and your offspring shall be like the dust of the earth, and
you shall spread abroad to the west and to the east and to the north
and to the south; and all the families of the earth shall be blessed in
you and in your offspring. 15 Know that I am with you and will keep
you wherever you go, and will bring you back to this land; for I will not
leave you until I have done what I have promised you." 16 Then Jacob
woke from his sleep and said, "Surely the LORD is in this place — and I
did not know it!" 17 And he was afraid, and said, "How awesome is this
place! This is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of
heaven."
18 So Jacob rose early in the morning, and he took the stone that he
had put under his head and set it up for a pillar and poured oil on the
top of it. 19 He called that place Bethel; but the name of the city was
Luz at the first. 20 Then Jacob made a vow, saying, "If God will be with
me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to
eat and clothing to wear, 21 so that I come again to my father's house
in peace, then the LORD shall be my God, 22 and this stone, which I have
set up for a pillar, shall be God's house; and of all that you give me I
will surely give one-tenth to you."
[Genesis 29]
Jacob's marriages to Laban's daughters
1 Then Jacob went on his journey, and came to the land of the people
of the east. 2 As he looked, he saw a well in the field and three flocks
of sheep lying there beside it; for out of that well the flocks were
watered. The stone on the well's mouth was large, 3 and when all the
flocks were gathered there, the shepherds would roll the stone from
the mouth of the well, and water the sheep, and put the stone back in
its place on the mouth of the well.
4 Jacob said to them, "My brothers, where do you come from?" They
said, "We are from Haran." 5 He said to them, "Do you know Laban
son of Nahor?" They said, "We do." 6 He said to them, "Is it well with

79

GENESIS 80

him?" "Yes," they replied, "and here is his daughter Rachel, coming
with the sheep." 7 He said, "Look, it is still broad daylight; it is not time
for the animals to be gathered together. Water the sheep, and go,
pasture them." 8 But they said, "We cannot until all the flocks are
gathered together, and the stone is rolled from the mouth of the well;
then we water the sheep."
9 While he was still speaking with them, Rachel came with her father's
sheep; for she kept them. 10 Now when Jacob saw Rachel, the
daughter of his mother's brother Laban, and the sheep of his mother's
brother Laban, Jacob went up and rolled the stone from the well's
mouth, and watered the flock of his mother's brother Laban. 11 Then
Jacob kissed Rachel, and wept aloud. 12 And Jacob told Rachel that he
was her father's kinsman, and that he was Rebekah's son; and she ran
and told her father.
13 When Laban heard the news about his sister's son Jacob, he ran to
meet him; he embraced him and kissed him, and brought him to his
house. Jacob told Laban all these things, 14 and Laban said to him,
"Surely you are my bone and my flesh!" And he stayed with him a
month.
15 Then Laban said to Jacob, "Because you are my kinsman, should you
therefore serve me for nothing? Tell me, what shall your wages be?" 16
Now Laban had two daughters; the name of the elder was Leah, and
the name of the younger was Rachel. 17 Leah's eyes were lovely, and
Rachel was graceful and beautiful. 18 Jacob loved Rachel; so he said, "I
will serve you seven years for your younger daughter Rachel." 19 Laban
said, "It is better that I give her to you than that I should give her to
any other man; stay with me." 20 So Jacob served seven years for
Rachel, and they seemed to him but a few days because of the love he
had for her.
21 Then Jacob said to Laban, "Give me my wife that I may go in to her,
for my time is completed." 22 So Laban gathered together all the
people of the place, and made a feast. 23 But in the evening he took
his daughter Leah and brought her to Jacob; and he went in to her. 24
(Laban gave his maid Zilpah to his daughter Leah to be her maid.) 25

80

GENESIS 81

When morning came, it was Leah! And Jacob said to Laban, "What is
this you have done to me? Did I not serve with you for Rachel? Why
then have you deceived me?" 26 Laban said, "This is not done in our
country — giving the younger before the firstborn. 27 Complete the
week of this one, and we will give you the other also in return for
serving me another seven years." 28 Jacob did so, and completed her
week; then Laban gave him his daughter Rachel as a wife. 29 (Laban
gave his maid Bilhah to his daughter Rachel to be her maid.) 30 So
Jacob went in to Rachel also, and he loved Rachel more than Leah. He
served Laban for another seven years.
The birth of eleven of Jacob's sons and Dinah
31 When the LORD saw that Leah was unloved, he opened her womb;
but Rachel was barren. 32 Leah conceived and bore a son, and she
named him Reuben; for she said, "Because the LORD has looked on my
affliction; surely now my husband will love me." 33 She conceived
again and bore a son, and said, "Because the LORD has heard that I am
hated, he has given me this son also"; and she named him Simeon. 34
Again she conceived and bore a son, and said, "Now this time my
husband will be joined to me, because I have borne him three sons";
therefore he was named Levi. 35 She conceived again and bore a son,
and said, "This time I will praise the LORD"; therefore she named him
Judah; then she ceased bearing.
[Genesis 30]
1 When Rachel saw that she bore Jacob no children, she envied her
sister; and she said to Jacob, "Give me children, or I shall die!" 2 Jacob
became very angry with Rachel and said, "Am I in the place of God,
who has withheld from you the fruit of the womb?" 3 Then she said,
"Here is my maid Bilhah; go in to her, that she may bear upon my
knees and that I too may have children through her." 4 So she gave
him her maid Bilhah as a wife; and Jacob went in to her. 5 And Bilhah
conceived and bore Jacob a son. 6 Then Rachel said, "God has judged
me, and has also heard my voice and given me a son"; therefore she
named him Dan. 7 Rachel's maid Bilhah conceived again and bore
Jacob a second son. 8 Then Rachel said, "With mighty wrestlings I have

81

GENESIS 82

wrestled with my sister, and have prevailed"; so she named him
Naphtali.
9 When Leah saw that she had ceased bearing children, she took her
maid Zilpah and gave her to Jacob as a wife. 10 Then Leah's maid
Zilpah bore Jacob a son. 11 And Leah said, "Good fortune!" so she
named him Gad. 12 Leah's maid Zilpah bore Jacob a second son. 13 And
Leah said, "Happy am I! For the women will call me happy"; so she
named him Asher.
14 In the days of wheat harvest Reuben went and found mandrakes in
the field, and brought them to his mother Leah. Then Rachel said to
Leah, "Please give me some of your son's mandrakes." 15 But she said
to her, "Is it a small matter that you have taken away my husband?
Would you take away my son's mandrakes also?" Rachel said, "Then he
may lie with you tonight for your son's mandrakes." 16 When Jacob
came from the field in the evening, Leah went out to meet him, and
said, "You must come in to me; for I have hired you with my son's
mandrakes." So he lay with her that night. 17 And God heeded Leah,
and she conceived and bore Jacob a fifth son. 18 Leah said, "God has
given me my hire because I gave my maid to my husband"; so she
named him Issachar. 19 And Leah conceived again, and she bore Jacob
a sixth son. 20 Then Leah said, "God has endowed me with a good
dowry; now my husband will honor me, because I have borne him six
sons"; so she named him Zebulun. 21 Afterwards she bore a daughter,
and named her Dinah.

22 Then God remembered Rachel, and God heeded her and opened her
womb. 23 She conceived and bore a son, and said, "God has taken
away my reproach"; 24 and she named him Joseph, saying, "May the
LORD add to me another son!"
The birth of Jacob's flocks
25 When Rachel had borne Joseph, Jacob said to Laban, "Send me
away, that I may go to my own home and country. 26 Give me my
wives and my children for whom I have served you, and let me go; for

82

GENESIS 83

you know very well the service I have given you." 27 But Laban said to
him, "If you will allow me to say so, I have learned by divination that
the LORD has blessed me because of you; 28 name your wages, and I
will give it." 29 Jacob said to him, "You yourself know how I have
served you, and how your cattle have fared with me. 30 For you had
little before I came, and it has increased abundantly; and the LORD has
blessed you wherever I turned. But now when shall I provide for my
own household also?" 31 He said, "What shall I give you?" Jacob said,
"You shall not give me anything; if you will do this for me, I will again
feed your flock and keep it: 32 let me pass through all your flock today,
removing from it every speckled and spotted sheep and every black
lamb, and the spotted and speckled among the goats; and such shall be
my wages. 33 So my honesty will answer for me later, when you come
to look into my wages with you. Every one that is not speckled and
spotted among the goats and black among the lambs, if found with
me, shall be counted stolen." 34 Laban said, "Good! Let it be as you
have said." 35 But that day Laban removed the male goats that were
striped and spotted, and all the female goats that were speckled and
spotted, every one that had white on it, and every lamb that was black,
and put them in charge of his sons; 36 and he set a distance of three
days' journey between himself and Jacob, while Jacob was pasturing
the rest of Laban's flock.
37 Then Jacob took fresh rods of poplar and almond and plane, and
peeled white streaks in them, exposing the white of the rods. 38 He set
the rods that he had peeled in front of the flocks in the troughs, that
is, the watering places, where the flocks came to drink. And since they
bred when they came to drink, 39 the flocks bred in front of the rods,
and so the flocks produced young that were striped, speckled, and
spotted. 40 Jacob separated the lambs, and set the faces of the flocks
toward the striped and the completely black animals in the flock of
Laban; and he put his own droves apart, and did not put them with
Laban's flock. 41 Whenever the stronger of the flock were breeding,
Jacob laid the rods in the troughs before the eyes of the flock, that
they might breed among the rods, 42 but for the feebler of the flock
he did not lay them there; so the feebler were Laban's, and the
stronger Jacob's. 43 Thus the man grew exceedingly rich, and had large
flocks, and male and female slaves, and camels and donkeys.

83

GENESIS 84

[Genesis 31]
Jacob's departure from Laban's family
1 Now Jacob heard that the sons of Laban were saying, "Jacob has
taken all that was our father's; he has gained all this wealth from what
belonged to our father." 2 And Jacob saw that Laban did not regard
him as favorably as he did before. 3 Then the LORD said to Jacob,
"Return to the land of your ancestors and to your kindred, and I will be
with you." 4 So Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah into the field
where his flock was, 5 and said to them, "I see that your father does
not regard me as favorably as he did before. But the God of my father
has been with me. 6 You know that I have served your father with all
my strength; 7 yet your father has cheated me and changed my wages
ten times, but God did not permit him to harm me. 8 If he said, 'The
speckled shall be your wages,' then all the flock bore speckled; and if
he said, 'The striped shall be your wages,' then all the flock bore
striped. 9 Thus God has taken away the livestock of your father, and
given them to me.
10 During the mating of the flock I once had a dream in which I looked
up and saw that the male goats that leaped upon the flock were
striped, speckled, and mottled. 11 Then the angel of God said to me in
the dream, 'Jacob,' and I said, 'Here I am!' 12 And he said, 'Look up and
see that all the goats that leap on the flock are striped, speckled, and
mottled; for I have seen all that Laban is doing to you. 13 I am the God
of Bethel, where you anointed a pillar and made a vow to me. Now
leave this land at once and return to the land of your birth.'" 14 Then
Rachel and Leah answered him, "Is there any portion or inheritance
left to us in our father's house? 15 Are we not regarded by him as
foreigners? For he has sold us, and he has been using up the money
given for us. 16 All the property that God has taken away from our
father belongs to us and to our children; now then, do whatever God
has said to you."
17 So Jacob arose, and set his children and his wives on camels; 18 and
he drove away all his livestock, all the property that he had gained, the
livestock in his possession that he had acquired in Paddan-aram, to go
to his father Isaac in the land of Canaan.

84

GENESIS 85

19 Now Laban had gone to shear his sheep, and Rachel stole her
father's household gods. 20 And Jacob deceived Laban the Aramean, in
that he did not tell him that he intended to flee. 21 So he fled with all
that he had; starting out he crossed the Euphrates, and set his face
toward the hill country of Gilead.
22 On the third day Laban was told that Jacob had fled. 23 So he took
his kinsfolk with him and pursued him for seven days until he caught
up with him in the hill country of Gilead. 24 But God came to Laban
the Aramean in a dream by night, and said to him, "Take heed that
you say not a word to Jacob, either good or bad."
25 Laban overtook Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the hill
country, and Laban with his kinsfolk camped in the hill country of
Gilead. 26 Laban said to Jacob, "What have you done? You have
deceived me, and carried away my daughters like captives of the
sword. 27 Why did you flee secretly and deceive me and not tell me? I
would have sent you away with mirth and songs, with tambourine and
lyre. 28 And why did you not permit me to kiss my sons and my
daughters farewell? What you have done is foolish. 29 It is in my power
to do you harm; but the God of your father spoke to me last night,
saying, 'Take heed that you speak to Jacob neither good nor bad.' 30
Even though you had to go because you longed greatly for your
father's house, why did you steal my gods?" 31 Jacob answered Laban,
"Because I was afraid, for I thought that you would take your
daughters from me by force. 32 But anyone with whom you find your
gods shall not live. In the presence of our kinsfolk, point out what I
have that is yours, and take it." Now Jacob did not know that Rachel
had stolen the gods.
33 So Laban went into Jacob's tent, and into Leah's tent, and into the
tent of the two maids, but he did not find them. And he went out of
Leah's tent, and entered Rachel's. 34 Now Rachel had taken the
household gods and put them in the camel's saddle, and sat on them.
Laban felt all about in the tent, but did not find them. 35 And she said
to her father, "Let not my lord be angry that I cannot rise before you,
for the way of women is upon me." So he searched, but did not find
the household gods.

85

GENESIS 86

36 Then Jacob became angry, and upbraided Laban. Jacob said to
Laban, "What is my offense? What is my sin, that you have hotly
pursued me? 37 Although you have felt about through all my goods,
what have you found of all your household goods? Set it here before
my kinsfolk and your kinsfolk, so that they may decide between us
two. 38 These twenty years I have been with you; your ewes and your
female goats have not miscarried, and I have not eaten the rams of
your flocks. 39 That which was torn by wild beasts I did not bring to
you; I bore the loss of it myself; of my hand you required it, whether
stolen by day or stolen by night. 40 It was like this with me: by day the
heat consumed me, and the cold by night, and my sleep fled from my
eyes. 41 These twenty years I have been in your house; I served you
fourteen years for your two daughters, and six years for your flock, and
you have changed my wages ten times. 42 If the God of my father, the
God of Abraham and the Fear of Isaac, had not been on my side, surely
now you would have sent me away empty-handed. God saw my
affliction and the labor of my hands, and rebuked you last night."
43 Then Laban answered and said to Jacob, "The daughters are my
daughters, the children are my children, the flocks are my flocks, and
all that you see is mine. But what can I do today about these daughters
of mine, or about their children whom they have borne? 44 Come now,
let us make a covenant, you and I; and let it be a witness between you
and me." 45 So Jacob took a stone, and set it up as a pillar. 46 And
Jacob said to his kinsfolk, "Gather stones," and they took stones, and
made a heap; and they ate there by the heap. 47 Laban called it Jegarsahadutha: but Jacob called it Galeed. 48 Laban said, "This heap is a
witness between you and me today." Therefore he called it Galeed, 49
and the pillar Mizpah, for he said, "The LORD watch between you and
me, when we are absent one from the other. 50 If you ill-treat my
daughters, or if you take wives in addition to my daughters, though no
one else is with us, remember that God is witness between you and
me."
51 Then Laban said to Jacob, "See this heap and see the pillar, which I
have set between you and me. 52 This heap is a witness, and the pillar
is a witness, that I will not pass beyond this heap to you, and you will
not pass beyond this heap and this pillar to me, for harm. 53 May the

86

GENESIS 87

God of Abraham and the God of Nahor" — the God of their father —
"judge between us." So Jacob swore by the Fear of his father Isaac, 54
and Jacob offered a sacrifice on the height and called his kinsfolk to
eat bread; and they ate bread and tarried all night in the hill country.
55 Early in the morning Laban rose up, and kissed his grandchildren
and his daughters and blessed them; then he departed and returned
home.
[Genesis 32]
Journey toward Esau
1 Jacob went on his way and the angels of God met him; 2 and when
Jacob saw them he said, "This is God's camp!" So he called that place
Mahanaim.
3 Jacob sent messengers before him to his brother Esau in the land of
Seir, the country of Edom, 4 instructing them, "Thus you shall say to my
lord Esau: Thus says your servant Jacob, 'I have lived with Laban as an
alien, and stayed until now; 5 and I have oxen, donkeys, flocks, male
and female slaves; and I have sent to tell my lord, in order that I may
find favor in your sight.'"
6 The messengers returned to Jacob, saying, "We came to your brother
Esau, and he is coming to meet you, and four hundred men are with
him." 7 Then Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed; and he divided
the people that were with him, and the flocks and herds and camels,
into two companies, 8 thinking, "If Esau comes to the one company
and destroys it, then the company that is left will escape."
9 And Jacob said, "O God of my father Abraham and God of my father
Isaac, O LORD who said to me, 'Return to your country and to your
kindred, and I will do you good,' 10 I am not worthy of the least of all
the steadfast love and all the faithfulness that you have shown to your
servant, for with only my staff I crossed this Jordan; and now I have
become two companies. 11 Deliver me, please, from the hand of my
brother, from the hand of Esau, for I am afraid of him; he may come
and kill us all, the mothers with the children. 12 Yet you have said, 'I

87

GENESIS 88

will surely do you good, and make your offspring as the sand of the
sea, which cannot be counted because of their number.'"
13 So he spent that night there, and from what he had with him he
took a present for his brother Esau, 14 two hundred female goats and
twenty male goats, two hundred ewes and twenty rams, 15 thirty milch
camels and their colts, forty cows and ten bulls, twenty female donkeys
and ten male donkeys. 16 These he delivered into the hand of his
servants, every drove by itself, and said to his servants, "Pass on ahead
of me, and put a space between drove and drove." 17 He instructed the
foremost, "When Esau my brother meets you, and asks you, 'To whom
do you belong? Where are you going? And whose are these ahead of
you?' 18 then you shall say, 'They belong to your servant Jacob; they
are a present sent to my lord Esau; and moreover he is behind us.'" 19
He likewise instructed the second and the third and all who followed
the droves, "You shall say the same thing to Esau when you meet him,
20 and you shall say, 'Moreover your servant Jacob is behind us.'" For
he thought, "I may appease him with the present that goes ahead of
me, and afterwards I shall see his face; perhaps he will accept me." 21
So the present passed on ahead of him; and he himself spent that night
in the camp.
22 The same night he got up and took his two wives, his two maids,
and his eleven children, and crossed the ford of the Jabbok. 23 He took
them and sent them across the stream, and likewise everything that he
had. 24 Jacob was left alone; and a man wrestled with him until
daybreak. 25 When the man saw that he did not prevail against Jacob,
he struck him on the hip socket; and Jacob's hip was put out of joint as
he wrestled with him. 26 Then he said, "Let me go, for the day is
breaking." But Jacob said, "I will not let you go, unless you bless me."
27 So he said to him, "What is your name?" And he said, "Jacob." 28
Then the man said, "You shall no longer be called Jacob, but Israel, for
you have striven with God and with humans, and have prevailed." 29
Then Jacob asked him, "Please tell me your name." But he said, "Why
is it that you ask my name?" And there he blessed him. 30 So Jacob
called the place Peniel, saying, "For I have seen God face to face, and
yet my life is preserved." 31 The sun rose upon him as he passed Penuel,
limping because of his hip. 32 Therefore to this day the Israelites do not

88

GENESIS 89

eat the thigh muscle that is on the hip socket, because he struck Jacob
on the hip socket at the thigh muscle.
[Genesis 33]
Partial reunion with Esau
1 Now Jacob looked up and saw Esau coming, and four hundred men
with him. So he divided the children among Leah and Rachel and the
two maids. 2 He put the maids with their children in front, then Leah
with her children, and Rachel and Joseph last of all. 3 He himself went
on ahead of them, bowing himself to the ground seven times, until he
came near his brother.
4 But Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck
and kissed him, and they wept. 5 When Esau looked up and saw the
women and children, he said, "Who are these with you?" Jacob said,
"The children whom God has graciously given your servant." 6 Then
the maids drew near, they and their children, and bowed down; 7 Leah
likewise and her children drew near and bowed down; and finally
Joseph and Rachel drew near, and they bowed down. 8 Esau said,
"What do you mean by all this company that I met?" Jacob answered,
"To find favor with my lord." 9 But Esau said, "I have enough, my
brother; keep what you have for yourself." 10 Jacob said, "No, please;
if I find favor with you, then accept my present from my hand; for truly
to see your face is like seeing the face of God — since you have
received me with such favor. 11 Please accept my gift that is brought to
you, because God has dealt graciously with me, and because I have
everything I want." So he urged him, and he took it.
12 Then Esau said, "Let us journey on our way, and I will go alongside
you." 13 But Jacob said to him, "My lord knows that the children are
frail and that the flocks and herds, which are nursing, are a care to me;
and if they are overdriven for one day, all the flocks will die. 14 Let my
lord pass on ahead of his servant, and I will lead on slowly, according
to the pace of the cattle that are before me and according to the pace
of the children, until I come to my lord in Seir."

89

GENESIS 90

15 So Esau said, "Let me leave with you some of the people who are
with me." But he said, "Why should my lord be so kind to me?" 16 So
Esau returned that day on his way to Seir. 17 But Jacob journeyed to
Succoth, and built himself a house, and made booths for his cattle;
therefore the place is called Succoth.
The stay in Shechem and the rape of Dinah
18 Jacob came safely to the city of Shechem, which is in the land of
Canaan, on his way from Paddan-aram; and he camped before the city.
19 And from the sons of Hamor, Shechem's father, he bought for one
hundred pieces of money the plot of land on which he had pitched his
tent. 20 There he erected an altar and called it El-Elohe-Israel.
[Genesis 34]
1 Now Dinah the daughter of Leah, whom she had borne to Jacob,
went out to visit the women of the region. 2 When Shechem son of
Hamor the Hivite, prince of the region, saw her, he seized her and lay
with her by force. 3 And his soul was drawn to Dinah daughter of
Jacob; he loved the girl, and spoke tenderly to her. 4 So Shechem spoke
to his father Hamor, saying, "Get me this girl to be my wife."
5 Now Jacob heard that Shechem had defiled his daughter Dinah; but
his sons were with his cattle in the field, so Jacob held his peace until
they came. 6 And Hamor the father of Shechem went out to Jacob to
speak with him, 7 just as the sons of Jacob came in from the field.
When they heard of it, the men were indignant and very angry,
because he had committed an outrage in Israel by lying with Jacob's
daughter, for such a thing ought not to be done.
8 But Hamor spoke with them, saying, "The heart of my son Shechem
longs for your daughter; please give her to him in marriage. 9 Make
marriages with us; give your daughters to us, and take our daughters
for yourselves. 10 You shall live with us; and the land shall be open to
you; live and trade in it, and get property in it." 11 Shechem also said to
her father and to her brothers, "Let me find favor with you, and
whatever you say to me I will give. 12 Put the marriage present and gift

90

GENESIS 91

as high as you like, and I will give whatever you ask me; only give me
the girl to be my wife."
13 The sons of Jacob answered Shechem and his father Hamor
deceitfully, because he had defiled their sister Dinah. 14 They said to
them, "We cannot do this thing, to give our sister to one who is
uncircumcised, for that would be a disgrace to us. 15 Only on this
condition will we consent to you: that you will become as we are and
every male among you be circumcised. 16 Then we will give our
daughters to you, and we will take your daughters for ourselves, and
we will live among you and become one people. 17 But if you will not
listen to us and be circumcised, then we will take our daughter and be
gone."
18 Their words pleased Hamor and Hamor's son Shechem. 19 And the
young man did not delay to do the thing, because he was delighted
with Jacob's daughter. Now he was the most honored of all his family.
20 So Hamor and his son Shechem came to the gate of their city and
spoke to the men of their city, saying, 21 "These people are friendly
with us; let them live in the land and trade in it, for the land is large
enough for them; let us take their daughters in marriage, and let us
give them our daughters. 22 Only on this condition will they agree to
live among us, to become one people: that every male among us be
circumcised as they are circumcised. 23 Will not their livestock, their
property, and all their animals be ours? Only let us agree with them,
and they will live among us." 24 And all who went out of the city gate
heeded Hamor and his son Shechem; and every male was circumcised,
all who went out of the gate of his city.
25 On the third day, when they were still in pain, two of the sons of
Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brothers, took their swords and came
against the city unawares, and killed all the males. 26 They killed
Hamor and his son Shechem with the sword, and took Dinah out of
Shechem's house, and went away. 27 And the other sons of Jacob came
upon the slain, and plundered the city, because their sister had been
defiled. 28 They took their flocks and their herds, their donkeys, and
whatever was in the city and in the field. 29 All their wealth, all their
little ones and their wives, all that was in the houses, they captured

91

GENESIS 92

and made their prey. 30 Then Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, "You
have brought trouble on me by making me odious to the inhabitants
of the land, the Canaanites and the Perizzites; my numbers are few,
and if they gather themselves against me and attack me, I shall be
destroyed, both I and my household." 31 But they said, "Should our
sister be treated like a whore?"
[Genesis 35]
Jacob's return to Bethel
1 God said to Jacob, "Arise, go up to Bethel, and settle there. Make an
altar there to the God who appeared to you when you fled from your
brother Esau." 2 So Jacob said to his household and to all who were
with him, "Put away the foreign gods that are among you, and purify
yourselves, and change your clothes; 3 then come, let us go up to
Bethel, that I may make an altar there to the God who answered me in
the day of my distress and has been with me wherever I have gone." 4
So they gave to Jacob all the foreign gods that they had, and the rings
that were in their ears; and Jacob hid them under the oak that was
near Shechem.
5 As they journeyed, a terror from God fell upon the cities all around
them, so that no one pursued them. 6 Jacob came to Luz (that is,
Bethel), which is in the land of Canaan, he and all the people who
were with him, 7 and there he built an altar and called the place Elbethel, because it was there that God had revealed himself to him
when he fled from his brother. 8 And Deborah, Rebekah's nurse, died,
and she was buried under an oak below Bethel. So it was called Allonbacuth.
9 God appeared to Jacob again when he came from Paddan-aram, and
he blessed him. 10 God said to him, "Your name is Jacob; no longer
shall you be called Jacob, but Israel shall be your name." So he was
called Israel. 11 God said to him, "I am God Almighty: be fruitful and
multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall come from you, and
kings shall spring from you. 12 The land that I gave to Abraham and
Isaac I will give to you, and I will give the land to your offspring after
you." 13 Then God went up from him at the place where he had

92

GENESIS 93

spoken with him. 14 Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he had
spoken with him, a pillar of stone; and he poured out a drink offering
on it, and poured oil on it. 15 So Jacob called the place where God had
spoken with him Bethel.
The birth of Benjamin and death of Rachel
16 Then they journeyed from Bethel; and when they were still some
distance from Ephrath, Rachel was in childbirth, and she had hard
labor. 17 When she was in her hard labor, the midwife said to her, "Do
not be afraid; for now you will have another son." 18 As her soul was
departing (for she died), she named him Ben-oni; but his father called
him Benjamin. 19 So Rachel died, and she was buried on the way to
Ephrath (that is, Bethlehem), 20 and Jacob set up a pillar at her grave;
it is the pillar of Rachel's tomb, which is there to this day. 21 Israel
journeyed on, and pitched his tent beyond the tower of Eder.
Concluding materials on Jacob's sons and Isaac's death and burial
22 While Israel lived in that land, Reuben went and lay with Bilhah his
father's concubine; and Israel heard of it.
Now the sons of Jacob were twelve. 23 The sons of Leah: Reuben
(Jacob's firstborn), Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun. 24 The
sons of Rachel: Joseph and Benjamin. 25 The sons of Bilhah, Rachel's
maid: Dan and Naphtali. 26 The sons of Zilpah, Leah's maid: Gad and
Asher. These were the sons of Jacob who were born to him in Paddanaram.
27 Jacob came to his father Isaac at Mamre, or Kiriath-arba (that is,
Hebron), where Abraham and Isaac had resided as aliens. 28 Now the
days of Isaac were one hundred eighty years. 29 And Isaac breathed his
last; he died and was gathered to his people, old and full of days; and
his sons Esau and Jacob buried him.

93

GENESIS 94

[Genesis 36]
Overview of the descendants of Esau and prior inhabitants of
Edom/Sier
1 These are the descendants of Esau (that is, Edom). 2 Esau took his
wives from the Canaanites: Adah daughter of Elon the Hittite,
Oholibamah daughter of Anah son of Zibeon the Hivite, 3 and
Basemath, Ishmael's daughter, sister of Nebaioth. 4 Adah bore Eliphaz
to Esau; Basemath bore Reuel; 5 and Oholibamah bore Jeush, Jalam,
and Korah. These are the sons of Esau who were born to him in the
land of Canaan.
6 Then Esau took his wives, his sons, his daughters, and all the
members of his household, his cattle, all his livestock, and all the
property he had acquired in the land of Canaan; and he moved to a
land some distance from his brother Jacob. 7 For their possessions were
too great for them to live together; the land where they were staying
could not support them because of their livestock. 8 So Esau settled in
the hill country of Seir; Esau is Edom.
9 These are the descendants of Esau, ancestor of the Edomites, in the
hill country of Seir. 10 These are the names of Esau's sons: Eliphaz son
of Adah the wife of Esau; Reuel, the son of Esau's wife Basemath. 11
The sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, Gatam, and Kenaz. 12
(Timna was a concubine of Eliphaz, Esau's son; she bore Amalek to
Eliphaz.) These were the sons of Adah, Esau's wife. 13 These were the
sons of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah. These were the
sons of Esau's wife, Basemath. 14 These were the sons of Esau's wife
Oholibamah, daughter of Anah son of Zibeon: she bore to Esau Jeush,
Jalam, and Korah.
15 These are the clans of the sons of Esau. The sons of Eliphaz the
firstborn of Esau: the clans Teman, Omar, Zepho, Kenaz, 16 Korah,
Gatam, and Amalek; these are the clans of Eliphaz in the land of Edom;
they are the sons of Adah. 17 These are the sons of Esau's son Reuel:
the clans Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah; these are the clans of
Reuel in the land of Edom; they are the sons of Esau's wife Basemath.
18 These are the sons of Esau's wife Oholibamah: the clans Jeush,

94

GENESIS 95

Jalam, and Korah; these are the clans born of Esau's wife Oholibamah,
the daughter of Anah. 19 These are the sons of Esau (that is, Edom),
and these are their clans.
20 These are the sons of Seir the Horite, the inhabitants of the land:
Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah, 21 Dishon, Ezer, and Dishan; these are the
clans of the Horites, the sons of Seir in the land of Edom. 22 The sons of
Lotan were Hori and Heman; and Lotan's sister was Timna. 23 These are
the sons of Shobal: Alvan, Manahath, Ebal, Shepho, and Onam. 24
These are the sons of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah; he is the Anah who
found the springs in the wilderness, as he pastured the donkeys of his
father Zibeon. 25 These are the children of Anah: Dishon and
Oholibamah daughter of Anah. 26 These are the sons of Dishon:
Hemdan, Eshban, Ithran, and Cheran. 27 These are the sons of Ezer:
Bilhan, Zaavan, and Akan. 28 These are the sons of Dishan: Uz and
Aran. 29 These are the clans of the Horites: the clans Lotan, Shobal,
Zibeon, Anah, 30 Dishon, Ezer, and Dishan; these are the clans of the
Horites, clan by clan in the land of Seir.
31 These are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom, before any
king reigned over the Israelites. 32 Bela son of Beor reigned in Edom,
the name of his city being Dinhabah. 33 Bela died, and Jobab son of
Zerah of Bozrah succeeded him as king. 34 Jobab died, and Husham of
the land of the Temanites succeeded him as king. 35 Husham died, and
Hadad son of Bedad, who defeated Midian in the country of Moab,
succeeded him as king, the name of his city being Avith. 36 Hadad died,
and Samlah of Masrekah succeeded him as king. 37 Samlah died, and
Shaul of Rehoboth on the Euphrates succeeded him as king. 38 Shaul
died, and Baal-hanan son of Achbor succeeded him as king. 39 Baalhanan son of Achbor died, and Hadar succeeded him as king, the name
of his city being Pau; his wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of
Matred, daughter of Me-zahab.
40 These are the names of the clans of Esau, according to their families
and their localities by their names: the clans Timna, Alvah, Jetheth, 41
Oholibamah, Elah, Pinon, 42 Kenaz, Teman, Mibzar, 43 Magdiel, and
Iram; these are the clans of Edom (that is, Esau, the father of Edom),
according to their settlements in the land that they held.

95

GENESIS 96

[Genesis 37]
Joseph's dreams of power
1 Jacob settled in the land where his father had lived as an alien, the
land of Canaan. 2 This is the story of the family of Jacob.
Joseph, being seventeen years old, was shepherding the flock with his
brothers; he was a helper to the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah, his father's
wives; and Joseph brought a bad report of them to their father. 3 Now
Israel loved Joseph more than any other of his children, because he was
the son of his old age; and he had made him a long robe with sleeves.
4 But when his brothers saw that their father loved him more than all
his brothers, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably to him.
5 Once Joseph had a dream, and when he told it to his brothers, they
hated him even more. 6 He said to them, "Listen to this dream that I
dreamed. 7 There we were, binding sheaves in the field. Suddenly my
sheaf rose and stood upright; then your sheaves gathered around it,
and bowed down to my sheaf." 8 His brothers said to him, "Are you
indeed to reign over us? Are you indeed to have dominion over us?" So
they hated him even more because of his dreams and his words.
9 He had another dream, and told it to his brothers, saying, "Look, I
have had another dream: the sun, the moon, and eleven stars were
bowing down to me." 10 But when he told it to his father and to his
brothers, his father rebuked him, and said to him, "What kind of
dream is this that you have had? Shall we indeed come, I and your
mother and your brothers, and bow to the ground before you?" 11 So
his brothers were jealous of him, but his father kept the matter in
mind.
Joseph is sold into slavery
12 Now his brothers went to pasture their father's flock near Shechem.
13 And Israel said to Joseph, "Are not your brothers pasturing the flock
at Shechem? Come, I will send you to them." He answered, "Here I
am." 14 So he said to him, "Go now, see if it is well with your brothers

96

GENESIS 97

and with the flock; and bring word back to me." So he sent him from
the valley of Hebron.
He came to Shechem, 15 and a man found him wandering in the fields;
the man asked him, "What are you seeking?" 16 "I am seeking my
brothers," he said; "tell me, please, where they are pasturing the
flock." 17 The man said, "They have gone away, for I heard them say,
'Let us go to Dothan.'" So Joseph went after his brothers, and found
them at Dothan. 18 They saw him from a distance, and before he came
near to them, they conspired to kill him. 19 They said to one another,
"Here comes this dreamer. 20 Come now, let us kill him and throw him
into one of the pits; then we shall say that a wild animal has devoured
him, and we shall see what will become of his dreams." 21 But when
Reuben heard it, he delivered him out of their hands, saying, "Let us
not take his life." 22 Reuben said to them, "Shed no blood; throw him
into this pit here in the wilderness, but lay no hand on him" — that he
might rescue him out of their hand and restore him to his father. 23 So
when Joseph came to his brothers, they stripped him of his robe, the
long robe with sleeves that he wore; 24 and they took him and threw
him into a pit. The pit was empty; there was no water in it.
25 Then they sat down to eat; and looking up they saw a caravan of
Ishmaelites coming from Gilead, with their camels carrying gum, balm,
and resin, on their way to carry it down to Egypt. 26 Then Judah said to
his brothers, "What profit is it if we kill our brother and conceal his
blood? 27 Come, let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and not lay our
hands on him, for he is our brother, our own flesh." And his brothers
agreed. 28 When some Midianite traders passed by, they drew Joseph
up, lifting him out of the pit, and sold him to the Ishmaelites for
twenty pieces of silver. And they took Joseph to Egypt.
29 When Reuben returned to the pit and saw that Joseph was not in
the pit, he tore his clothes. 30 He returned to his brothers, and said,
"The boy is gone; and I, where can I turn?" 31 Then they took Joseph's
robe, slaughtered a goat, and dipped the robe in the blood. 32 They
had the long robe with sleeves taken to their father, and they said,
"This we have found; see now whether it is your son's robe or not." 33
He recognized it, and said, "It is my son's robe! A wild animal has

97

GENESIS 98

devoured him; Joseph is without doubt torn to pieces." 34 Then Jacob
tore his garments, and put sackcloth on his loins, and mourned for his
son many days. 35 All his sons and all his daughters sought to comfort
him; but he refused to be comforted, and said, "No, I shall go down to
Sheol to my son, mourning." Thus his father bewailed him. 36
Meanwhile the Midianites had sold him in Egypt to Potiphar, one of
Pharaoh's officials, the captain of the guard.
[Genesis 38]
Judah and Tamar
1 It happened at that time that Judah went down from his brothers
and settled near a certain Adullamite whose name was Hirah. 2 There
Judah saw the daughter of a certain Canaanite whose name was Shua;
he married her and went in to her. 3 She conceived and bore a son; and
he named him Er. 4 Again she conceived and bore a son whom she
named Onan. 5 Yet again she bore a son, and she named him Shelah.
She was in Chezib when she bore him. 6 Judah took a wife for Er his
firstborn; her name was Tamar. 7 But Er, Judah's firstborn, was wicked
in the sight of the LORD, and the LORD put him to death. 8 Then Judah
said to Onan, "Go in to your brother's wife and perform the duty of a
brother-in-law to her; raise up offspring for your brother." 9 But since
Onan knew that the offspring would not be his, he spilled his semen
on the ground whenever he went in to his brother's wife, so that he
would not give offspring to his brother. 10 What he did was displeasing
in the sight of the LORD, and he put him to death also. 11 Then Judah
said to his daughter-in-law Tamar, "Remain a widow in your father's
house until my son Shelah grows up" — for he feared that he too
would die, like his brothers. So Tamar went to live in her father's
house.
12 In course of time the wife of Judah, Shua's daughter, died; when
Judah's time of mourning was over, he went up to Timnah to his
sheepshearers, he and his friend Hirah the Adullamite. 13 When Tamar
was told, "Your father-in-law is going up to Timnah to shear his
sheep," 14 she put off her widow's garments, put on a veil, wrapped
herself up, and sat down at the entrance to Enaim, which is on the
road to Timnah. She saw that Shelah was grown up, yet she had not

98

GENESIS 99

been given to him in marriage. 15 When Judah saw her, he thought her
to be a prostitute, for she had covered her face. 16 He went over to her
at the roadside, and said, "Come, let me come in to you," for he did
not know that she was his daughter-in-law. She said, "What will you
give me, that you may come in to me?" 17 He answered, "I will send
you a kid from the flock." And she said, "Only if you give me a pledge,
until you send it." 18 He said, "What pledge shall I give you?" She
replied, "Your signet and your cord, and the staff that is in your hand."
So he gave them to her, and went in to her, and she conceived by him.
19 Then she got up and went away, and taking off her veil she put on
the garments of her widowhood.
20 When Judah sent the kid by his friend the Adullamite, to recover
the pledge from the woman, he could not find her. 21 He asked the
townspeople, "Where is the temple prostitute who was at Enaim by
the wayside?" But they said, "No prostitute has been here." 22 So he
returned to Judah, and said, "I have not found her; moreover the
townspeople said, 'No prostitute has been here.'" 23 Judah replied,
"Let her keep the things as her own, otherwise we will be laughed at;
you see, I sent this kid, and you could not find her."
24 About three months later Judah was told, "Your daughter-in-law
Tamar has played the whore; moreover she is pregnant as a result of
whoredom." And Judah said, "Bring her out, and let her be burned."
25 As she was being brought out, she sent word to her father-in-law,
"It was the owner of these who made me pregnant." And she said,
"Take note, please, whose these are, the signet and the cord and the
staff." 26 Then Judah acknowledged them and said, "She is more in the
right than I, since I did not give her to my son Shelah." And he did not
lie with her again.
27 When the time of her delivery came, there were twins in her womb.
28 While she was in labor, one put out a hand; and the midwife took
and bound on his hand a crimson thread, saying, "This one came out
first." 29 But just then he drew back his hand, and out came his
brother; and she said, "What a breach you have made for yourself!"
Therefore he was named Perez. 30 Afterward his brother came out
with the crimson thread on his hand; and he was named Zerah.

99

GENESIS 100

[Genesis 39]
Joseph's success, temptation, and imprisonment
1 Now Joseph was taken down to Egypt, and Potiphar, an officer of
Pharaoh, the captain of the guard, an Egyptian, bought him from the
Ishmaelites who had brought him down there. 2 The LORD was with
Joseph, and he became a successful man; he was in the house of his
Egyptian master. 3 His master saw that the LORD was with him, and that
the LORD caused all that he did to prosper in his hands. 4 So Joseph
found favor in his sight and attended him; he made him overseer of his
house and put him in charge of all that he had. 5 From the time that
he made him overseer in his house and over all that he had, the LORD
blessed the Egyptian's house for Joseph's sake; the blessing of the LORD
was on all that he had, in house and field. 6 So he left all that he had
in Joseph's charge; and, with him there, he had no concern for
anything but the food that he ate.
Now Joseph was handsome and good-looking. 7 And after a time his
master's wife cast her eyes on Joseph and said, "Lie with me." 8 But he
refused and said to his master's wife, "Look, with me here, my master
has no concern about anything in the house, and he has put everything
that he has in my hand. 9 He is not greater in this house than I am, nor
has he kept back anything from me except yourself, because you are
his wife. How then could I do this great wickedness, and sin against
God?" 10 And although she spoke to Joseph day after day, he would
not consent to lie beside her or to be with her. 11 One day, however,
when he went into the house to do his work, and while no one else
was in the house, 12 she caught hold of his garment, saying, "Lie with
me!" But he left his garment in her hand, and fled and ran outside. 13
When she saw that he had left his garment in her hand and had fled
outside, 14 she called out to the members of her household and said to
them, "See, my husband has brought among us a Hebrew to insult us!
He came in to me to lie with me, and I cried out with a loud voice; 15
and when he heard me raise my voice and cry out, he left his garment
beside me, and fled outside." 16 Then she kept his garment by her until
his master came home, 17 and she told him the same story, saying, "The
Hebrew servant, whom you have brought among us, came in to me to

100

GENESIS 101

insult me; 18 but as soon as I raised my voice and cried out, he left his
garment beside me, and fled outside."
19 When his master heard the words that his wife spoke to him, saying,
"This is the way your servant treated me," he became enraged. 20 And
Joseph's master took him and put him into the prison, the place where
the king's prisoners were confined; he remained there in prison. 21 But
the LORD was with Joseph and showed him steadfast love; he gave him
favor in the sight of the chief jailer. 22 The chief jailer committed to
Joseph's care all the prisoners who were in the prison, and whatever
was done there, he was the one who did it. 23 The chief jailer paid no
heed to anything that was in Joseph's care, because the LORD was with
him; and whatever he did, the LORD made it prosper.
[Genesis 40]
Joseph establishes his expertise as dream interpreter
1 Some time after this, the cupbearer of the king of Egypt and his
baker offended their lord the king of Egypt. 2 Pharaoh was angry with
his two officers, the chief cupbearer and the chief baker, 3 and he put
them in custody in the house of the captain of the guard, in the prison
where Joseph was confined. 4 The captain of the guard charged Joseph
with them, and he waited on them; and they continued for some time
in custody. 5 One night they both dreamed — the cupbearer and the
baker of the king of Egypt, who were confined in the prison — each his
own dream, and each dream with its own meaning. 6 When Joseph
came to them in the morning, he saw that they were troubled. 7 So he
asked Pharaoh's officers, who were with him in custody in his master's
house, "Why are your faces downcast today?" 8 They said to him, "We
have had dreams, and there is no one to interpret them." And Joseph
said to them, "Do not interpretations belong to God? Please tell them
to me."
9 So the chief cupbearer told his dream to Joseph, and said to him, "In
my dream there was a vine before me, 10 and on the vine there were
three branches. As soon as it budded, its blossoms came out and the
clusters ripened into grapes. 11 Pharaoh's cup was in my hand; and I
took the grapes and pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and placed the

101

GENESIS 102

cup in Pharaoh's hand." 12 Then Joseph said to him, "This is its
interpretation: the three branches are three days; 13 within three days
Pharaoh will lift up your head and restore you to your office; and you
shall place Pharaoh's cup in his hand, just as you used to do when you
were his cupbearer. 14 But remember me when it is well with you;
please do me the kindness to make mention of me to Pharaoh, and so
get me out of this place. 15 For in fact I was stolen out of the land of
the Hebrews; and here also I have done nothing that they should have
put me into the dungeon."
16 When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was favorable, he
said to Joseph, "I also had a dream: there were three cake baskets on
my head, 17 and in the uppermost basket there were all sorts of baked
food for Pharaoh, but the birds were eating it out of the basket on my
head." 18 And Joseph answered, "This is its interpretation: the three
baskets are three days; 19 within three days Pharaoh will lift up your
head — from you! — and hang you on a pole; and the birds will eat
the flesh from you."
20 On the third day, which was Pharaoh's birthday, he made a feast for
all his servants, and lifted up the head of the chief cupbearer and the
head of the chief baker among his servants. 21 He restored the chief
cupbearer to his cupbearing, and he placed the cup in Pharaoh's hand;
22 but the chief baker he hanged, just as Joseph had interpreted to
them. 23 Yet the chief cupbearer did not remember Joseph, but forgot
him.
[Genesis 41]
Joseph's elevation
1 After two whole years, Pharaoh dreamed that he was standing by the
Nile, 2 and there came up out of the Nile seven sleek and fat cows, and
they grazed in the reed grass. 3 Then seven other cows, ugly and thin,
came up out of the Nile after them, and stood by the other cows on
the bank of the Nile. 4 The ugly and thin cows ate up the seven sleek
and fat cows. And Pharaoh awoke. 5 Then he fell asleep and dreamed
a second time; seven ears of grain, plump and good, were growing on
one stalk. 6 Then seven ears, thin and blighted by the east wind,

102

GENESIS 103

sprouted after them. 7 The thin ears swallowed up the seven plump
and full ears. Pharaoh awoke, and it was a dream. 8 In the morning his
spirit was troubled; so he sent and called for all the magicians of Egypt
and all its wise men. Pharaoh told them his dreams, but there was no
one who could interpret them to Pharaoh.
9 Then the chief cupbearer said to Pharaoh, "I remember my faults
today. 10 Once Pharaoh was angry with his servants, and put me and
the chief baker in custody in the house of the captain of the guard. 11
We dreamed on the same night, he and I, each having a dream with its
own meaning. 12 A young Hebrew was there with us, a servant of the
captain of the guard. When we told him, he interpreted our dreams to
us, giving an interpretation to each according to his dream. 13 As he
interpreted to us, so it turned out; I was restored to my office, and the
baker was hanged."
14 Then Pharaoh sent for Joseph, and he was hurriedly brought out of
the dungeon. When he had shaved himself and changed his clothes, he
came in before Pharaoh. 15 And Pharaoh said to Joseph, "I have had a
dream, and there is no one who can interpret it. I have heard it said of
you that when you hear a dream you can interpret it." 16 Joseph
answered Pharaoh, "It is not I; God will give Pharaoh a favorable
answer." 17 Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, "In my dream I was standing
on the banks of the Nile; 18 and seven cows, fat and sleek, came up out
of the Nile and fed in the reed grass. 19 Then seven other cows came
up after them, poor, very ugly, and thin. Never had I seen such ugly
ones in all the land of Egypt. 20 The thin and ugly cows ate up the first
seven fat cows, 21 but when they had eaten them no one would have
known that they had done so, for they were still as ugly as before.
Then I awoke. 22 I fell asleep a second time and I saw in my dream
seven ears of grain, full and good, growing on one stalk, 23 and seven
ears, withered, thin, and blighted by the east wind, sprouting after
them; 24 and the thin ears swallowed up the seven good ears. But
when I told it to the magicians, there was no one who could explain it
to me."
25 Then Joseph said to Pharaoh, "Pharaoh's dreams are one and the
same; God has revealed to Pharaoh what he is about to do. 26 The

103

GENESIS 104

seven good cows are seven years, and the seven good ears are seven
years; the dreams are one. 27 The seven lean and ugly cows that came
up after them are seven years, as are the seven empty ears blighted by
the east wind. They are seven years of famine. 28 It is as I told Pharaoh;
God has shown to Pharaoh what he is about to do. 29 There will come
seven years of great plenty throughout all the land of Egypt. 30 After
them there will arise seven years of famine, and all the plenty will be
forgotten in the land of Egypt; the famine will consume the land. 31
The plenty will no longer be known in the land because of the famine
that will follow, for it will be very grievous. 32 And the doubling of
Pharaoh's dream means that the thing is fixed by God, and God will
shortly bring it about. 33 Now therefore let Pharaoh select a man who
is discerning and wise, and set him over the land of Egypt. 34 Let
Pharaoh proceed to appoint overseers over the land, and take one-fifth
of the produce of the land of Egypt during the seven plenteous years.
35 Let them gather all the food of these good years that are coming,
and lay up grain under the authority of Pharaoh for food in the cities,
and let them keep it. 36 That food shall be a reserve for the land
against the seven years of famine that are to befall the land of Egypt,
so that the land may not perish through the famine."
37 The proposal pleased Pharaoh and all his servants. 38 Pharaoh said
to his servants, "Can we find anyone else like this — one in whom is
the spirit of God?" 39 So Pharaoh said to Joseph, "Since God has shown
you all this, there is no one so discerning and wise as you. 40 You shall
be over my house, and all my people shall order themselves as you
command; only with regard to the throne will I be greater than you."
41 And Pharaoh said to Joseph, "See, I have set you over all the land of
Egypt." 42 Removing his signet ring from his hand, Pharaoh put it on
Joseph's hand; he arrayed him in garments of fine linen, and put a gold
chain around his neck. 43 He had him ride in the chariot of his secondin-command; and they cried out in front of him, "Bow the knee!" Thus
he set him over all the land of Egypt. 44 Moreover Pharaoh said to
Joseph, "I am Pharaoh, and without your consent no one shall lift up
hand or foot in all the land of Egypt." 45 Pharaoh gave Joseph the
name Zaphenath-paneah; and he gave him Asenath daughter of
Potiphera, priest of On, as his wife. Thus Joseph gained authority over
the land of Egypt.

104

GENESIS 105

46 Joseph was thirty years old when he entered the service of Pharaoh
king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh, and
went through all the land of Egypt. 47 During the seven plenteous
years the earth produced abundantly. 48 He gathered up all the food
of the seven years when there was plenty in the land of Egypt, and
stored up food in the cities; he stored up in every city the food from
the fields around it. 49 So Joseph stored up grain in such abundance —
like the sand of the sea — that he stopped measuring it; it was beyond
measure.
50 Before the years of famine came, Joseph had two sons, whom
Asenath daughter of Potiphera, priest of On, bore to him. 51 Joseph
named the firstborn Manasseh, "For," he said, "God has made me
forget all my hardship and all my father's house." 52 The second he
named Ephraim, "For God has made me fruitful in the land of my
misfortunes."
53 The seven years of plenty that prevailed in the land of Egypt came
to an end; 54 and the seven years of famine began to come, just as
Joseph had said. There was famine in every country, but throughout
the land of Egypt there was bread. 55 When all the land of Egypt was
famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread. Pharaoh said to all
the Egyptians, "Go to Joseph; what he says to you, do." 56 And since
the famine had spread over all the land, Joseph opened all the
storehouses, and sold to the Egyptians, for the famine was severe in
the land of Egypt. 57 Moreover, all the world came to Joseph in Egypt
to buy grain, because the famine became severe throughout the world.
[Genesis 42]
Joseph's brothers' first journey to Egypt
1 When Jacob learned that there was grain in Egypt, he said to his sons,
"Why do you keep looking at one another? 2 I have heard," he said,
"that there is grain in Egypt; go down and buy grain for us there, that
we may live and not die." 3 So ten of Joseph's brothers went down to
buy grain in Egypt. 4 But Jacob did not send Joseph's brother Benjamin
with his brothers, for he feared that harm might come to him. 5 Thus

105

GENESIS 106

the sons of Israel were among the other people who came to buy
grain, for the famine had reached the land of Canaan.
6 Now Joseph was governor over the land; it was he who sold to all the
people of the land. And Joseph's brothers came and bowed themselves
before him with their faces to the ground. 7 When Joseph saw his
brothers, he recognized them, but he treated them like strangers and
spoke harshly to them. "Where do you come from?" he said. They said,
"From the land of Canaan, to buy food." 8 Although Joseph had
recognized his brothers, they did not recognize him. 9 Joseph also
remembered the dreams that he had dreamed about them. He said to
them, "You are spies; you have come to see the nakedness of the
land!" 10 They said to him, "No, my lord; your servants have come to
buy food. 11 We are all sons of one man; we are honest men; your
servants have never been spies." 12 But he said to them, "No, you have
come to see the nakedness of the land!" 13 They said, "We, your
servants, are twelve brothers, the sons of a certain man in the land of
Canaan; the youngest, however, is now with our father, and one is no
more." 14 But Joseph said to them, "It is just as I have said to you; you
are spies! 15 Here is how you shall be tested: as Pharaoh lives, you shall
not leave this place unless your youngest brother comes here! 16 Let
one of you go and bring your brother, while the rest of you remain in
prison, in order that your words may be tested, whether there is truth
in you; or else, as Pharaoh lives, surely you are spies." 17 And he put
them all together in prison for three days.
18 On the third day Joseph said to them, "Do this and you will live, for I
fear God: 19 if you are honest men, let one of your brothers stay here
where you are imprisoned. The rest of you shall go and carry grain for
the famine of your households, 20 and bring your youngest brother to
me. Thus your words will be verified, and you shall not die." And they
agreed to do so. 21 They said to one another, "Alas, we are paying the
penalty for what we did to our brother; we saw his anguish when he
pleaded with us, but we would not listen. That is why this anguish has
come upon us." 22 Then Reuben answered them, "Did I not tell you not
to wrong the boy? But you would not listen. So now there comes a
reckoning for his blood." 23 They did not know that Joseph understood
them, since he spoke with them through an interpreter. 24 He turned

106

GENESIS 107

away from them and wept; then he returned and spoke to them. And
he picked out Simeon and had him bound before their eyes. 25 Joseph
then gave orders to fill their bags with grain, to return every man's
money to his sack, and to give them provisions for their journey. This
was done for them.
26 They loaded their donkeys with their grain, and departed. 27 When
one of them opened his sack to give his donkey fodder at the lodging
place, he saw his money at the top of the sack. 28 He said to his
brothers, "My money has been put back; here it is in my sack!" At this
they lost heart and turned trembling to one another, saying, "What is
this that God has done to us?"
29 When they came to their father Jacob in the land of Canaan, they
told him all that had happened to them, saying, 30 "The man, the lord
of the land, spoke harshly to us, and charged us with spying on the
land. 31 But we said to him, 'We are honest men, we are not spies. 32
We are twelve brothers, sons of our father; one is no more, and the
youngest is now with our father in the land of Canaan.' 33 Then the
man, the lord of the land, said to us, 'By this I shall know that you are
honest men: leave one of your brothers with me, take grain for the
famine of your households, and go your way. 34 Bring your youngest
brother to me, and I shall know that you are not spies but honest men.
Then I will release your brother to you, and you may trade in the
land.'"
35 As they were emptying their sacks, there in each one's sack was his
bag of money. When they and their father saw their bundles of money,
they were dismayed. 36 And their father Jacob said to them, "I am the
one you have bereaved of children: Joseph is no more, and Simeon is
no more, and now you would take Benjamin. All this has happened to
me!" 37 Then Reuben said to his father, "You may kill my two sons if I
do not bring him back to you. Put him in my hands, and I will bring him
back to you." 38 But he said, "My son shall not go down with you, for
his brother is dead, and he alone is left. If harm should come to him on
the journey that you are to make, you would bring down my gray hairs
with sorrow to Sheol."

107

GENESIS 108

[Genesis 43]
Joseph's brothers' second journey to Egypt
1 Now the famine was severe in the land. 2 And when they had eaten
up the grain that they had brought from Egypt, their father said to
them, "Go again, buy us a little more food." 3 But Judah said to him,
"The man solemnly warned us, saying, 'You shall not see my face unless
your brother is with you.' 4 If you will send our brother with us, we will
go down and buy you food; 5 but if you will not send him, we will not
go down, for the man said to us, 'You shall not see my face, unless your
brother is with you.'" 6 Israel said, "Why did you treat me so badly as
to tell the man that you had another brother?" 7 They replied, "The
man questioned us carefully about ourselves and our kindred, saying,
'Is your father still alive? Have you another brother?' What we told him
was in answer to these questions. Could we in any way know that he
would say, 'Bring your brother down'?" 8 Then Judah said to his father
Israel, "Send the boy with me, and let us be on our way, so that we
may live and not die — you and we and also our little ones. 9 I myself
will be surety for him; you can hold me accountable for him. If I do not
bring him back to you and set him before you, then let me bear the
blame forever. 10 If we had not delayed, we would now have returned
twice."
11 Then their father Israel said to them, "If it must be so, then do this:
take some of the choice fruits of the land in your bags, and carry them
down as a present to the man — a little balm and a little honey, gum,
resin, pistachio nuts, and almonds. 12 Take double the money with you.
Carry back with you the money that was returned in the top of your
sacks; perhaps it was an oversight. 13 Take your brother also, and be on
your way again to the man; 14 may God Almighty grant you mercy
before the man, so that he may send back your other brother and
Benjamin. As for me, if I am bereaved of my children, I am bereaved."
15 So the men took the present, and they took double the money with
them, as well as Benjamin. Then they went on their way down to
Egypt, and stood before Joseph.

108

GENESIS 109

16 When Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the steward of his
house, "Bring the men into the house, and slaughter an animal and
make ready, for the men are to dine with me at noon." 17 The man did
as Joseph said, and brought the men to Joseph's house. 18 Now the
men were afraid because they were brought to Joseph's house, and
they said, "It is because of the money, replaced in our sacks the first
time, that we have been brought in, so that he may have an
opportunity to fall upon us, to make slaves of us and take our
donkeys." 19 So they went up to the steward of Joseph's house and
spoke with him at the entrance to the house. 20 They said, "Oh, my
lord, we came down the first time to buy food; 21 and when we came
to the lodging place we opened our sacks, and there was each one's
money in the top of his sack, our money in full weight. So we have
brought it back with us. 22 Moreover we have brought down with us
additional money to buy food. We do not know who put our money in
our sacks." 23 He replied, "Rest assured, do not be afraid; your God and
the God of your father must have put treasure in your sacks for you; I
received your money." Then he brought Simeon out to them. 24 When
the steward had brought the men into Joseph's house, and given them
water, and they had washed their feet, and when he had given their
donkeys fodder, 25 they made the present ready for Joseph's coming at
noon, for they had heard that they would dine there.
26 When Joseph came home, they brought him the present that they
had carried into the house, and bowed to the ground before him. 27
He inquired about their welfare, and said, "Is your father well, the old
man of whom you spoke? Is he still alive?" 28 They said, "Your servant
our father is well; he is still alive." And they bowed their heads and did
obeisance. 29 Then he looked up and saw his brother Benjamin, his
mother's son, and said, "Is this your youngest brother, of whom you
spoke to me? God be gracious to you, my son!" 30 With that, Joseph
hurried out, because he was overcome with affection for his brother,
and he was about to weep. So he went into a private room and wept
there. 31 Then he washed his face and came out; and controlling
himself he said, "Serve the meal." 32 They served him by himself, and
them by themselves, and the Egyptians who ate with him by
themselves, because the Egyptians could not eat with the Hebrews, for
that is an abomination to the Egyptians. 33 When they were seated

109

GENESIS 110

before him, the firstborn according to his birthright and the youngest
according to his youth, the men looked at one another in amazement.
34 Portions were taken to them from Joseph's table, but Benjamin's
portion was five times as much as any of theirs. So they drank and were
merry with him.
[Genesis 44]
Joseph's final test of his brothers
1 Then he commanded the steward of his house, "Fill the men's sacks
with food, as much as they can carry, and put each man's money in the
top of his sack. 2 Put my cup, the silver cup, in the top of the sack of
the youngest, with his money for the grain." And he did as Joseph told
him. 3 As soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away with
their donkeys. 4 When they had gone only a short distance from the
city, Joseph said to his steward, "Go, follow after the men; and when
you overtake them, say to them, 'Why have you returned evil for
good? Why have you stolen my silver cup? 5 Is it not from this that my
lord drinks? Does he not indeed use it for divination? You have done
wrong in doing this.'"
6 When he overtook them, he repeated these words to them. 7 They
said to him, "Why does my lord speak such words as these? Far be it
from your servants that they should do such a thing! 8 Look, the
money that we found at the top of our sacks, we brought back to you
from the land of Canaan; why then would we steal silver or gold from
your lord's house? 9 Should it be found with any one of your servants,
let him die; moreover the rest of us will become my lord's slaves." 10
He said, "Even so; in accordance with your words, let it be: he with
whom it is found shall become my slave, but the rest of you shall go
free." 11 Then each one quickly lowered his sack to the ground, and
each opened his sack. 12 He searched, beginning with the eldest and
ending with the youngest; and the cup was found in Benjamin's sack.
13 At this they tore their clothes. Then each one loaded his donkey, and
they returned to the city.

110

GENESIS 111

14 Judah and his brothers came to Joseph's house while he was still
there; and they fell to the ground before him. 15 Joseph said to them,
"What deed is this that you have done? Do you not know that one
such as I can practice divination?" 16 And Judah said, "What can we say
to my lord? What can we speak? How can we clear ourselves? God has
found out the guilt of your servants; here we are then, my lord's slaves,
both we and also the one in whose possession the cup has been
found." 17 But he said, "Far be it from me that I should do so! Only the
one in whose possession the cup was found shall be my slave; but as for
you, go up in peace to your father."
18 Then Judah stepped up to him and said, "O my lord, let your servant
please speak a word in my lord's ears, and do not be angry with your
servant; for you are like Pharaoh himself. 19 My lord asked his servants,
saying, 'Have you a father or a brother?' 20 And we said to my lord,
'We have a father, an old man, and a young brother, the child of his
old age. His brother is dead; he alone is left of his mother's children,
and his father loves him.' 21 Then you said to your servants, 'Bring him
down to me, so that I may set my eyes on him.' 22 We said to my lord,
'The boy cannot leave his father, for if he should leave his father, his
father would die.' 23 Then you said to your servants, 'Unless your
youngest brother comes down with you, you shall see my face no
more.' 24 When we went back to your servant my father we told him
the words of my lord. 25 And when our father said, 'Go again, buy us a
little food,' 26 we said, 'We cannot go down. Only if our youngest
brother goes with us, will we go down; for we cannot see the man's
face unless our youngest brother is with us.' 27 Then your servant my
father said to us, 'You know that my wife bore me two sons; 28 one
left me, and I said, Surely he has been torn to pieces; and I have never
seen him since. 29 If you take this one also from me, and harm comes
to him, you will bring down my gray hairs in sorrow to Sheol.' 30 Now
therefore, when I come to your servant my father and the boy is not
with us, then, as his life is bound up in the boy's life, 31 when he sees
that the boy is not with us, he will die; and your servants will bring
down the gray hairs of your servant our father with sorrow to Sheol. 32
For your servant became surety for the boy to my father, saying, 'If I do
not bring him back to you, then I will bear the blame in the sight of my
father all my life.' 33 Now therefore, please let your servant remain as a

111

GENESIS 112

slave to my lord in place of the boy; and let the boy go back with his
brothers. 34 For how can I go back to my father if the boy is not with
me? I fear to see the suffering that would come upon my father."
[Genesis 45]
Joseph makes himself known to his brothers and father
1 Then Joseph could no longer control himself before all those who
stood by him, and he cried out, "Send everyone away from me." So no
one stayed with him when Joseph made himself known to his brothers.
2 And he wept so loudly that the Egyptians heard it, and the household
of Pharaoh heard it. 3 Joseph said to his brothers, "I am Joseph. Is my
father still alive?" But his brothers could not answer him, so dismayed
were they at his presence.
4 Then Joseph said to his brothers, "Come closer to me." And they
came closer. He said, "I am your brother, Joseph, whom you sold into
Egypt. 5 And now do not be distressed, or angry with yourselves,
because you sold me here; for God sent me before you to preserve life.
6 For the famine has been in the land these two years; and there are
five more years in which there will be neither plowing nor harvest. 7
God sent me before you to preserve for you a remnant on earth, and
to keep alive for you many survivors. 8 So it was not you who sent me
here, but God; he has made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his
house and ruler over all the land of Egypt. 9 Hurry and go up to my
father and say to him, 'Thus says your son Joseph, God has made me
lord of all Egypt; come down to me, do not delay. 10 You shall settle in
the land of Goshen, and you shall be near me, you and your children
and your children's children, as well as your flocks, your herds, and all
that you have. 11 I will provide for you there — since there are five
more years of famine to come — so that you and your household, and
all that you have, will not come to poverty.' 12 And now your eyes and
the eyes of my brother Benjamin see that it is my own mouth that
speaks to you. 13 You must tell my father how greatly I am honored in
Egypt, and all that you have seen. Hurry and bring my father down
here." 14 Then he fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck and wept,
while Benjamin wept upon his neck. 15 And he kissed all his brothers
and wept upon them; and after that his brothers talked with him.

112

GENESIS 113

16 When the report was heard in Pharaoh's house, "Joseph's brothers
have come," Pharaoh and his servants were pleased. 17 Pharaoh said to
Joseph, "Say to your brothers, 'Do this: load your animals and go back
to the land of Canaan. 18 Take your father and your households and
come to me, so that I may give you the best of the land of Egypt, and
you may enjoy the fat of the land.' 19 You are further charged to say,
'Do this: take wagons from the land of Egypt for your little ones and
for your wives, and bring your father, and come. 20 Give no thought to
your possessions, for the best of all the land of Egypt is yours.'"
21 The sons of Israel did so. Joseph gave them wagons according to the
instruction of Pharaoh, and he gave them provisions for the journey. 22
To each one of them he gave a set of garments; but to Benjamin he
gave three hundred pieces of silver and five sets of garments. 23 To his
father he sent the following: ten donkeys loaded with the good things
of Egypt, and ten female donkeys loaded with grain, bread, and
provision for his father on the journey. 24 Then he sent his brothers on
their way, and as they were leaving he said to them, "Do not quarrel
along the way."
25 So they went up out of Egypt and came to their father Jacob in the
land of Canaan. 26 And they told him, "Joseph is still alive! He is even
ruler over all the land of Egypt." He was stunned; he could not believe
them. 27 But when they told him all the words of Joseph that he had
said to them, and when he saw the wagons that Joseph had sent to
carry him, the spirit of their father Jacob revived. 28 Israel said,
"Enough! My son Joseph is still alive. I must go and see him before I
die."
[Genesis 46]
Jacob's migration to Egypt
1 When Israel set out on his journey with all that he had and came to
Beer-sheba, he offered sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac. 2 God
spoke to Israel in visions of the night, and said, "Jacob, Jacob." And he
said, "Here I am." 3 Then he said, "I am God, the God of your father;
do not be afraid to go down to Egypt, for I will make of you a great

113

GENESIS 114

nation there. 4 I myself will go down with you to Egypt, and I will also
bring you up again; and Joseph's own hand shall close your eyes."
5 Then Jacob set out from Beer-sheba; and the sons of Israel carried
their father Jacob, their little ones, and their wives, in the wagons that
Pharaoh had sent to carry him. 6 They also took their livestock and the
goods that they had acquired in the land of Canaan, and they came
into Egypt, Jacob and all his offspring with him, 7 his sons, and his sons'
sons with him, his daughters, and his sons' daughters; all his offspring
he brought with him into Egypt.
8 Now these are the names of the Israelites, Jacob and his offspring,
who came to Egypt. Reuben, Jacob's firstborn, 9 and the children of
Reuben: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi. 10 The children of Simeon:
Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jachin, Zohar, and Shaul, the son of a Canaanite
woman. 11 The children of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. 12 The
children of Judah: Er, Onan, Shelah, Perez, and Zerah (but Er and Onan
died in the land of Canaan); and the children of Perez were Hezron
and Hamul. 13 The children of Issachar: Tola, Puvah, Jashub, and
Shimron. 14 The children of Zebulun: Sered, Elon, and Jahleel 15 (these
are the sons of Leah, whom she bore to Jacob in Paddan-aram,
together with his daughter Dinah; in all his sons and his daughters
numbered thirty-three). 16 The children of Gad: Ziphion, Haggi, Shuni,
Ezbon, Eri, Arodi, and Areli. 17 The children of Asher: Imnah, Ishvah,
Ishvi, Beriah, and their sister Serah. The children of Beriah: Heber and
Malchiel 18 (these are the children of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to his
daughter Leah; and these she bore to Jacob — sixteen persons). 19 The
children of Jacob's wife Rachel: Joseph and Benjamin. 20 To Joseph in
the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and Ephraim, whom Asenath
daughter of Potiphera, priest of On, bore to him. 21 The children of
Benjamin: Bela, Becher, Ashbel, Gera, Naaman, Ehi, Rosh, Muppim,
Huppim, and Ard 22 (these are the children of Rachel, who were born
to Jacob — fourteen persons in all). 23 The children of Dan: Hashum. 24
The children of Naphtali: Jahzeel, Guni, Jezer, and Shillem 25 (these are
the children of Bilhah, whom Laban gave to his daughter Rachel, and
these she bore to Jacob — seven persons in all). 26 All the persons
belonging to Jacob who came into Egypt, who were his own offspring,
not including the wives of his sons, were sixty-six persons in all. 27 The

114

GENESIS 115

children of Joseph, who were born to him in Egypt, were two; all the
persons of the house of Jacob who came into Egypt were seventy.
Jacob's family settles in Egypt
28 Israel sent Judah ahead to Joseph to lead the way before him into
Goshen. When they came to the land of Goshen, 29 Joseph made ready
his chariot and went up to meet his father Israel in Goshen. He
presented himself to him, fell on his neck, and wept on his neck a good
while. 30 Israel said to Joseph, "I can die now, having seen for myself
that you are still alive." 31 Joseph said to his brothers and to his father's
household, "I will go up and tell Pharaoh, and will say to him, 'My
brothers and my father's household, who were in the land of Canaan,
have come to me. 32 The men are shepherds, for they have been
keepers of livestock; and they have brought their flocks, and their
herds, and all that they have.' 33 When Pharaoh calls you, and says,
'What is your occupation?' 34 you shall say, 'Your servants have been
keepers of livestock from our youth even until now, both we and our
ancestors' — in order that you may settle in the land of Goshen,
because all shepherds are abhorrent to the Egyptians."
[Genesis 47]
1 So Joseph went and told Pharaoh, "My father and my brothers, with
their flocks and herds and all that they possess, have come from the
land of Canaan; they are now in the land of Goshen." 2 From among
his brothers he took five men and presented them to Pharaoh. 3
Pharaoh said to his brothers, "What is your occupation?" And they said
to Pharaoh, "Your servants are shepherds, as our ancestors were." 4
They said to Pharaoh, "We have come to reside as aliens in the land;
for there is no pasture for your servants' flocks because the famine is
severe in the land of Canaan. Now, we ask you, let your servants settle
in the land of Goshen." 5 Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, "Your father
and your brothers have come to you. 6 The land of Egypt is before you;
settle your father and your brothers in the best part of the land; let
them live in the land of Goshen; and if you know that there are
capable men among them, put them in charge of my livestock."

115

GENESIS 116

7 Then Joseph brought in his father Jacob, and presented him before
Pharaoh, and Jacob blessed Pharaoh. 8 Pharaoh said to Jacob, "How
many are the years of your life?" 9 Jacob said to Pharaoh, "The years of
my earthly sojourn are one hundred thirty; few and hard have been
the years of my life. They do not compare with the years of the life of
my ancestors during their long sojourn." 10 Then Jacob blessed
Pharaoh, and went out from the presence of Pharaoh. 11 Joseph settled
his father and his brothers, and granted them a holding in the land of
Egypt, in the best part of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh
had instructed. 12 And Joseph provided his father, his brothers, and all
his father's household with food, according to the number of their
dependents.
13 Now there was no food in all the land, for the famine was very
severe. The land of Egypt and the land of Canaan languished because
of the famine. 14 Joseph collected all the money to be found in the
land of Egypt and in the land of Canaan, in exchange for the grain that
they bought; and Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh's house. 15
When the money from the land of Egypt and from the land of Canaan
was spent, all the Egyptians came to Joseph, and said, "Give us food!
Why should we die before your eyes? For our money is gone." 16 And
Joseph answered, "Give me your livestock, and I will give you food in
exchange for your livestock, if your money is gone." 17 So they brought
their livestock to Joseph; and Joseph gave them food in exchange for
the horses, the flocks, the herds, and the donkeys. That year he
supplied them with food in exchange for all their livestock. 18 When
that year was ended, they came to him the following year, and said to
him, "We can not hide from my lord that our money is all spent; and
the herds of cattle are my lord's. There is nothing left in the sight of my
lord but our bodies and our lands. 19 Shall we die before your eyes,
both we and our land? Buy us and our land in exchange for food. We
with our land will become slaves to Pharaoh; just give us seed, so that
we may live and not die, and that the land may not become desolate."
20 So Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh. All the
Egyptians sold their fields, because the famine was severe upon them;
and the land became Pharaoh's. 21 As for the people, he made slaves of
them from one end of Egypt to the other. 22 Only the land of the

116

GENESIS 117

priests he did not buy; for the priests had a fixed allowance from
Pharaoh, and lived on the allowance that Pharaoh gave them;
therefore they did not sell their land. 23 Then Joseph said to the
people, "Now that I have this day bought you and your land for
Pharaoh, here is seed for you; sow the land. 24 And at the harvests you
shall give one-fifth to Pharaoh, and four-fifths shall be your own, as
seed for the field and as food for yourselves and your households, and
as food for your little ones." 25 They said, "You have saved our lives;
may it please my lord, we will be slaves to Pharaoh." 26 So Joseph
made it a statute concerning the land of Egypt, and it stands to this
day, that Pharaoh should have the fifth. The land of the priests alone
did not become Pharaoh's.
27 Thus Israel settled in the land of Egypt, in the region of Goshen; and
they gained possessions in it, and were fruitful and multiplied
exceedingly. 28 Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years; so the
days of Jacob, the years of his life, were one hundred forty-seven years.
Jacob's preparations for death, including the adoption and blessing of
Ephraim and Manasseh
29 When the time of Israel's death drew near, he called his son Joseph
and said to him, "If I have found favor with you, put your hand under
my thigh and promise to deal loyally and truly with me. Do not bury
me in Egypt. 30 When I lie down with my ancestors, carry me out of
Egypt and bury me in their burial place." He answered, "I will do as
you have said." 31 And he said, "Swear to me"; and he swore to him.
Then Israel bowed himself on the head of his bed.
[Genesis 48]
1 After this Joseph was told, "Your father is ill." So he took with him
his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim. 2 When Jacob was told, "Your
son Joseph has come to you," he summoned his strength and sat up in
bed. 3 And Jacob said to Joseph, "God Almighty appeared to me at Luz
in the land of Canaan, and he blessed me, 4 and said to me, 'I am going
to make you fruitful and increase your numbers; I will make of you a
company of peoples, and will give this land to your offspring after you

117

GENESIS 118

for a perpetual holding.' 5 Therefore your two sons, who were born to
you in the land of Egypt before I came to you in Egypt, are now mine;
Ephraim and Manasseh shall be mine, just as Reuben and Simeon are. 6
As for the offspring born to you after them, they shall be yours. They
shall be recorded under the names of their brothers with regard to
their inheritance. 7 For when I came from Paddan, Rachel, alas, died in
the land of Canaan on the way, while there was still some distance to
go to Ephrath; and I buried her there on the way to Ephrath" (that is,
Bethlehem).
8 When Israel saw Joseph's sons, he said, "Who are these?" 9 Joseph
said to his father, "They are my sons, whom God has given me here."
And he said, "Bring them to me, please, that I may bless them." 10 Now
the eyes of Israel were dim with age, and he could not see well. So
Joseph brought them near him; and he kissed them and embraced
them. 11 Israel said to Joseph, "I did not expect to see your face; and
here God has let me see your children also." 12 Then Joseph removed
them from his father's knees, and he bowed himself with his face to
the earth. 13 Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward
Israel's left, and Manasseh in his left hand toward Israel's right, and
brought them near him. 14 But Israel stretched out his right hand and
laid it on the head of Ephraim, who was the younger, and his left hand
on the head of Manasseh, crossing his hands, for Manasseh was the
firstborn. 15 He blessed Joseph, and said,
"The God before whom my ancestors Abraham and Isaac walked,
the God who has been my shepherd all my life to this day,
16 the angel who has redeemed me from all harm, bless the boys;
and in them let my name be perpetuated, and the name
of my ancestors Abraham and Isaac;
and let them grow into a multitude on the earth."
17 When Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand on the head of
Ephraim, it displeased him; so he took his father's hand, to remove it
from Ephraim's head to Manasseh's head. 18 Joseph said to his father,
"Not so, my father! Since this one is the firstborn, put your right hand
on his head." 19 But his father refused, and said, "I know, my son, I
know; he also shall become a people, and he also shall be great.
Nevertheless his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his

118

GENESIS 119

offspring shall become a multitude of nations." 20 So he blessed them
that day, saying,
"By you Israel will invoke blessings, saying,
'God make you like Ephraim and like Manasseh.'"
So he put Ephraim ahead of Manasseh. 21 Then Israel said to Joseph, "I
am about to die, but God will be with you and will bring you again to
the land of your ancestors. 22 I now give to you one portion more than
to your brothers, the portion that I took from the hand of the Amorites
with my sword and with my bow."
[Genesis 49]
Jacob's blessing on his twelve sons
1 Then Jacob called his sons, and said: "Gather around, that I may tell
you what will happen to you in days to come.
2 Assemble and hear, O sons of Jacob;
listen to Israel your father.
3 Reuben, you are my firstborn,
my might and the first fruits of my vigor,
excelling in rank and excelling in power.
4 Unstable as water, you shall no longer excel
because you went up onto your father's bed;
then you defiled it — you went up onto my couch!
5 Simeon and Levi are brothers;
weapons of violence are their swords.
6 May I never come into their council;
may I not be joined to their company —
for in their anger they killed men,
and at their whim they hamstrung oxen.
7 Cursed be their anger, for it is fierce,
and their wrath, for it is cruel!
I will divide them in Jacob,
and scatter them in Israel.

119

GENESIS 120

8 Judah, your brothers shall praise you;
your hand shall be on the neck of your enemies;
your father's sons shall bow down before you.
9 Judah is a lion's whelp;
from the prey, my son, you have gone up.
He crouches down, he stretches out like a lion,
like a lioness — who dares rouse him up?
10 The scepter shall not depart from Judah,
nor the ruler's staff from between his feet,
until tribute comes to him;
and the obedience of the peoples is his.
11 Binding his foal to the vine
and his donkey's colt to the choice vine,
he washes his garments in wine
and his robe in the blood of grapes;
12 his eyes are darker than wine,
and his teeth whiter than milk.
13 Zebulun shall settle at the shore of the sea;
he shall be a haven for ships,
and his border shall be at Sidon.
14 Issachar is a strong donkey,
lying down between the sheepfolds;
15 he saw that a resting place was good,
and that the land was pleasant;
so he bowed his shoulder to the burden,
and became a slave at forced labor.
16 Dan shall judge his people
as one of the tribes of Israel.
17 Dan shall be a snake by the roadside,
a viper along the path,
that bites the horse's heels
so that its rider falls backward.
18 I wait for your salvation, O LORD.

120

GENESIS 121

19 Gad shall be raided by raiders,
but he shall raid at their heels.
20 Asher's food shall be rich,
and he shall provide royal delicacies.
21 Naphtali is a doe let loose
that bears lovely fawns.
22 Joseph is a fruitful bough,
a fruitful bough by a spring;
his branches run over the wall.
23 The archers fiercely attacked him;
they shot at him and pressed him hard.
24 Yet his bow remained taut,
and his arms were made agile
by the hands of the Mighty One of Jacob,
by the name of the Shepherd, the Rock of Israel,
25 by the God of your father, who will help you,
by the Almighty who will bless you
with blessings of heaven above,
blessings of the deep that lies beneath,
blessings of the breasts and of the womb.
26 The blessings of your father
are stronger than the blessings of the eternal mountains,
the bounties of the everlasting hills;
may they be on the head of Joseph,
on the brow of him who was set apart from his brothers.
27 Benjamin is a ravenous wolf,
in the morning devouring the prey,
and at evening dividing the spoil."
28 All these are the twelve tribes of Israel, and this is what their father
said to them when he blessed them, blessing each one of them with a
suitable blessing.

121

GENESIS 122

Order to bury Jacob at Machpelah
29 Then he charged them, saying to them, "I am about to be gathered
to my people. Bury me with my ancestors — in the cave in the field of
Ephron the Hittite, 30 in the cave in the field at Machpelah, near
Mamre, in the land of Canaan, in the field that Abraham bought from
Ephron the Hittite as a burial site. 31 There Abraham and his wife Sarah
were buried; there Isaac and his wife Rebekah were buried; and there I
buried Leah — 32 the field and the cave that is in it were purchased
from the Hittites." 33 When Jacob ended his charge to his sons, he
drew up his feet into the bed, breathed his last, and was gathered to
his people.
[Genesis 50]
Burial of Jacob and final days of Joseph
1 Then Joseph threw himself on his father's face and wept over him
and kissed him. 2 Joseph commanded the physicians in his service to
embalm his father. So the physicians embalmed Israel; 3 they spent
forty days in doing this, for that is the time required for embalming.
And the Egyptians wept for him seventy days.
4 When the days of weeping for him were past, Joseph addressed the
household of Pharaoh, "If now I have found favor with you, please
speak to Pharaoh as follows: 5 My father made me swear an oath; he
said, 'I am about to die. In the tomb that I hewed out for myself in the
land of Canaan, there you shall bury me.' Now therefore let me go up,
so that I may bury my father; then I will return." 6 Pharaoh answered,
"Go up, and bury your father, as he made you swear to do."
7 So Joseph went up to bury his father. With him went up all the
servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his household, and all the elders of
the land of Egypt, 8 as well as all the household of Joseph, his brothers,
and his father's household. Only their children, their flocks, and their
herds were left in the land of Goshen. 9 Both chariots and charioteers
went up with him. It was a very great company. 10 When they came to
the threshing floor of Atad, which is beyond the Jordan, they held
there a very great and sorrowful lamentation; and he observed a time

122

GENESIS 123

of mourning for his father seven days. 11 When the Canaanite
inhabitants of the land saw the mourning on the threshing floor of
Atad, they said, "This is a grievous mourning on the part of the
Egyptians." Therefore the place was named Abel-mizraim; it is beyond
the Jordan. 12 Thus his sons did for him as he had instructed them. 13
They carried him to the land of Canaan and buried him in the cave of
the field at Machpelah, the field near Mamre, which Abraham bought
as a burial site from Ephron the Hittite. 14 After he had buried his
father, Joseph returned to Egypt with his brothers and all who had
gone up with him to bury his father.
15 Realizing that their father was dead, Joseph's brothers said, "What if
Joseph still bears a grudge against us and pays us back in full for all the
wrong that we did to him?" 16 So they approached Joseph, saying,
"Your father gave this instruction before he died, 17 'Say to Joseph: I
beg you, forgive the crime of your brothers and the wrong they did in
harming you.' Now therefore please forgive the crime of the servants
of the God of your father." Joseph wept when they spoke to him. 18
Then his brothers also wept, fell down before him, and said, "We are
here as your slaves." 19 But Joseph said to them, "Do not be afraid! Am
I in the place of God? 20 Even though you intended to do harm to me,
God intended it for good, in order to preserve a numerous people, as
he is doing today. 21 So have no fear; I myself will provide for you and
your little ones." In this way he reassured them, speaking kindly to
them.
22 So Joseph remained in Egypt, he and his father's household; and
Joseph lived one hundred ten years. 23 Joseph saw Ephraim's children
of the third generation; the children of Machir son of Manasseh were
also born on Joseph's knees.
24 Then Joseph said to his brothers, "I am about to die; but God will
surely come to you, and bring you up out of this land to the land that
he swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob." 25 So Joseph made the
Israelites swear, saying, "When God comes to you, you shall carry up
my bones from here." 26 And Joseph died, being one hundred ten
years old; he was embalmed and placed in a coffin in Egypt.

123

EXODUS 124

EXODUS
Introduction
The book of Exodus is named after the focus of the first fifteen
chapters of the book: the liberation of Israel from Egypt by "the God
of Abraham... Isaac, and... Jacob" (3.15). The Exodus, however, is not a
goal until itself; the book continues with various laws which distinguish
the community (chs 20-23, 34), as well as the instructions for the
construction of the tabernacle (chs 25-40), which are narrated in great
detail, and assure that a holy God will reside among the people.
It is impossible to discern what historical events lie behind the book of
Exodus. Given the lack of contemporaneous evidence outside the Bible,
we can hope only to attain a plausible reconstruction. Reconstructions
run the gamut from identifying the Pharaoh of the plagues with
Rameses II (1279-1213 BCE) to asserting that the entire story is
metaphorical, and Israel was never in Egypt. Those favoring a historical
reading of the book have noted that no nation is likely to make up a
story that its ancestors had been slaves. Those favoring a metaphorical
reading have suggested that the tyranny experienced reflects Egypt's
political and economic domination of the land of Canaan in the Lat
Bronze Age. They emphasize the continuity of Israelite culture with
Canaanite (rather than Egyptian) culture in architecture, crafts,
language, and worship. There is also uncertainty about most of the
place names in the book, even about the location of Mount Sinai. Nor
is there a consensus on the authorship and date of the various parts of
this complex work. Some sections are Priestly (cf. 20.8-11 with Gen 2.1-3,
and note with interest in the priestly tabernacle in chs 25-40), other
sections are clearly reminiscent of Deuteronomy (cf. 23.23-33 with Deut
7), and some contain material usually ascribed to JE, traditionally
considered to be the earliest sources of the Pentateuch. Underlying the
final form of the book is a complicated literary prehistory, in which the
sources or "documents" of the Pentateuch (J, E, and P) have been
124

EXODUS 125

combined in a way that values the preservation of divergent traditions
more than a superficial consistency. The book also includes an often
bewildering variety of smaller unites from various stages of Israel's
history. These include hymns and hymnic fragments, itineraries, ritual
traditions, and legal codifications, along with elements of myth and
folklore and birth and contest narratives. Some of these traditions are
relatively ancient and may well reflect authentic historical memory.
In the absence of a consensus concerning the book's historicity and
composition, it is best to read Exodus as a finished narrative, a story —
though never forgetting that it has a pre-history, and that in its final
form within the larger story of the Torah or Pentateuch, it is the
definitive story of the establishment of Israel as a people freed from
human tyranny who became slaves to their own loving God.
God's purpose in liberating Israel is expressed in several similar ways: in
order to establish an exclusive relationship ("I will take you as my
people, and I will be your God," 6.7; "I... brought you to myself," 19.4),
to make them unique ("my treasured possession out of all the
peoples,.... a priestly kingdom and a holy nation," 19.5-6), and to
"dwell among them" (29.46). Indeed, the Exodus is inextricably tied to
the provisions of the covenant by providing reason and motivation for
much of what God expects of the people. In worship, the experience of
liberation from slavery prompts the Israelites to reinterpret ancient
festivals, instilling them with completely new meaning: passover (12.113), unleavened bread (12.14-20), and sacrifice of firstborn (13.1-2).
Likewise, in late biblical legislation, the festival of booths comes to
commemorate the wilderness wandering (Lev 23.39-43), and in postbiblical Judaism, the festival of weeks celebrates the giving of the
covenant at Sinai (19.1). The central commandment, "you shall have no
other gods before me," is immediately preceded by the identification
of God as the one "who brought you out of the land of Egypt" (20.1-3).
An important component of the upbringing of children is to be
explanation of customs on the basis of liberation (12.24-27). Ethically,
God uses the experience of oppression to motivate the covenant
partner: Israel's memory of being aliens in Egypt gives them empathy
for aliens within Israel (22.21; 23.9). Thus, the Exodus is truly the central,
unifying focus of the book.

125

EXODUS 126

One way to express the movement in Exodus is to say that chs 1-15 tell
the story of freedom from while chs 16-40 tells the story of freedom to:
liberation from slavery is followed by liberation to accomplish a new
thing. This is explicitly reflected in 7.16, where the Lord sent Moses to
demand of the Pharaoh: "Let my people go, so that they may worship
[serve/be slaves to] me" (emphasis added; cf. 4.23). The people are still
servants, but the change of masters makes all the difference.
Additionally, Israel was forced to serve Pharaoh, while it freely decides
to serve the Lord (24.3, 7).
Another way to understand the book is to visualize its geographical
movement. Chapters 1-15 tell the story of leaving the city where the evil
Pharaoh reigns and enslaves the Hebrews; chs 16-40 tell the story of
arriving at the mountain where a holy God reigns and creates the
people of Israel. In Egypt a royal construction program enslaves
Hebrews; Hebrew boys are killed, and in the end God claims the lives of
all the firstborn of Egypt, human and animal alike. At Sinai all the
firstborn males of Israel, human and animal alike, are equally claimed
by God. A new royal construction program is inaugurated, for building
the portable tabernacle that assures the continuing presence of God
among the new people as they travel to the promised land.
Indeed, this geographical movement can be understood more
specifically as a pilgrimage undertaken first by Moses alone (chs 2-4),
then by all the people (chs 13-40). Each pilgrimage proceeds from the
evil land where Pharaoh reigns through the desert to the holy
mountain where the God of Sinai reigns. The goal of each pilgrimage is
experiencing God through a theophany and receiving a commission.
The first theophany is for Moses alone (3.1-6), the second is for all Israel
(19.16-19) but is too much for them to bear (20.18-21), so the third is for
the leaders only (24.9-11), and the fourth is for Moses alone as covenant
mediator (24.15-18). While Moses' commission is to act as God's agent in
freeing the people (chs 3-4), Israel's commission is to act as God's holy
people in all areas of life (chs 19-24) and to build a shrine so that God
may dwell in their presence (chs 25-31). The first effort to fulfill each
commission fails: Moses' first appearance before Pharaoh only makes
the oppression worse (ch 5), and Israel's first impatient attempt to
ensure God's continuing presence among them, the construction of the

126

EXODUS 127

calf, almost brings complete destruction (ch 32). but after each
commission is restated (6.2-7.7; 34.10-28 after the fifth theophany,
again for Moses alone, 33.17-34.9), the second attempt is successful.
Moses finally leads the slaves to freedom (chs 7-15), and Israel finally
builds the tabernacle so that God may dwell among them (chs 35-40).
There is more than one way to outline the book, since many of the
stories it narrates point both backward and forward. For example, the
hymn in ch 15 points backward to celebrate the victories of the divine
warrior, while it also points ahead to anticipate the terror of the other
peoples and the march forward to God's mountain. Thus, the following
suggest structure of the book is necessarily mono-dimensional.
•
•
•
•
•

1.1-15.21.
15.22-18.27.
19.1-31.18.
32.1-34.35.
35.1-40.38.

God liberates Israel from slavery by defeating Pharaoh
God journeys with Israel to Mount Sinai
God establishes the covenant with Israel
Israel breaks the covenant, but God reestablishes it
Israel obeys instructions, and God takes up residence
with them

Many recurrent words and themes tie the book's different parts
together. For example, some of the themes that frame the first part of
the story, that of liberation, are women's activities (15.19-21), a lifethreatening body of water with reeds (2.3), a loud cry (2.23), the
plundering of Egypt (3.21-22), God's claim on the firstborn son (4.22-23),
and ritual with blood (as protection against death at God's hand, 4.2426).
The Hebrew word for heaviness (5.9), referring not only to the
"hardening" of Pharaoh's heart (7.14; 8.15, 32; 9.7, 34; 10.1) but also to
God's "glory" (14.4, 17-18; 16.7, 10; 24.16-17; 29.43; 33.18, 22; 40.34-35),
unifies the book. Other themes tie the parts of the story together:
knowledge, or better, acknowledgment of God (5.2); the distinction
between Israel and other peoples (Egypt, 8.22-23; other peoples, 15.1318); and proper service/worship: first the right object of service, not the
Pharaoh, but God; second, the right means of worship, not a golden
calf (ch 32) but a tabernacle (chs 25-31; 35-40). Several of the themes
that frame the first part of the story, liberation, recur in the second
127

EXODUS 128

half, covenant, thus linking the two sections together: the treasures of
Egypt used both to break and to keep the covenant (3.21-22); the
firstborn (4.22-23); and ritual with blood (now sealing the covenant
between God and Israel, 24.3-8; and consecrating the priests, 29.20-21).
Another predominant pattern is God's precise command followed by
Moses' exact obedience. It can be seen (7.6) in Moses' two commissions,
the plagues, the victory at the sea, several incidents during the journey,
and preeminently the instructions for making the tabernacle (chs 2531). The one case of disobedience, the construction of the golden calf
(ch 32), disrupts this theme. Moses must intercede four times, many
Israelites must die, and three chapters are required before the story can
get back on track. Finally the commands of chs 25-31 are carried out in
chs 35-40, and God indeed takes up residence among the people.

[Exodus 1]
God liberates Israel from slavery by defeating Pharaoh; the Israelites
suffer oppression in Egypt
1 These are the names of the sons of Israel who came to Egypt with
Jacob, each with his household: 2 Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, 3
Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin, 4 Dan and Naphtali, Gad and Asher. 5
The total number of people born to Jacob was seventy. Joseph was
already in Egypt. 6 Then Joseph died, and all his brothers, and that
whole generation. 7 But the Israelites were fruitful and prolific; they
multiplied and grew exceedingly strong, so that the land was filled
with them.
8 Now a new king arose over Egypt, who did not know Joseph. 9 He
said to his people, "Look, the Israelite people are more numerous and
more powerful than we. 10 Come, let us deal shrewdly with them, or
they will increase and, in the event of war, join our enemies and fight
against us and escape from the land." 11 Therefore they set taskmasters
over them to oppress them with forced labor. They built supply cities,
Pithom and Rameses, for Pharaoh. 12 But the more they were

128

EXODUS 129

oppressed, the more they multiplied and spread, so that the Egyptians
came to dread the Israelites. 13 The Egyptians became ruthless in
imposing tasks on the Israelites, 14 and made their lives bitter with
hard service in mortar and brick and in every kind of field labor. They
were ruthless in all the tasks that they imposed on them.
15 The king of Egypt said to the Hebrew midwives, one of whom was
named Shiphrah and the other Puah, 16 "When you act as midwives to
the Hebrew women, and see them on the birthstool, if it is a boy, kill
him; but if it is a girl, she shall live." 17 But the midwives feared God;
they did not do as the king of Egypt commanded them, but they let
the boys live. 18 So the king of Egypt summoned the midwives and said
to them, "Why have you done this, and allowed the boys to live?" 19
The midwives said to Pharaoh, "Because the Hebrew women are not
like the Egyptian women; for they are vigorous and give birth before
the midwife comes to them." 20 So God dealt well with the midwives;
and the people multiplied and became very strong. 21 And because the
midwives feared God, he gave them families. 22 Then Pharaoh
commanded all his people, "Every boy that is born to the Hebrews you
shall throw into the Nile, but you shall let every girl live."
[Exodus 2]
The early life of Moses
1 Now a man from the house of Levi went and married a Levite
woman. 2 The woman conceived and bore a son; and when she saw
that he was a fine baby, she hid him three months. 3 When she could
hide him no longer she got a papyrus basket for him, and plastered it
with bitumen and pitch; she put the child in it and placed it among the
reeds on the bank of the river. 4 His sister stood at a distance, to see
what would happen to him.
5 The daughter of Pharaoh came down to bathe at the river, while her
attendants walked beside the river. She saw the basket among the
reeds and sent her maid to bring it. 6 When she opened it, she saw the
child. He was crying, and she took pity on him. "This must be one of
the Hebrews' children," she said. 7 Then his sister said to Pharaoh's
daughter, "Shall I go and get you a nurse from the Hebrew women to

129

EXODUS 130

nurse the child for you?" 8 Pharaoh's daughter said to her, "Yes." So
the girl went and called the child's mother. 9 Pharaoh's daughter said
to her, "Take this child and nurse it for me, and I will give you your
wages." So the woman took the child and nursed it. 10 When the child
grew up, she brought him to Pharaoh's daughter, and she took him as
her son. She named him Moses, "because," she said, "I drew him out of
the water."
11 One day, after Moses had grown up, he went out to his people and
saw their forced labor. He saw an Egyptian beating a Hebrew, one of
his kinsfolk. 12 He looked this way and that, and seeing no one he
killed the Egyptian and hid him in the sand. 13 When he went out the
next day, he saw two Hebrews fighting; and he said to the one who
was in the wrong, "Why do you strike your fellow Hebrew?" 14 He
answered, "Who made you a ruler and judge over us? Do you mean to
kill me as you killed the Egyptian?" Then Moses was afraid and
thought, "Surely the thing is known." 15 When Pharaoh heard of it, he
sought to kill Moses.
But Moses fled from Pharaoh. He settled in the land of Midian, and sat
down by a well. 16 The priest of Midian had seven daughters. They
came to draw water, and filled the troughs to water their father's
flock. 17 But some shepherds came and drove them away. Moses got up
and came to their defense and watered their flock. 18 When they
returned to their father Reuel, he said, "How is it that you have come
back so soon today?" 19 They said, "An Egyptian helped us against the
shepherds; he even drew water for us and watered the flock." 20 He
said to his daughters, "Where is he? Why did you leave the man? Invite
him to break bread." 21 Moses agreed to stay with the man, and he
gave Moses his daughter Zipporah in marriage. 22 She bore a son, and
he named him Gershom; for he said, "I have been an alien residing in a
foreign land."
God calls Moses
23 After a long time the king of Egypt died. The Israelites groaned
under their slavery, and cried out. Out of the slavery their cry for help
rose up to God. 24 God heard their groaning, and God remembered his

130

EXODUS 131

covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. 25 God looked upon the
Israelites, and God took notice of them.
[Exodus 3]
1 Moses was keeping the flock of his father-in-law Jethro, the priest of
Midian; he led his flock beyond the wilderness, and came to Horeb, the
mountain of God. 2 There the angel of the LORD appeared to him in a
flame of fire out of a bush; he looked, and the bush was blazing, yet it
was not consumed. 3 Then Moses said, "I must turn aside and look at
this great sight, and see why the bush is not burned up." 4 When the
LORD saw that he had turned aside to see, God called to him out of the
bush, "Moses, Moses!" And he said, "Here I am." 5 Then he said,
"Come no closer! Remove the sandals from your feet, for the place on
which you are standing is holy ground." 6 He said further, "I am the
God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob." And Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look at
God.
7 Then the LORD said, "I have observed the misery of my people who
are in Egypt; I have heard their cry on account of their taskmasters.
Indeed, I know their sufferings, 8 and I have come down to deliver
them from the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land to a
good and broad land, a land flowing with milk and honey, to the
country of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, the Perizzites, the
Hivites, and the Jebusites. 9 The cry of the Israelites has now come to
me; I have also seen how the Egyptians oppress them. 10 So come, I will
send you to Pharaoh to bring my people, the Israelites, out of Egypt."
11 But Moses said to God, "Who am I that I should go to Pharaoh, and
bring the Israelites out of Egypt?" 12 He said, "I will be with you; and
this shall be the sign for you that it is I who sent you: when you have
brought the people out of Egypt, you shall worship God on this
mountain."
13 But Moses said to God, "If I come to the Israelites and say to them,
'The God of your ancestors has sent me to you,' and they ask me, 'What
is his name?' what shall I say to them?" 14 God said to Moses, "I AM
WHO I AM." He said further, "Thus you shall say to the Israelites, 'I AM

131

EXODUS 132

has sent me to you.'" 15 God also said to Moses, "Thus you shall say to
the Israelites, 'The LORD, the God of your ancestors, the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has sent me to you':
This is my name forever,
and this my title for all generations.
16 Go and assemble the elders of Israel, and say to them, 'The LORD, the
God of your ancestors, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, has
appeared to me, saying: I have given heed to you and to what has
been done to you in Egypt. 17 I declare that I will bring you up out of
the misery of Egypt, to the land of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the
Amorites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites, a land flowing
with milk and honey.' 18 They will listen to your voice; and you and the
elders of Israel shall go to the king of Egypt and say to him, 'The LORD,
the God of the Hebrews, has met with us; let us now go a three days'
journey into the wilderness, so that we may sacrifice to the LORD our
God.' 19 I know, however, that the king of Egypt will not let you go
unless compelled by a mighty hand. 20 So I will stretch out my hand
and strike Egypt with all my wonders that I will perform in it; after that
he will let you go. 21 I will bring this people into such favor with the
Egyptians that, when you go, you will not go empty-handed; 22 each
woman shall ask her neighbor and any woman living in the neighbor's
house for jewelry of silver and of gold, and clothing, and you shall put
them on your sons and on your daughters; and so you shall plunder the
Egyptians."
[Exodus 4]
1 Then Moses answered, "But suppose they do not believe me or listen
to me, but say, 'The LORD did not appear to you.'" 2 The LORD said to
him, "What is that in your hand?" He said, "A staff." 3 And he said,
"Throw it on the ground." So he threw the staff on the ground, and it
became a snake; and Moses drew back from it. 4 Then the LORD said to
Moses, "Reach out your hand, and seize it by the tail" — so he reached
out his hand and grasped it, and it became a staff in his hand — 5 "so
that they may believe that the LORD, the God of their ancestors, the
God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has appeared
to you."

132

EXODUS 133

6 Again, the LORD said to him, "Put your hand inside your cloak." He
put his hand into his cloak; and when he took it out, his hand was
leprous, as white as snow. 7 Then God said, "Put your hand back into
your cloak" — so he put his hand back into his cloak, and when he
took it out, it was restored like the rest of his body — 8 "If they will
not believe you or heed the first sign, they may believe the second
sign. 9 If they will not believe even these two signs or heed you, you
shall take some water from the Nile and pour it on the dry ground; and
the water that you shall take from the Nile will become blood on the
dry ground."
10 But Moses said to the LORD, "O my Lord, I have never been eloquent,
neither in the past nor even now that you have spoken to your servant;
but I am slow of speech and slow of tongue." 11 Then the LORD said to
him, "Who gives speech to mortals? Who makes them mute or deaf,
seeing or blind? Is it not I, the LORD? 12 Now go, and I will be with your
mouth and teach you what you are to speak." 13 But he said, "O my
Lord, please send someone else." 14 Then the anger of the LORD was
kindled against Moses and he said, "What of your brother Aaron the
Levite? I know that he can speak fluently; even now he is coming out
to meet you, and when he sees you his heart will be glad. 15 You shall
speak to him and put the words in his mouth; and I will be with your
mouth and with his mouth, and will teach you what you shall do. 16 He
indeed shall speak for you to the people; he shall serve as a mouth for
you, and you shall serve as God for him. 17 Take in your hand this staff,
with which you shall perform the signs."
Moses returns to Egypt to prepare the people for liberation
18 Moses went back to his father-in-law Jethro and said to him, "Please
let me go back to my kindred in Egypt and see whether they are still
living." And Jethro said to Moses, "Go in peace." 19 The LORD said to
Moses in Midian, "Go back to Egypt; for all those who were seeking
your life are dead." 20 So Moses took his wife and his sons, put them
on a donkey, and went back to the land of Egypt; and Moses carried
the staff of God in his hand.

133

EXODUS 134

21 And the LORD said to Moses, "When you go back to Egypt, see that
you perform before Pharaoh all the wonders that I have put in your
power; but I will harden his heart, so that he will not let the people go.
22 Then you shall say to Pharaoh, 'Thus says the LORD: Israel is my
firstborn son. 23 I said to you, "Let my son go that he may worship
me." But you refused to let him go; now I will kill your firstborn son.'"
24 On the way, at a place where they spent the night, the LORD met
him and tried to kill him. 25 But Zipporah took a flint and cut off her
son's foreskin, and touched Moses' feet with it, and said, "Truly you are
a bridegroom of blood to me!" 26 So he let him alone. It was then she
said, "A bridegroom of blood by circumcision."
27 The LORD said to Aaron, "Go into the wilderness to meet Moses." So
he went; and he met him at the mountain of God and kissed him. 28
Moses told Aaron all the words of the LORD with which he had sent
him, and all the signs with which he had charged him. 29 Then Moses
and Aaron went and assembled all the elders of the Israelites. 30 Aaron
spoke all the words that the LORD had spoken to Moses, and performed
the signs in the sight of the people. 31 The people believed; and when
they heard that the LORD had given heed to the Israelites and that he
had seen their misery, they bowed down and worshiped.
[Exodus 5]
The first audience with Pharaoh fails
1 Afterward Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and said, "Thus says the
LORD, the God of Israel, 'Let my people go, so that they may celebrate a
festival to me in the wilderness.'" 2 But Pharaoh said, "Who is the LORD,
that I should heed him and let Israel go? I do not know the LORD, and I
will not let Israel go." 3 Then they said, "The God of the Hebrews has
revealed himself to us; let us go a three days' journey into the
wilderness to sacrifice to the LORD our God, or he will fall upon us with
pestilence or sword." 4 But the king of Egypt said to them, "Moses and
Aaron, why are you taking the people away from their work? Get to
your labors!" 5 Pharaoh continued, "Now they are more numerous
than the people of the land and yet you want them to stop working!"
6 That same day Pharaoh commanded the taskmasters of the people,

134

EXODUS 135

as well as their supervisors, 7 "You shall no longer give the people
straw to make bricks, as before; let them go and gather straw for
themselves. 8 But you shall require of them the same quantity of bricks
as they have made previously; do not diminish it, for they are lazy; that
is why they cry, 'Let us go and offer sacrifice to our God.' 9 Let heavier
work be laid on them; then they will labor at it and pay no attention to
deceptive words."
10 So the taskmasters and the supervisors of the people went out and
said to the people, "Thus says Pharaoh, 'I will not give you straw. 11 Go
and get straw yourselves, wherever you can find it; but your work will
not be lessened in the least.'" 12 So the people scattered throughout
the land of Egypt, to gather stubble for straw. 13 The taskmasters were
urgent, saying, "Complete your work, the same daily assignment as
when you were given straw." 14 And the supervisors of the Israelites,
whom Pharaoh's taskmasters had set over them, were beaten, and
were asked, "Why did you not finish the required quantity of bricks
yesterday and today, as you did before?"
15 Then the Israelite supervisors came to Pharaoh and cried, "Why do
you treat your servants like this? 16 No straw is given to your servants,
yet they say to us, 'Make bricks!' Look how your servants are beaten!
You are unjust to your own people." 17 He said, "You are lazy, lazy;
that is why you say, 'Let us go and sacrifice to the LORD.' 18 Go now,
and work; for no straw shall be given you, but you shall still deliver the
same number of bricks." 19 The Israelite supervisors saw that they were
in trouble when they were told, "You shall not lessen your daily
number of bricks." 20 As they left Pharaoh, they came upon Moses and
Aaron who were waiting to meet them. 21 They said to them, "The
LORD look upon you and judge! You have brought us into bad odor
with Pharaoh and his officials, and have put a sword in their hand to
kill us."
22 Then Moses turned again to the LORD and said, "O LORD, why have
you mistreated this people? Why did you ever send me? 23 Since I first
came to Pharaoh to speak in your name, he has mistreated this people,
and you have done nothing at all to deliver your people."

135

EXODUS 136

[Exodus 6]
1 Then the LORD said to Moses, "Now you shall see what I will do to
Pharaoh: Indeed, by a mighty hand he will let them go; by a mighty
hand he will drive them out of his land."
God repeats the call of Moses and the appointment of Aaron
2 God also spoke to Moses and said to him: "I am the LORD. 3 I
appeared to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob as God Almighty, but by my
name 'The LORD' I did not make myself known to them. 4 I also
established my covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan,
the land in which they resided as aliens. 5 I have also heard the
groaning of the Israelites whom the Egyptians are holding as slaves,
and I have remembered my covenant. 6 Say therefore to the Israelites,
'I am the LORD, and I will free you from the burdens of the Egyptians
and deliver you from slavery to them. I will redeem you with an
outstretched arm and with mighty acts of judgment. 7 I will take you as
my people, and I will be your God. You shall know that I am the LORD
your God, who has freed you from the burdens of the Egyptians. 8 I
will bring you into the land that I swore to give to Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob; I will give it to you for a possession. I am the LORD.'" 9 Moses
told this to the Israelites; but they would not listen to Moses, because
of their broken spirit and their cruel slavery.
10 Then the LORD spoke to Moses, 11 "Go and tell Pharaoh king of Egypt
to let the Israelites go out of his land." 12 But Moses spoke to the LORD,
"The Israelites have not listened to me; how then shall Pharaoh listen
to me, poor speaker that I am?" 13 Thus the LORD spoke to Moses and
Aaron, and gave them orders regarding the Israelites and Pharaoh king
of Egypt, charging them to free the Israelites from the land of Egypt.
The genealogy of Moses and Aaron
14 The following are the heads of their ancestral houses: the sons of
Reuben, the firstborn of Israel: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi; these
are the families of Reuben. 15 The sons of Simeon: Jemuel, Jamin,
Ohad, Jachin, Zohar, and Shaul, the son of a Canaanite woman; these

136

EXODUS 137

are the families of Simeon. 16 The following are the names of the sons
of Levi according to their genealogies: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari,
and the length of Levi's life was one hundred thirty-seven years. 17 The
sons of Gershon: Libni and Shimei, by their families. 18 The sons of
Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel, and the length of Kohath's
life was one hundred thirty-three years. 19 The sons of Merari: Mahli
and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites according to their
genealogies. 20 Amram married Jochebed his father's sister and she
bore him Aaron and Moses, and the length of Amram's life was one
hundred thirty-seven years. 21 The sons of Izhar: Korah, Nepheg, and
Zichri. 22 The sons of Uzziel: Mishael, Elzaphan, and Sithri. 23 Aaron
married Elisheba, daughter of Amminadab and sister of Nahshon, and
she bore him Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. 24 The sons of
Korah: Assir, Elkanah, and Abiasaph; these are the families of the
Korahites. 25 Aaron's son Eleazar married one of the daughters of
Putiel, and she bore him Phinehas. These are the heads of the ancestral
houses of the Levites by their families.
26 It was this same Aaron and Moses to whom the LORD said, "Bring the
Israelites out of the land of Egypt, company by company." 27 It was
they who spoke to Pharaoh king of Egypt to bring the Israelites out of
Egypt, the same Moses and Aaron.
28 On the day when the LORD spoke to Moses in the land of Egypt, 29
he said to him, "I am the LORD; tell Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I am
speaking to you." 30 But Moses said in the LORD's presence, "Since I am
a poor speaker, why would Pharaoh listen to me?"
[Exodus 7]
1 The LORD said to Moses, "See, I have made you like God to Pharaoh,
and your brother Aaron shall be your prophet. 2 You shall speak all
that I command you, and your brother Aaron shall tell Pharaoh to let
the Israelites go out of his land. 3 But I will harden Pharaoh's heart,
and I will multiply my signs and wonders in the land of Egypt. 4 When
Pharaoh does not listen to you, I will lay my hand upon Egypt and
bring my people the Israelites, company by company, out of the land of
Egypt by great acts of judgment. 5 The Egyptians shall know that I am

137

EXODUS 138

the LORD, when I stretch out my hand against Egypt and bring the
Israelites out from among them." 6 Moses and Aaron did so; they did
just as the LORD commanded them. 7 Moses was eighty years old and
Aaron eighty-three when they spoke to Pharaoh.
The ten plagues; the preface to the sequence of plagues
8 The LORD said to Moses and Aaron, 9 "When Pharaoh says to you,
'Perform a wonder,' then you shall say to Aaron, 'Take your staff and
throw it down before Pharaoh, and it will become a snake.'" 10 So
Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and did as the LORD had
commanded; Aaron threw down his staff before Pharaoh and his
officials, and it became a snake. 11 Then Pharaoh summoned the wise
men and the sorcerers; and they also, the magicians of Egypt, did the
same by their secret arts. 12 Each one threw down his staff, and they
became snakes; but Aaron's staff swallowed up theirs. 13 Still Pharaoh's
heart was hardened, and he would not listen to them, as the LORD had
said.
First plague: blood
14 Then the LORD said to Moses, "Pharaoh's heart is hardened; he
refuses to let the people go. 15 Go to Pharaoh in the morning, as he is
going out to the water; stand by at the river bank to meet him, and
take in your hand the staff that was turned into a snake. 16 Say to him,
'The LORD, the God of the Hebrews, sent me to you to say, "Let my
people go, so that they may worship me in the wilderness." But until
now you have not listened. 17 Thus says the LORD, "By this you shall
know that I am the LORD." See, with the staff that is in my hand I will
strike the water that is in the Nile, and it shall be turned to blood. 18
The fish in the river shall die, the river itself shall stink, and the
Egyptians shall be unable to drink water from the Nile.'" 19 The LORD
said to Moses, "Say to Aaron, 'Take your staff and stretch out your
hand over the waters of Egypt — over its rivers, its canals, and its
ponds, and all its pools of water — so that they may become blood;
and there shall be blood throughout the whole land of Egypt, even in
vessels of wood and in vessels of stone.'"

138

EXODUS 139

20 Moses and Aaron did just as the LORD commanded. In the sight of
Pharaoh and of his officials he lifted up the staff and struck the water
in the river, and all the water in the river was turned into blood, 21 and
the fish in the river died. The river stank so that the Egyptians could
not drink its water, and there was blood throughout the whole land of
Egypt. 22 But the magicians of Egypt did the same by their secret arts;
so Pharaoh's heart remained hardened, and he would not listen to
them, as the LORD had said. 23 Pharaoh turned and went into his house,
and he did not take even this to heart. 24 And all the Egyptians had to
dig along the Nile for water to drink, for they could not drink the
water of the river.
25 Seven days passed after the LORD had struck the Nile.
[Exodus 8]
Second plague: frogs
1 Then the LORD said to Moses, "Go to Pharaoh and say to him, 'Thus
says the LORD: Let my people go, so that they may worship me. 2 If you
refuse to let them go, I will plague your whole country with frogs. 3
The river shall swarm with frogs; they shall come up into your palace,
into your bedchamber and your bed, and into the houses of your
officials and of your people, and into your ovens and your kneading
bowls. 4 The frogs shall come up on you and on your people and on all
your officials.'" 5 And the LORD said to Moses, "Say to Aaron, 'Stretch
out your hand with your staff over the rivers, the canals, and the pools,
and make frogs come up on the land of Egypt.'" 6 So Aaron stretched
out his hand over the waters of Egypt; and the frogs came up and
covered the land of Egypt. 7 But the magicians did the same by their
secret arts, and brought frogs up on the land of Egypt.
8 Then Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron, and said, "Pray to the LORD to
take away the frogs from me and my people, and I will let the people
go to sacrifice to the LORD." 9 Moses said to Pharaoh, "Kindly tell me
when I am to pray for you and for your officials and for your people,
that the frogs may be removed from you and your houses and be left
only in the Nile." 10 And he said, "Tomorrow." Moses said, "As you
say! So that you may know that there is no one like the LORD our God,

139

EXODUS 140

11 the frogs shall leave you and your houses and your officials and your
people; they shall be left only in the Nile." 12 Then Moses and Aaron
went out from Pharaoh; and Moses cried out to the LORD concerning
the frogs that he had brought upon Pharaoh. 13 And the LORD did as
Moses requested: the frogs died in the houses, the courtyards, and the
fields. 14 And they gathered them together in heaps, and the land
stank. 15 But when Pharaoh saw that there was a respite, he hardened
his heart, and would not listen to them, just as the LORD had said.
Third plague: gnats
16 Then the LORD said to Moses, "Say to Aaron, 'Stretch out your staff
and strike the dust of the earth, so that it may become gnats
throughout the whole land of Egypt.'" 17 And they did so; Aaron
stretched out his hand with his staff and struck the dust of the earth,
and gnats came on humans and animals alike; all the dust of the earth
turned into gnats throughout the whole land of Egypt. 18 The
magicians tried to produce gnats by their secret arts, but they could
not. There were gnats on both humans and animals. 19 And the
magicians said to Pharaoh, "This is the finger of God!" But Pharaoh's
heart was hardened, and he would not listen to them, just as the LORD
had said.
Fourth plague: flies
20 Then the LORD said to Moses, "Rise early in the morning and present
yourself before Pharaoh, as he goes out to the water, and say to him,
'Thus says the LORD: Let my people go, so that they may worship me. 21
For if you will not let my people go, I will send swarms of flies on you,
your officials, and your people, and into your houses; and the houses
of the Egyptians shall be filled with swarms of flies; so also the land
where they live. 22 But on that day I will set apart the land of Goshen,
where my people live, so that no swarms of flies shall be there, that
you may know that I the LORD am in this land. 23 Thus I will make a
distinction between my people and your people. This sign shall appear
tomorrow.'" 24 The LORD did so, and great swarms of flies came into
the house of Pharaoh and into his officials' houses; in all of Egypt the
land was ruined because of the flies.

140

EXODUS 141

25 Then Pharaoh summoned Moses and Aaron, and said, "Go, sacrifice
to your God within the land." 26 But Moses said, "It would not be right
to do so; for the sacrifices that we offer to the LORD our God are
offensive to the Egyptians. If we offer in the sight of the Egyptians
sacrifices that are offensive to them, will they not stone us? 27 We must
go a three days' journey into the wilderness and sacrifice to the LORD
our God as he commands us." 28 So Pharaoh said, "I will let you go to
sacrifice to the LORD your God in the wilderness, provided you do not
go very far away. Pray for me." 29 Then Moses said, "As soon as I leave
you, I will pray to the LORD that the swarms of flies may depart
tomorrow from Pharaoh, from his officials, and from his people; only
do not let Pharaoh again deal falsely by not letting the people go to
sacrifice to the LORD."
30 So Moses went out from Pharaoh and prayed to the LORD. 31 And
the LORD did as Moses asked: he removed the swarms of flies from
Pharaoh, from his officials, and from his people; not one remained. 32
But Pharaoh hardened his heart this time also, and would not let the
people go.
[Exodus 9]
Fifth Plague: livestock disease
1 Then the LORD said to Moses, "Go to Pharaoh, and say to him, 'Thus
says the LORD, the God of the Hebrews: Let my people go, so that they
may worship me. 2 For if you refuse to let them go and still hold them,
3 the hand of the LORD will strike with a deadly pestilence your
livestock in the field: the horses, the donkeys, the camels, the herds,
and the flocks. 4 But the LORD will make a distinction between the
livestock of Israel and the livestock of Egypt, so that nothing shall die
of all that belongs to the Israelites.'" 5 The LORD set a time, saying,
"Tomorrow the LORD will do this thing in the land." 6 And on the next
day the LORD did so; all the livestock of the Egyptians died, but of the
livestock of the Israelites not one died. 7 Pharaoh inquired and found
that not one of the livestock of the Israelites was dead. But the heart
of Pharaoh was hardened, and he would not let the people go.

141

EXODUS 142

Sixth plague: boils
8 Then the LORD said to Moses and Aaron, "Take handfuls of soot from
the kiln, and let Moses throw it in the air in the sight of Pharaoh. 9 It
shall become fine dust all over the land of Egypt, and shall cause
festering boils on humans and animals throughout the whole land of
Egypt." 10 So they took soot from the kiln, and stood before Pharaoh,
and Moses threw it in the air, and it caused festering boils on humans
and animals. 11 The magicians could not stand before Moses because of
the boils, for the boils afflicted the magicians as well as all the
Egyptians. 12 But the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he
would not listen to them, just as the LORD had spoken to Moses.
Seventh plague: hail and thunderstorm
13 Then the LORD said to Moses, "Rise up early in the morning and
present yourself before Pharaoh, and say to him, 'Thus says the LORD,
the God of the Hebrews: Let my people go, so that they may worship
me. 14 For this time I will send all my plagues upon you yourself, and
upon your officials, and upon your people, so that you may know that
there is no one like me in all the earth. 15 For by now I could have
stretched out my hand and struck you and your people with pestilence,
and you would have been cut off from the earth. 16 But this is why I
have let you live: to show you my power, and to make my name
resound through all the earth. 17 You are still exalting yourself against
my people, and will not let them go. 18 Tomorrow at this time I will
cause the heaviest hail to fall that has ever fallen in Egypt from the day
it was founded until now. 19 Send, therefore, and have your livestock
and everything that you have in the open field brought to a secure
place; every human or animal that is in the open field and is not
brought under shelter will die when the hail comes down upon them.'"
20 Those officials of Pharaoh who feared the word of the LORD hurried
their slaves and livestock off to a secure place. 21 Those who did not
regard the word of the LORD left their slaves and livestock in the open
field.

142

EXODUS 143

22 The LORD said to Moses, "Stretch out your hand toward heaven so
that hail may fall on the whole land of Egypt, on humans and animals
and all the plants of the field in the land of Egypt." 23 Then Moses
stretched out his staff toward heaven, and the LORD sent thunder and
hail, and fire came down on the earth. And the LORD rained hail on the
land of Egypt; 24 there was hail with fire flashing continually in the
midst of it, such heavy hail as had never fallen in all the land of Egypt
since it became a nation. 25 The hail struck down everything that was
in the open field throughout all the land of Egypt, both human and
animal; the hail also struck down all the plants of the field, and
shattered every tree in the field. 26 Only in the land of Goshen, where
the Israelites were, there was no hail.
27 Then Pharaoh summoned Moses and Aaron, and said to them, "This
time I have sinned; the LORD is in the right, and I and my people are in
the wrong. 28 Pray to the LORD! Enough of God's thunder and hail! I
will let you go; you need stay no longer." 29 Moses said to him, "As
soon as I have gone out of the city, I will stretch out my hands to the
LORD; the thunder will cease, and there will be no more hail, so that
you may know that the earth is the LORD's. 30 But as for you and your
officials, I know that you do not yet fear the LORD God." 31 (Now the
flax and the barley were ruined, for the barley was in the ear and the
flax was in bud. 32 But the wheat and the spelt were not ruined, for
they are late in coming up.) 33 So Moses left Pharaoh, went out of the
city, and stretched out his hands to the LORD; then the thunder and the
hail ceased, and the rain no longer poured down on the earth. 34 But
when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunder had
ceased, he sinned once more and hardened his heart, he and his
officials. 35 So the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he would not
let the Israelites go, just as the LORD had spoken through Moses.
[Exodus 10]
Eighth plague: locusts
1 Then the LORD said to Moses, "Go to Pharaoh; for I have hardened his
heart and the heart of his officials, in order that I may show these signs
of mine among them, 2 and that you may tell your children and

143

EXODUS 144

grandchildren how I have made fools of the Egyptians and what signs I
have done among them — so that you may know that I am the LORD."
3 So Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh, and said to him, "Thus says the
LORD, the God of the Hebrews, 'How long will you refuse to humble
yourself before me? Let my people go, so that they may worship me. 4
For if you refuse to let my people go, tomorrow I will bring locusts into
your country. 5 They shall cover the surface of the land, so that no one
will be able to see the land. They shall devour the last remnant left you
after the hail, and they shall devour every tree of yours that grows in
the field. 6 They shall fill your houses, and the houses of all your
officials and of all the Egyptians — something that neither your
parents nor your grandparents have seen, from the day they came on
earth to this day.'" Then he turned and went out from Pharaoh.
7 Pharaoh's officials said to him, "How long shall this fellow be a snare
to us? Let the people go, so that they may worship the LORD their God;
do you not yet understand that Egypt is ruined?" 8 So Moses and
Aaron were brought back to Pharaoh, and he said to them, "Go,
worship the LORD your God! But which ones are to go?" 9 Moses said,
"We will go with our young and our old; we will go with our sons and
daughters and with our flocks and herds, because we have the LORD's
festival to celebrate." 10 He said to them, "The LORD indeed will be
with you, if ever I let your little ones go with you! Plainly, you have
some evil purpose in mind. 11 No, never! Your men may go and worship
the LORD, for that is what you are asking." And they were driven out
from Pharaoh's presence.
12 Then the LORD said to Moses, "Stretch out your hand over the land
of Egypt, so that the locusts may come upon it and eat every plant in
the land, all that the hail has left." 13 So Moses stretched out his staff
over the land of Egypt, and the LORD brought an east wind upon the
land all that day and all that night; when morning came, the east wind
had brought the locusts. 14 The locusts came upon all the land of Egypt
and settled on the whole country of Egypt, such a dense swarm of
locusts as had never been before, nor ever shall be again. 15 They
covered the surface of the whole land, so that the land was black; and
they ate all the plants in the land and all the fruit of the trees that the

144

EXODUS 145

hail had left; nothing green was left, no tree, no plant in the field, in
all the land of Egypt. 16 Pharaoh hurriedly summoned Moses and
Aaron and said, "I have sinned against the LORD your God, and against
you. 17 Do forgive my sin just this once, and pray to the LORD your God
that at the least he remove this deadly thing from me." 18 So he went
out from Pharaoh and prayed to the LORD. 19 The LORD changed the
wind into a very strong west wind, which lifted the locusts and drove
them into the Red Sea; not a single locust was left in all the country of
Egypt. 20 But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he would not let
the Israelites go.
Ninth plague: dense darkness
21 Then the LORD said to Moses, "Stretch out your hand toward heaven
so that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, a darkness that
can be felt." 22 So Moses stretched out his hand toward heaven, and
there was dense darkness in all the land of Egypt for three days. 23
People could not see one another, and for three days they could not
move from where they were; but all the Israelites had light where they
lived. 24 Then Pharaoh summoned Moses, and said, "Go, worship the
LORD. Only your flocks and your herds shall remain behind. Even your
children may go with you." 25 But Moses said, "You must also let us
have sacrifices and burnt offerings to sacrifice to the LORD our God. 26
Our livestock also must go with us; not a hoof shall be left behind, for
we must choose some of them for the worship of the LORD our God,
and we will not know what to use to worship the LORD until we arrive
there." 27 But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he was
unwilling to let them go. 28 Then Pharaoh said to him, "Get away from
me! Take care that you do not see my face again, for on the day you
see my face you shall die." 29 Moses said, "Just as you say! I will never
see your face again."
[Exodus 11]
The announcement of the final plague, the death of the firstborn
1 The LORD said to Moses, "I will bring one more plague upon Pharaoh
and upon Egypt; afterwards he will let you go from here; indeed, when
he lets you go, he will drive you away. 2 Tell the people that every man

145

EXODUS 146

is to ask his neighbor and every woman is to ask her neighbor for
objects of silver and gold." 3 The LORD gave the people favor in the
sight of the Egyptians. Moreover, Moses himself was a man of great
importance in the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh's officials and
in the sight of the people.
4 Moses said, "Thus says the LORD: About midnight I will go out
through Egypt. 5 Every firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die, from the
firstborn of Pharaoh who sits on his throne to the firstborn of the
female slave who is behind the handmill, and all the firstborn of the
livestock. 6 Then there will be a loud cry throughout the whole land of
Egypt, such as has never been or will ever be again. 7 But not a dog
shall growl at any of the Israelites — not at people, not at animals — so
that you may know that the LORD makes a distinction between Egypt
and Israel. 8 Then all these officials of yours shall come down to me,
and bow low to me, saying, 'Leave us, you and all the people who
follow you.' After that I will leave." And in hot anger he left Pharaoh.
9 The LORD said to Moses, "Pharaoh will not listen to you, in order that
my wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt." 10 Moses and
Aaron performed all these wonders before Pharaoh; but the LORD
hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he did not let the people of Israel go
out of his land.
[Exodus 12]
The festivals of Passover and unleavened bread
1 The LORD said to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt: 2 This month
shall mark for you the beginning of months; it shall be the first month
of the year for you. 3 Tell the whole congregation of Israel that on the
tenth of this month they are to take a lamb for each family, a lamb for
each household. 4 If a household is too small for a whole lamb, it shall
join its closest neighbor in obtaining one; the lamb shall be divided in
proportion to the number of people who eat of it. 5 Your lamb shall be
without blemish, a year-old male; you may take it from the sheep or
from the goats. 6 You shall keep it until the fourteenth day of this
month; then the whole assembled congregation of Israel shall
slaughter it at twilight. 7 They shall take some of the blood and put it

146

EXODUS 147

on the two doorposts and the lintel of the houses in which they eat it.
8 They shall eat the lamb that same night; they shall eat it roasted over
the fire with unleavened bread and bitter herbs. 9 Do not eat any of it
raw or boiled in water, but roasted over the fire, with its head, legs,
and inner organs. 10 You shall let none of it remain until the morning;
anything that remains until the morning you shall burn. 11 This is how
you shall eat it: your loins girded, your sandals on your feet, and your
staff in your hand; and you shall eat it hurriedly. It is the passover of
the LORD. 12 For I will pass through the land of Egypt that night, and I
will strike down every firstborn in the land of Egypt, both human
beings and animals; on all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgments: I
am the LORD. 13 The blood shall be a sign for you on the houses where
you live: when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and no plague shall
destroy you when I strike the land of Egypt.
14 This day shall be a day of remembrance for you. You shall celebrate
it as a festival to the LORD; throughout your generations you shall
observe it as a perpetual ordinance. 15 Seven days you shall eat
unleavened bread; on the first day you shall remove leaven from your
houses, for whoever eats leavened bread from the first day until the
seventh day shall be cut off from Israel. 16 On the first day you shall
hold a solemn assembly, and on the seventh day a solemn assembly; no
work shall be done on those days; only what everyone must eat, that
alone may be prepared by you. 17 You shall observe the festival of
unleavened bread, for on this very day I brought your companies out
of the land of Egypt: you shall observe this day throughout your
generations as a perpetual ordinance. 18 In the first month, from the
evening of the fourteenth day until the evening of the twenty-first
day, you shall eat unleavened bread. 19 For seven days no leaven shall
be found in your houses; for whoever eats what is leavened shall be cut
off from the congregation of Israel, whether an alien or a native of the
land. 20 You shall eat nothing leavened; in all your settlements you
shall eat unleavened bread.
21 Then Moses called all the elders of Israel and said to them, "Go,
select lambs for your families, and slaughter the passover lamb. 22 Take
a bunch of hyssop, dip it in the blood that is in the basin, and touch the
lintel and the two doorposts with the blood in the basin. None of you

147

EXODUS 148

shall go outside the door of your house until morning. 23 For the LORD
will pass through to strike down the Egyptians; when he sees the blood
on the lintel and on the two doorposts, the LORD will pass over that
door and will not allow the destroyer to enter your houses to strike
you down. 24 You shall observe this rite as a perpetual ordinance for
you and your children. 25 When you come to the land that the LORD
will give you, as he has promised, you shall keep this observance. 26
And when your children ask you, 'What do you mean by this
observance?' 27 you shall say, 'It is the passover sacrifice to the LORD,
for he passed over the houses of the Israelites in Egypt, when he struck
down the Egyptians but spared our houses.'" And the people bowed
down and worshiped.
28 The Israelites went and did just as the LORD had commanded Moses
and Aaron.
The Israelites leave Egypt; the conclusion of the tenth plague: the
death of the firstborn
29 At midnight the LORD struck down all the firstborn in the land of
Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sat on his throne to the
firstborn of the prisoner who was in the dungeon, and all the firstborn
of the livestock. 30 Pharaoh arose in the night, he and all his officials
and all the Egyptians; and there was a loud cry in Egypt, for there was
not a house without someone dead. 31 Then he summoned Moses and
Aaron in the night, and said, "Rise up, go away from my people, both
you and the Israelites! Go, worship the LORD, as you said. 32 Take your
flocks and your herds, as you said, and be gone. And bring a blessing
on me too!"
33 The Egyptians urged the people to hasten their departure from the
land, for they said, "We shall all be dead." 34 So the people took their
dough before it was leavened, with their kneading bowls wrapped up
in their cloaks on their shoulders. 35 The Israelites had done as Moses
told them; they had asked the Egyptians for jewelry of silver and gold,
and for clothing, 36 and the LORD had given the people favor in the
sight of the Egyptians, so that they let them have what they asked.
And so they plundered the Egyptians.

148

EXODUS 149

The first stage of the journey
37 The Israelites journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred
thousand men on foot, besides children. 38 A mixed crowd also went
up with them, and livestock in great numbers, both flocks and herds.
39 They baked unleavened cakes of the dough that they had brought
out of Egypt; it was not leavened, because they were driven out of
Egypt and could not wait, nor had they prepared any provisions for
themselves.
40 The time that the Israelites had lived in Egypt was four hundred
thirty years. 41 At the end of four hundred thirty years, on that very
day, all the companies of the LORD went out from the land of Egypt. 42
That was for the LORD a night of vigil, to bring them out of the land of
Egypt. That same night is a vigil to be kept for the LORD by all the
Israelites throughout their generations.
43 The LORD said to Moses and Aaron: This is the ordinance for the
passover: no foreigner shall eat of it, 44 but any slave who has been
purchased may eat of it after he has been circumcised; 45 no bound or
hired servant may eat of it. 46 It shall be eaten in one house; you shall
not take any of the animal outside the house, and you shall not break
any of its bones. 47 The whole congregation of Israel shall celebrate it.
48 If an alien who resides with you wants to celebrate the passover to
the LORD, all his males shall be circumcised; then he may draw near to
celebrate it; he shall be regarded as a native of the land. But no
uncircumcised person shall eat of it; 49 there shall be one law for the
native and for the alien who resides among you.
50 All the Israelites did just as the LORD had commanded Moses and
Aaron. 51 That very day the LORD brought the Israelites out of the land
of Egypt, company by company.

149

EXODUS 150

[Exodus 13]
Consecration of the firstborn and Festival of Unleavened Bread
1 The LORD said to Moses: 2 Consecrate to me all the firstborn; whatever
is the first to open the womb among the Israelites, of human beings
and animals, is mine.
3 Moses said to the people, "Remember this day on which you came
out of Egypt, out of the house of slavery, because the LORD brought
you out from there by strength of hand; no leavened bread shall be
eaten. 4 Today, in the month of Abib, you are going out. 5 When the
LORD brings you into the land of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the
Amorites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which he swore to your
ancestors to give you, a land flowing with milk and honey, you shall
keep this observance in this month. 6 Seven days you shall eat
unleavened bread, and on the seventh day there shall be a festival to
the LORD. 7 Unleavened bread shall be eaten for seven days; no
leavened bread shall be seen in your possession, and no leaven shall be
seen among you in all your territory. 8 You shall tell your child on that
day, 'It is because of what the LORD did for me when I came out of
Egypt.' 9 It shall serve for you as a sign on your hand and as a reminder
on your forehead, so that the teaching of the LORD may be on your lips;
for with a strong hand the LORD brought you out of Egypt. 10 You shall
keep this ordinance at its proper time from year to year.
11 "When the LORD has brought you into the land of the Canaanites, as
he swore to you and your ancestors, and has given it to you, 12 you
shall set apart to the LORD all that first opens the womb. All the
firstborn of your livestock that are males shall be the LORD's. 13 But
every firstborn donkey you shall redeem with a sheep; if you do not
redeem it, you must break its neck. Every firstborn male among your
children you shall redeem. 14 When in the future your child asks you,
'What does this mean?' you shall answer, 'By strength of hand the LORD
brought us out of Egypt, from the house of slavery. 15 When Pharaoh
stubbornly refused to let us go, the LORD killed all the firstborn in the
land of Egypt, from human firstborn to the firstborn of animals.
Therefore I sacrifice to the LORD every male that first opens the womb,
but every firstborn of my sons I redeem.' 16 It shall serve as a sign on

150

EXODUS 151

your hand and as an emblem on your forehead that by strength of
hand the LORD brought us out of Egypt."
God rescues Israel at the sea (told first in prose)
17 When Pharaoh let the people go, God did not lead them by way of
the land of the Philistines, although that was nearer; for God thought,
"If the people face war, they may change their minds and return to
Egypt." 18 So God led the people by the roundabout way of the
wilderness toward the Red Sea. The Israelites went up out of the land
of Egypt prepared for battle. 19 And Moses took with him the bones of
Joseph who had required a solemn oath of the Israelites, saying, "God
will surely take notice of you, and then you must carry my bones with
you from here." 20 They set out from Succoth, and camped at Etham,
on the edge of the wilderness. 21 The LORD went in front of them in a
pillar of cloud by day, to lead them along the way, and in a pillar of
fire by night, to give them light, so that they might travel by day and
by night. 22 Neither the pillar of cloud by day nor the pillar of fire by
night left its place in front of the people.
[Exodus 14]
1 Then the LORD said to Moses: 2 Tell the Israelites to turn back and
camp in front of Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, in front of
Baal-zephon; you shall camp opposite it, by the sea. 3 Pharaoh will say
of the Israelites, "They are wandering aimlessly in the land; the
wilderness has closed in on them." 4 I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and
he will pursue them, so that I will gain glory for myself over Pharaoh
and all his army; and the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD. And
they did so.
5 When the king of Egypt was told that the people had fled, the minds
of Pharaoh and his officials were changed toward the people, and they
said, "What have we done, letting Israel leave our service?" 6 So he
had his chariot made ready, and took his army with him; 7 he took six
hundred picked chariots and all the other chariots of Egypt with
officers over all of them. 8 The LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh
king of Egypt and he pursued the Israelites, who were going out

151

EXODUS 152

boldly. 9 The Egyptians pursued them, all Pharaoh's horses and
chariots, his chariot drivers and his army; they overtook them camped
by the sea, by Pi-hahiroth, in front of Baal-zephon.
10 As Pharaoh drew near, the Israelites looked back, and there were
the Egyptians advancing on them. In great fear the Israelites cried out
to the LORD. 11 They said to Moses, "Was it because there were no
graves in Egypt that you have taken us away to die in the wilderness?
What have you done to us, bringing us out of Egypt? 12 Is this not the
very thing we told you in Egypt, 'Let us alone and let us serve the
Egyptians'? For it would have been better for us to serve the Egyptians
than to die in the wilderness." 13 But Moses said to the people, "Do
not be afraid, stand firm, and see the deliverance that the LORD will
accomplish for you today; for the Egyptians whom you see today you
shall never see again. 14 The LORD will fight for you, and you have only
to keep still."
15 Then the LORD said to Moses, "Why do you cry out to me? Tell the
Israelites to go forward. 16 But you lift up your staff, and stretch out
your hand over the sea and divide it, that the Israelites may go into the
sea on dry ground. 17 Then I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians so
that they will go in after them; and so I will gain glory for myself over
Pharaoh and all his army, his chariots, and his chariot drivers. 18 And
the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD, when I have gained glory
for myself over Pharaoh, his chariots, and his chariot drivers."
19 The angel of God who was going before the Israelite army moved
and went behind them; and the pillar of cloud moved from in front of
them and took its place behind them. 20 It came between the army of
Egypt and the army of Israel. And so the cloud was there with the
darkness, and it lit up the night; one did not come near the other all
night.
21 Then Moses stretched out his hand over the sea. The LORD drove the
sea back by a strong east wind all night, and turned the sea into dry
land; and the waters were divided. 22 The Israelites went into the sea
on dry ground, the waters forming a wall for them on their right and
on their left. 23 The Egyptians pursued, and went into the sea after

152

EXODUS 153

them, all of Pharaoh's horses, chariots, and chariot drivers. 24 At the
morning watch the LORD in the pillar of fire and cloud looked down
upon the Egyptian army, and threw the Egyptian army into panic. 25
He clogged their chariot wheels so that they turned with difficulty. The
Egyptians said, "Let us flee from the Israelites, for the LORD is fighting
for them against Egypt."
26 Then the LORD said to Moses, "Stretch out your hand over the sea, so
that the water may come back upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots
and chariot drivers." 27 So Moses stretched out his hand over the sea,
and at dawn the sea returned to its normal depth. As the Egyptians
fled before it, the LORD tossed the Egyptians into the sea. 28 The waters
returned and covered the chariots and the chariot drivers, the entire
army of Pharaoh that had followed them into the sea; not one of them
remained. 29 But the Israelites walked on dry ground through the sea,
the waters forming a wall for them on their right and on their left.
30 Thus the LORD saved Israel that day from the Egyptians; and Israel
saw the Egyptians dead on the seashore. 31 Israel saw the great work
that the LORD did against the Egyptians. So the people feared the LORD
and believed in the LORD and in his servant Moses.
[Exodus 15]
1 Then Moses and the Israelites sang this song to the LORD:
"I will sing to the LORD, for he has triumphed gloriously;
horse and rider he has thrown into the sea.
2 The LORD is my strength and my might,
and he has become my salvation;
this is my God, and I will praise him,
my father's God, and I will exalt him.
3 The LORD is a warrior;
the LORD is his name.
4 "Pharaoh's chariots and his army he cast into the sea;
his picked officers were sunk in the Red Sea.

153

EXODUS 154

5 The floods covered them;
they went down into the depths like a stone.
6 Your right hand, O LORD, glorious in power —
your right hand, O LORD, shattered the enemy.
7 In the greatness of your majesty you overthrew your adversaries;
you sent out your fury, it consumed them like stubble.
8 At the blast of your nostrils the waters piled up,
the floods stood up in a heap;
the deeps congealed in the heart of the sea.
9 The enemy said, 'I will pursue, I will overtake,
I will divide the spoil, my desire shall have its fill of them.
I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.'
10 You blew with your wind, the sea covered them;
they sank like lead in the mighty waters.
11 "Who is like you, O LORD, among the gods?
Who is like you, majestic in holiness,
awesome in splendor, doing wonders?
12 You stretched out your right hand,
the earth swallowed them.
13 "In your steadfast love you led the people whom you redeemed;
you guided them by your strength to your holy abode.
14 The peoples heard, they trembled;
pangs seized the inhabitants of Philistia.
15 Then the chiefs of Edom were dismayed;
trembling seized the leaders of Moab;
all the inhabitants of Canaan melted away.
16 Terror and dread fell upon them;
by the might of your arm, they became still as a stone
until your people, O LORD, passed by,
until the people whom you acquired passed by.
17 You brought them in and planted them on the mountain of
your own possession, the place, O LORD, that you made
your abode, the sanctuary, O LORD, that your hands
have established.
18 The LORD will reign forever and ever."

154

EXODUS 155

19 When the horses of Pharaoh with his chariots and his chariot drivers
went into the sea, the LORD brought back the waters of the sea upon
them; but the Israelites walked through the sea on dry ground.
20 Then the prophet Miriam, Aaron's sister, took a tambourine in her
hand; and all the women went out after her with tambourines and
with dancing. 21 And Miriam sang to them:
"Sing to the LORD, for he has triumphed gloriously;
horse and rider he has thrown into the sea."
God journeys with Israel to Mount Sinai; God makes the water potable
at Marah
22 Then Moses ordered Israel to set out from the Red Sea, and they
went into the wilderness of Shur. They went three days in the
wilderness and found no water. 23 When they came to Marah, they
could not drink the water of Marah because it was bitter. That is why it
was called Marah. 24 And the people complained against Moses,
saying, "What shall we drink?" 25 He cried out to the LORD; and the
LORD showed him a piece of wood; he threw it into the water, and the
water became sweet.
There the LORD made for them a statute and an ordinance and there he
put them to the test. 26 He said, "If you will listen carefully to the voice
of the LORD your God, and do what is right in his sight, and give heed
to his commandments and keep all his statutes, I will not bring upon
you any of the diseases that I brought upon the Egyptians; for I am the
LORD who heals you."
27 Then they came to Elim, where there were twelve springs of water
and seventy palm trees; and they camped there by the water.
[Exodus 16]
God provides manna and quails
1 The whole congregation of the Israelites set out from Elim; and Israel
came to the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the
fifteenth day of the second month after they had departed from the

155

EXODUS 156

land of Egypt. 2 The whole congregation of the Israelites complained
against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness. 3 The Israelites said to
them, "If only we had died by the hand of the LORD in the land of
Egypt, when we sat by the fleshpots and ate our fill of bread; for you
have brought us out into this wilderness to kill this whole assembly
with hunger."
4 Then the LORD said to Moses, "I am going to rain bread from heaven
for you, and each day the people shall go out and gather enough for
that day. In that way I will test them, whether they will follow my
instruction or not. 5 On the sixth day, when they prepare what they
bring in, it will be twice as much as they gather on other days." 6 So
Moses and Aaron said to all the Israelites, "In the evening you shall
know that it was the LORD who brought you out of the land of Egypt, 7
and in the morning you shall see the glory of the LORD, because he has
heard your complaining against the LORD. For what are we, that you
complain against us?" 8 And Moses said, "When the LORD gives you
meat to eat in the evening and your fill of bread in the morning,
because the LORD has heard the complaining that you utter against him
— what are we? Your complaining is not against us but against the
LORD."
9 Then Moses said to Aaron, "Say to the whole congregation of the
Israelites, 'Draw near to the LORD, for he has heard your complaining.'"
10 And as Aaron spoke to the whole congregation of the Israelites,
they looked toward the wilderness, and the glory of the LORD appeared
in the cloud. 11 The LORD spoke to Moses and said, 12 "I have heard the
complaining of the Israelites; say to them, 'At twilight you shall eat
meat, and in the morning you shall have your fill of bread; then you
shall know that I am the LORD your God.'"
13 In the evening quails came up and covered the camp; and in the
morning there was a layer of dew around the camp. 14 When the layer
of dew lifted, there on the surface of the wilderness was a fine flaky
substance, as fine as frost on the ground. 15 When the Israelites saw it,
they said to one another, "What is it?" For they did not know what it
was. Moses said to them, "It is the bread that the LORD has given you to
eat. 16 This is what the LORD has commanded: 'Gather as much of it as

156

EXODUS 157

each of you needs, an omer to a person according to the number of
persons, all providing for those in their own tents.'" 17 The Israelites
did so, some gathering more, some less. 18 But when they measured it
with an omer, those who gathered much had nothing over, and those
who gathered little had no shortage; they gathered as much as each of
them needed. 19 And Moses said to them, "Let no one leave any of it
over until morning." 20 But they did not listen to Moses; some left part
of it until morning, and it bred worms and became foul. And Moses
was angry with them. 21 Morning by morning they gathered it, as
much as each needed; but when the sun grew hot, it melted.
22 On the sixth day they gathered twice as much food, two omers
apiece. When all the leaders of the congregation came and told Moses,
23 he said to them, "This is what the LORD has commanded: 'Tomorrow
is a day of solemn rest, a holy sabbath to the LORD; bake what you
want to bake and boil what you want to boil, and all that is left over
put aside to be kept until morning.'" 24 So they put it aside until
morning, as Moses commanded them; and it did not become foul, and
there were no worms in it. 25 Moses said, "Eat it today, for today is a
sabbath to the LORD; today you will not find it in the field. 26 Six days
you shall gather it; but on the seventh day, which is a sabbath, there
will be none."
27 On the seventh day some of the people went out to gather, and
they found none. 28 The LORD said to Moses, "How long will you refuse
to keep my commandments and instructions? 29 See! The LORD has
given you the sabbath, therefore on the sixth day he gives you food for
two days; each of you stay where you are; do not leave your place on
the seventh day." 30 So the people rested on the seventh day.
31 The house of Israel called it manna; it was like coriander seed, white,
and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey. 32 Moses said,
"This is what the LORD has commanded: 'Let an omer of it be kept
throughout your generations, in order that they may see the food with
which I fed you in the wilderness, when I brought you out of the land
of Egypt.'" 33 And Moses said to Aaron, "Take a jar, and put an omer
of manna in it, and place it before the LORD, to be kept throughout
your generations." 34 As the LORD commanded Moses, so Aaron placed

157

EXODUS 158

it before the covenant, for safekeeping. 35 The Israelites ate manna
forty years, until they came to a habitable land; they ate manna, until
they came to the border of the land of Canaan. 36 An omer is a tenth
of an ephah.
[Exodus 17]
Water flows out of the rock at Massah and Meribah
1 From the wilderness of Sin the whole congregation of the Israelites
journeyed by stages, as the LORD commanded. They camped at
Rephidim, but there was no water for the people to drink. 2 The
people quarreled with Moses, and said, "Give us water to drink."
Moses said to them, "Why do you quarrel with me? Why do you test
the LORD?" 3 But the people thirsted there for water; and the people
complained against Moses and said, "Why did you bring us out of
Egypt, to kill us and our children and livestock with thirst?" 4 So Moses
cried out to the LORD, "What shall I do with this people? They are
almost ready to stone me." 5 The LORD said to Moses, "Go on ahead of
the people, and take some of the elders of Israel with you; take in your
hand the staff with which you struck the Nile, and go. 6 I will be
standing there in front of you on the rock at Horeb. Strike the rock,
and water will come out of it, so that the people may drink." Moses
did so, in the sight of the elders of Israel. 7 He called the place Massah
and Meribah, because the Israelites quarreled and tested the LORD,
saying, "Is the LORD among us or not?"
God defeats the Amalekites
8 Then Amalek came and fought with Israel at Rephidim. 9 Moses said
to Joshua, "Choose some men for us and go out, fight with Amalek.
Tomorrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the staff of God in my
hand." 10 So Joshua did as Moses told him, and fought with Amalek,
while Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill. 11
Whenever Moses held up his hand, Israel prevailed; and whenever he
lowered his hand, Amalek prevailed. 12 But Moses' hands grew weary;
so they took a stone and put it under him, and he sat on it. Aaron and
Hur held up his hands, one on one side, and the other on the other

158

EXODUS 159

side; so his hands were steady until the sun set. 13 And Joshua defeated
Amalek and his people with the sword.
14 Then the LORD said to Moses, "Write this as a reminder in a book and
recite it in the hearing of Joshua: I will utterly blot out the
remembrance of Amalek from under heaven." 15 And Moses built an
altar and called it, The LORD is my banner. 16 He said, "A hand upon the
banner of the LORD! The LORD will have war with Amalek from
generation to generation."
[Exodus 18]
Jethro visits
1 Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses' father-in-law, heard of all that
God had done for Moses and for his people Israel, how the LORD had
brought Israel out of Egypt. 2 After Moses had sent away his wife
Zipporah, his father-in-law Jethro took her back, 3 along with her two
sons. The name of the one was Gershom (for he said, "I have been an
alien in a foreign land"), 4 and the name of the other, Eliezer (for he
said, "The God of my father was my help, and delivered me from the
sword of Pharaoh"). 5 Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, came into the
wilderness where Moses was encamped at the mountain of God,
bringing Moses' sons and wife to him. 6 He sent word to Moses, "I,
your father-in-law Jethro, am coming to you, with your wife and her
two sons." 7 Moses went out to meet his father-in-law; he bowed
down and kissed him; each asked after the other's welfare, and they
went into the tent. 8 Then Moses told his father-in-law all that the
LORD had done to Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel's sake, all the
hardship that had beset them on the way, and how the LORD had
delivered them. 9 Jethro rejoiced for all the good that the LORD had
done to Israel, in delivering them from the Egyptians.
10 Jethro said, "Blessed be the LORD, who has delivered you from the
Egyptians and from Pharaoh. 11 Now I know that the LORD is greater
than all gods, because he delivered the people from the Egyptians,
when they dealt arrogantly with them." 12 And Jethro, Moses' fatherin-law, brought a burnt offering and sacrifices to God; and Aaron came

159

EXODUS 160

with all the elders of Israel to eat bread with Moses' father-in-law in
the presence of God.
13 The next day Moses sat as judge for the people, while the people
stood around him from morning until evening. 14 When Moses' fatherin-law saw all that he was doing for the people, he said, "What is this
that you are doing for the people? Why do you sit alone, while all the
people stand around you from morning until evening?" 15 Moses said
to his father-in-law, "Because the people come to me to inquire of
God. 16 When they have a dispute, they come to me and I decide
between one person and another, and I make known to them the
statutes and instructions of God." 17 Moses' father-in-law said to him,
"What you are doing is not good. 18 You will surely wear yourself out,
both you and these people with you. For the task is too heavy for you;
you cannot do it alone. 19 Now listen to me. I will give you counsel, and
God be with you! You should represent the people before God, and
you should bring their cases before God; 20 teach them the statutes
and instructions and make known to them the way they are to go and
the things they are to do. 21 You should also look for able men among
all the people, men who fear God, are trustworthy, and hate dishonest
gain; set such men over them as officers over thousands, hundreds,
fifties and tens. 22 Let them sit as judges for the people at all times; let
them bring every important case to you, but decide every minor case
themselves. So it will be easier for you, and they will bear the burden
with you. 23 If you do this, and God so commands you, then you will be
able to endure, and all these people will go to their home in peace."
24 So Moses listened to his father-in-law and did all that he had said.
25 Moses chose able men from all Israel and appointed them as heads
over the people, as officers over thousands, hundreds, fifties, and tens.
26 And they judged the people at all times; hard cases they brought to
Moses, but any minor case they decided themselves. 27 Then Moses let
his father-in-law depart, and he went off to his own country.

160

EXODUS 161

[Exodus 19]
God establishes the covenant with Israel; God appears for the second
time at Sinai/Horeb
1 On the third new moon after the Israelites had gone out of the land
of Egypt, on that very day, they came into the wilderness of Sinai. 2
They had journeyed from Rephidim, entered the wilderness of Sinai,
and camped in the wilderness; Israel camped there in front of the
mountain. 3 Then Moses went up to God; the LORD called to him from
the mountain, saying, "Thus you shall say to the house of Jacob, and
tell the Israelites: 4 You have seen what I did to the Egyptians, and how
I bore you on eagles' wings and brought you to myself. 5 Now
therefore, if you obey my voice and keep my covenant, you shall be my
treasured possession out of all the peoples. Indeed, the whole earth is
mine, 6 but you shall be for me a priestly kingdom and a holy nation.
These are the words that you shall speak to the Israelites."
7 So Moses came, summoned the elders of the people, and set before
them all these words that the LORD had commanded him. 8 The people
all answered as one: "Everything that the LORD has spoken we will do."
Moses reported the words of the people to the LORD. 9 Then the LORD
said to Moses, "I am going to come to you in a dense cloud, in order
that the people may hear when I speak with you and so trust you ever
after."
When Moses had told the words of the people to the LORD, 10 the LORD
said to Moses: "Go to the people and consecrate them today and
tomorrow. Have them wash their clothes 11 and prepare for the third
day, because on the third day the LORD will come down upon Mount
Sinai in the sight of all the people. 12 You shall set limits for the people
all around, saying, 'Be careful not to go up the mountain or to touch
the edge of it. Any who touch the mountain shall be put to death. 13
No hand shall touch them, but they shall be stoned or shot with
arrows; whether animal or human being, they shall not live.' When the
trumpet sounds a long blast, they may go up on the mountain." 14 So
Moses went down from the mountain to the people. He consecrated
the people, and they washed their clothes. 15 And he said to the
people, "Prepare for the third day; do not go near a woman."

161

EXODUS 162

16 On the morning of the third day there was thunder and lightning, as
well as a thick cloud on the mountain, and a blast of a trumpet so loud
that all the people who were in the camp trembled. 17 Moses brought
the people out of the camp to meet God. They took their stand at the
foot of the mountain. 18 Now Mount Sinai was wrapped in smoke,
because the LORD had descended upon it in fire; the smoke went up
like the smoke of a kiln, while the whole mountain shook violently. 19
As the blast of the trumpet grew louder and louder, Moses would
speak and God would answer him in thunder. 20 When the LORD
descended upon Mount Sinai, to the top of the mountain, the LORD
summoned Moses to the top of the mountain, and Moses went up. 21
Then the LORD said to Moses, "Go down and warn the people not to
break through to the LORD to look; otherwise many of them will perish.
22 Even the priests who approach the LORD must consecrate themselves
or the LORD will break out against them." 23 Moses said to the LORD,
"The people are not permitted to come up to Mount Sinai; for you
yourself warned us, saying, 'Set limits around the mountain and keep it
holy.'" 24 The LORD said to him, "Go down, and come up bringing
Aaron with you; but do not let either the priests or the people break
through to come up to the LORD; otherwise he will break out against
them." 25 So Moses went down to the people and told them.
[Exodus 20]
The Ten Commandments
1 Then God spoke all these words:
2 I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt,
out of the house of slavery; 3 you shall have no other gods before me.
4 You shall not make for yourself an idol, whether in the form of
anything that is in heaven above, or that is on the earth beneath, or
that is in the water under the earth. 5 You shall not bow down to them
or worship them; for I the LORD your God am a jealous God, punishing
children for the iniquity of parents, to the third and the fourth
generation of those who reject me, 6 but showing steadfast love to the
thousandth generation of those who love me and keep my
commandments.

162

EXODUS 163

7 You shall not make wrongful use of the name of the LORD your God,
for the LORD will not acquit anyone who misuses his name.
8 Remember the sabbath day, and keep it holy. 9 Six days you shall
labor and do all your work. 10 But the seventh day is a sabbath to the
LORD your God; you shall not do any work — you, your son or your
daughter, your male or female slave, your livestock, or the alien
resident in your towns. 11 For in six days the LORD made heaven and
earth, the sea, and all that is in them, but rested the seventh day;
therefore the LORD blessed the sabbath day and consecrated it.
12 Honor your father and your mother, so that your days may be long
in the land that the LORD your God is giving you.
13 You shall not murder.
14 You shall not commit adultery.
15 You shall not steal.
16 You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor.
17 You shall not covet your neighbor's house; you shall not covet your
neighbor's wife, or male or female slave, or ox, or donkey, or anything
that belongs to your neighbor.
The people request Moses as covenant mediator
18 When all the people witnessed the thunder and lightning, the sound
of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking, they were afraid and
trembled and stood at a distance, 19 and said to Moses, "You speak to
us, and we will listen; but do not let God speak to us, or we will die."
20 Moses said to the people, "Do not be afraid; for God has come only
to test you and to put the fear of him upon you so that you do not
sin." 21 Then the people stood at a distance, while Moses drew near to
the thick darkness where God was.

163

EXODUS 164

The Covenant Collection, or Book of the Covenant; regulations for
worship
22 The LORD said to Moses: Thus you shall say to the Israelites: "You
have seen for yourselves that I spoke with you from heaven. 23 You
shall not make gods of silver alongside me, nor shall you make for
yourselves gods of gold. 24 You need make for me only an altar of
earth and sacrifice on it your burnt offerings and your offerings of
well-being, your sheep and your oxen; in every place where I cause my
name to be remembered I will come to you and bless you. 25 But if you
make for me an altar of stone, do not build it of hewn stones; for if
you use a chisel upon it you profane it. 26 You shall not go up by steps
to my altar, so that your nakedness may not be exposed on it."
[Exodus 21]
Case laws; the rights of slaves
1 These are the ordinances that you shall set before them:
2 When you buy a male Hebrew slave, he shall serve six years, but in
the seventh he shall go out a free person, without debt. 3 If he comes
in single, he shall go out single; if he comes in married, then his wife
shall go out with him. 4 If his master gives him a wife and she bears
him sons or daughters, the wife and her children shall be her master's
and he shall go out alone. 5 But if the slave declares, "I love my master,
my wife, and my children; I will not go out a free person," 6 then his
master shall bring him before God. He shall be brought to the door or
the doorpost; and his master shall pierce his ear with an awl; and he
shall serve him for life.
7 When a man sells his daughter as a slave, she shall not go out as the
male slaves do. 8 If she does not please her master, who designated her
for himself, then he shall let her be redeemed; he shall have no right to
sell her to a foreign people, since he has dealt unfairly with her. 9 If he
designates her for his son, he shall deal with her as with a daughter. 10
If he takes another wife to himself, he shall not diminish the food,
clothing, or marital rights of the first wife. 11 And if he does not do

164

EXODUS 165

these three things for her, she shall go out without debt, without
payment of money.
Laws protecting human beings
12 Whoever strikes a person mortally shall be put to death. 13 If it was
not premeditated, but came about by an act of God, then I will appoint
for you a place to which the killer may flee. 14 But if someone willfully
attacks and kills another by treachery, you shall take the killer from my
altar for execution.
15 Whoever strikes father or mother shall be put to death.
16 Whoever kidnaps a person, whether that person has been sold or is
still held in possession, shall be put to death.
17 Whoever curses father or mother shall be put to death.
18 When individuals quarrel and one strikes the other with a stone or
fist so that the injured party, though not dead, is confined to bed, 19
but recovers and walks around outside with the help of a staff, then
the assailant shall be free of liability, except to pay for the loss of time,
and to arrange for full recovery.
20 When a slaveowner strikes a male or female slave with a rod and
the slave dies immediately, the owner shall be punished. 21 But if the
slave survives a day or two, there is no punishment; for the slave is the
owner's property.
22 When people who are fighting injure a pregnant woman so that
there is a miscarriage, and yet no further harm follows, the one
responsible shall be fined what the woman's husband demands, paying
as much as the judges determine. 23 If any harm follows, then you shall
give life for life, 24 eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot
for foot, 25 burn for burn, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.
26 When a slaveowner strikes the eye of a male or female slave,
destroying it, the owner shall let the slave go, a free person, to

165

EXODUS 166

compensate for the eye. 27 If the owner knocks out a tooth of a male
or female slave, the slave shall be let go, a free person, to compensate
for the tooth.
28 When an ox gores a man or a woman to death, the ox shall be
stoned, and its flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of the ox shall
not be liable. 29 If the ox has been accustomed to gore in the past, and
its owner has been warned but has not restrained it, and it kills a man
or a woman, the ox shall be stoned, and its owner also shall be put to
death. 30 If a ransom is imposed on the owner, then the owner shall
pay whatever is imposed for the redemption of the victim's life. 31 If it
gores a boy or a girl, the owner shall be dealt with according to this
same rule. 32 If the ox gores a male or female slave, the owner shall
pay to the slaveowner thirty shekels of silver, and the ox shall be
stoned.
Laws dealing with property and compensation
33 If someone leaves a pit open, or digs a pit and does not cover it, and
an ox or a donkey falls into it, 34 the owner of the pit shall make
restitution, giving money to its owner, but keeping the dead animal.
35 If someone's ox hurts the ox of another, so that it dies, then they
shall sell the live ox and divide the price of it; and the dead animal they
shall also divide. 36 But if it was known that the ox was accustomed to
gore in the past, and its owner has not restrained it, the owner shall
restore ox for ox, but keep the dead animal.
[Exodus 22]
1 When someone steals an ox or a sheep, and slaughters it or sells it,
the thief shall pay five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep. The
thief shall make restitution, but if unable to do so, shall be sold for the
theft. 4 When the animal, whether ox or donkey or sheep, is found
alive in the thief's possession, the thief shall pay double.
2 If a thief is found breaking in, and is beaten to death, no bloodguilt
is incurred; 3 but if it happens after sunrise, bloodguilt is incurred.

166

EXODUS 167

5 When someone causes a field or vineyard to be grazed over, or lets
livestock loose to graze in someone else's field, restitution shall be
made from the best in the owner's field or vineyard.
6 When fire breaks out and catches in thorns so that the stacked grain
or the standing grain or the field is consumed, the one who started the
fire shall make full restitution.
7 When someone delivers to a neighbor money or goods for
safekeeping, and they are stolen from the neighbor's house, then the
thief, if caught, shall pay double. 8 If the thief is not caught, the owner
of the house shall be brought before God, to determine whether or
not the owner had laid hands on the neighbor's goods.
9 In any case of disputed ownership involving ox, donkey, sheep,
clothing, or any other loss, of which one party says, "This is mine," the
case of both parties shall come before God; the one whom God
condemns shall pay double to the other.
10 When someone delivers to another a donkey, ox, sheep, or any
other animal for safekeeping, and it dies or is injured or is carried off,
without anyone seeing it, 11 an oath before the LORD shall decide
between the two of them that the one has not laid hands on the
property of the other; the owner shall accept the oath, and no
restitution shall be made. 12 But if it was stolen, restitution shall be
made to its owner. 13 If it was mangled by beasts, let it be brought as
evidence; restitution shall not be made for the mangled remains.
14 When someone borrows an animal from another and it is injured or
dies, the owner not being present, full restitution shall be made. 15 If
the owner was present, there shall be no restitution; if it was hired,
only the hiring fee is due.
16 When a man seduces a virgin who is not engaged to be married, and
lies with her, he shall give the bride-price for her and make her his
wife. 17 But if her father refuses to give her to him, he shall pay an
amount equal to the bride-price for virgins.

167

EXODUS 168

Social and religious commands
18 You shall not permit a female sorcerer to live.
19 Whoever lies with an animal shall be put to death.
20 Whoever sacrifices to any god, other than the LORD alone, shall be
devoted to destruction.
21 You shall not wrong or oppress a resident alien, for you were aliens
in the land of Egypt. 22 You shall not abuse any widow or orphan. 23 If
you do abuse them, when they cry out to me, I will surely heed their
cry; 24 my wrath will burn, and I will kill you with the sword, and your
wives shall become widows and your children orphans.
25 If you lend money to my people, to the poor among you, you shall
not deal with them as a creditor; you shall not exact interest from
them. 26 If you take your neighbor's cloak in pawn, you shall restore it
before the sun goes down; 27 for it may be your neighbor's only
clothing to use as cover; in what else shall that person sleep? And if
your neighbor cries out to me, I will listen, for I am compassionate.
28 You shall not revile God, or curse a leader of your people.
29 You shall not delay to make offerings from the fullness of your
harvest and from the outflow of your presses.
The firstborn of your sons you shall give to me. 30 You shall do the
same with your oxen and with your sheep: seven days it shall remain
with its mother; on the eighth day you shall give it to me.
31 You shall be people consecrated to me; therefore you shall not eat
any meat that is mangled by beasts in the field; you shall throw it to
the dogs.

168

EXODUS 169

[Exodus 23]
1 You shall not spread a false report. You shall not join hands with the
wicked to act as a malicious witness. 2 You shall not follow a majority
in wrongdoing; when you bear witness in a lawsuit, you shall not side
with the majority so as to pervert justice; 3 nor shall you be partial to
the poor in a lawsuit.
4 When you come upon your enemy's ox or donkey going astray, you
shall bring it back.
5 When you see the donkey of one who hates you lying under its
burden and you would hold back from setting it free, you must help to
set it free.
6 You shall not pervert the justice due to your poor in their lawsuits. 7
Keep far from a false charge, and do not kill the innocent and those in
the right, for I will not acquit the guilty. 8 You shall take no bribe, for
a bribe blinds the officials, and subverts the cause of those who are in
the right.
9 You shall not oppress a resident alien; you know the heart of an
alien, for you were aliens in the land of Egypt.
A ritual calendar
10 For six years you shall sow your land and gather in its yield; 11 but
the seventh year you shall let it rest and lie fallow, so that the poor of
your people may eat; and what they leave the wild animals may eat.
You shall do the same with your vineyard, and with your olive orchard.
12 Six days you shall do your work, but on the seventh day you shall
rest, so that your ox and your donkey may have relief, and your
homeborn slave and the resident alien may be refreshed. 13 Be
attentive to all that I have said to you. Do not invoke the names of
other gods; do not let them be heard on your lips.

169

EXODUS 170

14 Three times in the year you shall hold a festival for me. 15 You shall
observe the festival of unleavened bread; as I commanded you, you
shall eat unleavened bread for seven days at the appointed time in the
month of Abib, for in it you came out of Egypt.
No one shall appear before me empty-handed.
16 You shall observe the festival of harvest, of the first fruits of your
labor, of what you sow in the field. You shall observe the festival of
ingathering at the end of the year, when you gather in from the field
the fruit of your labor. 17 Three times in the year all your males shall
appear before the Lord GOD.
18 You shall not offer the blood of my sacrifice with anything
leavened, or let the fat of my festival remain until the morning.
19 The choicest of the first fruits of your ground you shall bring into
the house of the LORD your God.
You shall not boil a kid in its mother's milk.
The divine warrior will conquer the promised land
20 I am going to send an angel in front of you, to guard you on the
way and to bring you to the place that I have prepared. 21 Be attentive
to him and listen to his voice; do not rebel against him, for he will not
pardon your transgression; for my name is in him.
22 But if you listen attentively to his voice and do all that I say, then I
will be an enemy to your enemies and a foe to your foes.
23 When my angel goes in front of you, and brings you to the
Amorites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Canaanites, the Hivites, and
the Jebusites, and I blot them out, 24 you shall not bow down to their
gods, or worship them, or follow their practices, but you shall utterly
demolish them and break their pillars in pieces. 25 You shall worship
the LORD your God, and I will bless your bread and your water; and I
will take sickness away from among you. 26 No one shall miscarry or be

170

EXODUS 171

barren in your land; I will fulfill the number of your days. 27 I will send
my terror in front of you, and will throw into confusion all the people
against whom you shall come, and I will make all your enemies turn
their backs to you. 28 And I will send the pestilence in front of you,
which shall drive out the Hivites, the Canaanites, and the Hittites from
before you. 29 I will not drive them out from before you in one year, or
the land would become desolate and the wild animals would multiply
against you. 30 Little by little I will drive them out from before you,
until you have increased and possess the land. 31 I will set your borders
from the Red Sea to the sea of the Philistines, and from the wilderness
to the Euphrates; for I will hand over to you the inhabitants of the
land, and you shall drive them out before you. 32 You shall make no
covenant with them and their gods. 33 They shall not live in your land,
or they will make you sin against me; for if you worship their gods, it
will surely be a snare to you.
[Exodus 24]
The covenant is ratified in two ceremonies
1 Then he said to Moses, "Come up to the LORD, you and Aaron, Nadab,
and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel, and worship at a
distance. 2 Moses alone shall come near the LORD; but the others shall
not come near, and the people shall not come up with him."
3 Moses came and told the people all the words of the LORD and all the
ordinances; and all the people answered with one voice, and said, "All
the words that the LORD has spoken we will do." 4 And Moses wrote
down all the words of the LORD. He rose early in the morning, and built
an altar at the foot of the mountain, and set up twelve pillars,
corresponding to the twelve tribes of Israel. 5 He sent young men of
the people of Israel, who offered burnt offerings and sacrificed oxen as
offerings of well-being to the LORD. 6 Moses took half of the blood and
put it in basins, and half of the blood he dashed against the altar. 7
Then he took the book of the covenant, and read it in the hearing of
the people; and they said, "All that the LORD has spoken we will do,
and we will be obedient." 8 Moses took the blood and dashed it on
the people, and said, "See the blood of the covenant that the LORD has
made with you in accordance with all these words."

171

EXODUS 172

9 Then Moses and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders
of Israel went up, 10 and they saw the God of Israel. Under his feet
there was something like a pavement of sapphire stone, like the very
heaven for clearness. 11 God did not lay his hand on the chief men of
the people of Israel; also they beheld God, and they ate and drank.
Instructions for worship; Moses meets God on the mountain
12 The LORD said to Moses, "Come up to me on the mountain, and wait
there; and I will give you the tablets of stone, with the law and the
commandment, which I have written for their instruction." 13 So Moses
set out with his assistant Joshua, and Moses went up into the mountain
of God. 14 To the elders he had said, "Wait here for us, until we come
to you again; for Aaron and Hur are with you; whoever has a dispute
may go to them."
15 Then Moses went up on the mountain, and the cloud covered the
mountain. 16 The glory of the LORD settled on Mount Sinai, and the
cloud covered it for six days; on the seventh day he called to Moses out
of the cloud. 17 Now the appearance of the glory of the LORD was like a
devouring fire on the top of the mountain in the sight of the people of
Israel. 18 Moses entered the cloud, and went up on the mountain.
Moses was on the mountain for forty days and forty nights.
[Exodus 25]
The tabernacle and its furnishings; the offering, the ark, the table, and
the lampstand
1 The LORD said to Moses: 2 Tell the Israelites to take for me an offering;
from all whose hearts prompt them to give you shall receive the
offering for me. 3 This is the offering that you shall receive from them:
gold, silver, and bronze, 4 blue, purple, and crimson yarns and fine
linen, goats' hair, 5 tanned rams' skins, fine leather, acacia wood, 6 oil
for the lamps, spices for the anointing oil and for the fragrant incense,
7 onyx stones and gems to be set in the ephod and for the breastpiece.
8 And have them make me a sanctuary, so that I may dwell among
them. 9 In accordance with all that I show you concerning the pattern
of the tabernacle and of all its furniture, so you shall make it.

172

EXODUS 173

10 They shall make an ark of acacia wood; it shall be two and a half
cubits long, a cubit and a half wide, and a cubit and a half high. 11 You
shall overlay it with pure gold, inside and outside you shall overlay it,
and you shall make a molding of gold upon it all around. 12 You shall
cast four rings of gold for it and put them on its four feet, two rings on
the one side of it, and two rings on the other side. 13 You shall make
poles of acacia wood, and overlay them with gold. 14 And you shall put
the poles into the rings on the sides of the ark, by which to carry the
ark. 15 The poles shall remain in the rings of the ark; they shall not be
taken from it. 16 You shall put into the ark the covenant that I shall
give you.
17 Then you shall make a mercy seat of pure gold; two cubits and a half
shall be its length, and a cubit and a half its width. 18 You shall make
two cherubim of gold; you shall make them of hammered work, at the
two ends of the mercy seat. 19 Make one cherub at the one end, and
one cherub at the other; of one piece with the mercy seat you shall
make the cherubim at its two ends. 20 The cherubim shall spread out
their wings above, overshadowing the mercy seat with their wings.
They shall face one to another; the faces of the cherubim shall be
turned toward the mercy seat. 21 You shall put the mercy seat on the
top of the ark; and in the ark you shall put the covenant that I shall
give you. 22 There I will meet with you, and from above the mercy seat,
from between the two cherubim that are on the ark of the covenant, I
will deliver to you all my commands for the Israelites.
23 You shall make a table of acacia wood, two cubits long, one cubit
wide, and a cubit and a half high. 24 You shall overlay it with pure
gold, and make a molding of gold around it. 25 You shall make around
it a rim a handbreadth wide, and a molding of gold around the rim. 26
You shall make for it four rings of gold, and fasten the rings to the
four corners at its four legs. 27 The rings that hold the poles used for
carrying the table shall be close to the rim. 28 You shall make the poles
of acacia wood, and overlay them with gold, and the table shall be
carried with these. 29 You shall make its plates and dishes for incense,
and its flagons and bowls with which to pour drink offerings; you shall

173

EXODUS 174

make them of pure gold. 30 And you shall set the bread of the
Presence on the table before me always.
31 You shall make a lampstand of pure gold. The base and the shaft of
the lampstand shall be made of hammered work; its cups, its calyxes,
and its petals shall be of one piece with it; 32 and there shall be six
branches going out of its sides, three branches of the lampstand out of
one side of it and three branches of the lampstand out of the other
side of it; 33 three cups shaped like almond blossoms, each with calyx
and petals, on one branch, and three cups shaped like almond
blossoms, each with calyx and petals, on the other branch — so for the
six branches going out of the lampstand. 34 On the lampstand itself
there shall be four cups shaped like almond blossoms, each with its
calyxes and petals. 35 There shall be a calyx of one piece with it under
the first pair of branches, a calyx of one piece with it under the next
pair of branches, and a calyx of one piece with it under the last pair of
branches — so for the six branches that go out of the lampstand. 36
Their calyxes and their branches shall be of one piece with it, the whole
of it one hammered piece of pure gold. 37 You shall make the seven
lamps for it; and the lamps shall be set up so as to give light on the
space in front of it. 38 Its snuffers and trays shall be of pure gold. 39 It,
and all these utensils, shall be made from a talent of pure gold. 40 And
see that you make them according to the pattern for them, which is
being shown you on the mountain.
[Exodus 26]
The tabernacle
1 Moreover you shall make the tabernacle with ten curtains of fine
twisted linen, and blue, purple, and crimson yarns; you shall make
them with cherubim skillfully worked into them. 2 The length of each
curtain shall be twenty-eight cubits, and the width of each curtain four
cubits; all the curtains shall be of the same size. 3 Five curtains shall be
joined to one another; and the other five curtains shall be joined to
one another. 4 You shall make loops of blue on the edge of the
outermost curtain in the first set; and likewise you shall make loops on
the edge of the outermost curtain in the second set. 5 You shall make
fifty loops on the one curtain, and you shall make fifty loops on the

174

EXODUS 175

edge of the curtain that is in the second set; the loops shall be opposite
one another. 6 You shall make fifty clasps of gold, and join the curtains
to one another with the clasps, so that the tabernacle may be one
whole.
7 You shall also make curtains of goats' hair for a tent over the
tabernacle; you shall make eleven curtains. 8 The length of each
curtain shall be thirty cubits, and the width of each curtain four cubits;
the eleven curtains shall be of the same size. 9 You shall join five
curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves, and the sixth
curtain you shall double over at the front of the tent. 10 You shall
make fifty loops on the edge of the curtain that is outermost in one
set, and fifty loops on the edge of the curtain that is outermost in the
second set.
11 You shall make fifty clasps of bronze, and put the clasps into the
loops, and join the tent together, so that it may be one whole. 12 The
part that remains of the curtains of the tent, the half curtain that
remains, shall hang over the back of the tabernacle. 13 The cubit on the
one side, and the cubit on the other side, of what remains in the
length of the curtains of the tent, shall hang over the sides of the
tabernacle, on this side and that side, to cover it. 14 You shall make for
the tent a covering of tanned rams' skins and an outer covering of fine
leather.
15 You shall make upright frames of acacia wood for the tabernacle. 16
Ten cubits shall be the length of a frame, and a cubit and a half the
width of each frame. 17 There shall be two pegs in each frame to fit the
frames together; you shall make these for all the frames of the
tabernacle. 18 You shall make the frames for the tabernacle: twenty
frames for the south side; 19 and you shall make forty bases of silver
under the twenty frames, two bases under the first frame for its two
pegs, and two bases under the next frame for its two pegs; 20 and for
the second side of the tabernacle, on the north side twenty frames, 21
and their forty bases of silver, two bases under the first frame, and two
bases under the next frame; 22 and for the rear of the tabernacle
westward you shall make six frames. 23 You shall make two frames for
corners of the tabernacle in the rear; 24 they shall be separate beneath,

175

EXODUS 176

but joined at the top, at the first ring; it shall be the same with both of
them; they shall form the two corners. 25 And so there shall be eight
frames, with their bases of silver, sixteen bases; two bases under the
first frame, and two bases under the next frame.
26 You shall make bars of acacia wood, five for the frames of the one
side of the tabernacle, 27 and five bars for the frames of the other side
of the tabernacle, and five bars for the frames of the side of the
tabernacle at the rear westward. 28 The middle bar, halfway up the
frames, shall pass through from end to end. 29 You shall overlay the
frames with gold, and shall make their rings of gold to hold the bars;
and you shall overlay the bars with gold. 30 Then you shall erect the
tabernacle according to the plan for it that you were shown on the
mountain.
31 You shall make a curtain of blue, purple, and crimson yarns, and of
fine twisted linen; it shall be made with cherubim skillfully worked into
it. 32 You shall hang it on four pillars of acacia overlaid with gold,
which have hooks of gold and rest on four bases of silver. 33 You shall
hang the curtain under the clasps, and bring the ark of the covenant in
there, within the curtain; and the curtain shall separate for you the
holy place from the most holy. 34 You shall put the mercy seat on the
ark of the covenant in the most holy place. 35 You shall set the table
outside the curtain, and the lampstand on the south side of the
tabernacle opposite the table; and you shall put the table on the north
side.
36 You shall make a screen for the entrance of the tent, of blue,
purple, and crimson yarns, and of fine twisted linen, embroidered with
needlework. 37 You shall make for the screen five pillars of acacia, and
overlay them with gold; their hooks shall be of gold, and you shall cast
five bases of bronze for them.

176

EXODUS 177

[Exodus 27]
The altar and the court
1 You shall make the altar of acacia wood, five cubits long and five
cubits wide; the altar shall be square, and it shall be three cubits high. 2
You shall make horns for it on its four corners; its horns shall be of one
piece with it, and you shall overlay it with bronze. 3 You shall make
pots for it to receive its ashes, and shovels and basins and forks and
firepans; you shall make all its utensils of bronze. 4 You shall also make
for it a grating, a network of bronze; and on the net you shall make
four bronze rings at its four corners. 5 You shall set it under the ledge
of the altar so that the net shall extend halfway down the altar. 6 You
shall make poles for the altar, poles of acacia wood, and overlay them
with bronze; 7 the poles shall be put through the rings, so that the
poles shall be on the two sides of the altar when it is carried. 8 You
shall make it hollow, with boards. They shall be made just as you were
shown on the mountain.
9 You shall make the court of the tabernacle. On the south side the
court shall have hangings of fine twisted linen one hundred cubits long
for that side; 10 its twenty pillars and their twenty bases shall be of
bronze, but the hooks of the pillars and their bands shall be of silver. 11
Likewise for its length on the north side there shall be hangings one
hundred cubits long, their pillars twenty and their bases twenty, of
bronze, but the hooks of the pillars and their bands shall be of silver. 12
For the width of the court on the west side there shall be fifty cubits of
hangings, with ten pillars and ten bases. 13 The width of the court on
the front to the east shall be fifty cubits. 14 There shall be fifteen cubits
of hangings on the one side, with three pillars and three bases. 15
There shall be fifteen cubits of hangings on the other side, with three
pillars and three bases. 16 For the gate of the court there shall be a
screen twenty cubits long, of blue, purple, and crimson yarns, and of
fine twisted linen, embroidered with needlework; it shall have four
pillars and with them four bases. 17 All the pillars around the court
shall be banded with silver; their hooks shall be of silver, and their
bases of bronze. 18 The length of the court shall be one hundred
cubits, the width fifty, and the height five cubits, with hangings of fine
twisted linen and bases of bronze. 19 All the utensils of the tabernacle

177

EXODUS 178

for every use, and all its pegs and all the pegs of the court, shall be of
bronze.
20 You shall further command the Israelites to bring you pure oil of
beaten olives for the light, so that a lamp may be set up to burn
regularly. 21 In the tent of meeting, outside the curtain that is before
the covenant, Aaron and his sons shall tend it from evening to morning
before the LORD. It shall be a perpetual ordinance to be observed
throughout their generations by the Israelites.
[Exodus 28]
The priests
1 Then bring near to you your brother Aaron, and his sons with him,
from among the Israelites, to serve me as priests — Aaron and Aaron's
sons, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar. 2 You shall make sacred
vestments for the glorious adornment of your brother Aaron. 3 And
you shall speak to all who have ability, whom I have endowed with
skill, that they make Aaron's vestments to consecrate him for my
priesthood. 4 These are the vestments that they shall make: a
breastpiece, an ephod, a robe, a checkered tunic, a turban, and a sash.
When they make these sacred vestments for your brother Aaron and
his sons to serve me as priests, 5 they shall use gold, blue, purple, and
crimson yarns, and fine linen.
6 They shall make the ephod of gold, of blue, purple, and crimson
yarns, and of fine twisted linen, skillfully worked. 7 It shall have two
shoulder-pieces attached to its two edges, so that it may be joined
together. 8 The decorated band on it shall be of the same
workmanship and materials, of gold, of blue, purple, and crimson
yarns, and of fine twisted linen. 9 You shall take two onyx stones, and
engrave on them the names of the sons of Israel, 10 six of their names
on the one stone, and the names of the remaining six on the other
stone, in the order of their birth. 11 As a gem-cutter engraves signets,
so you shall engrave the two stones with the names of the sons of
Israel; you shall mount them in settings of gold filigree. 12 You shall set
the two stones on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod, as stones of
remembrance for the sons of Israel; and Aaron shall bear their names

178

EXODUS 179

before the LORD on his two shoulders for remembrance. 13 You shall
make settings of gold filigree, 14 and two chains of pure gold, twisted
like cords; and you shall attach the corded chains to the settings.
15 You shall make a breastpiece of judgment, in skilled work; you shall
make it in the style of the ephod; of gold, of blue and purple and
crimson yarns, and of fine twisted linen you shall make it. 16 It shall be
square and doubled, a span in length and a span in width. 17 You shall
set in it four rows of stones. A row of carnelian, chrysolite, and emerald
shall be the first row; 18 and the second row a turquoise, a sapphire
and a moonstone; 19 and the third row a jacinth, an agate, and an
amethyst; 20 and the fourth row a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper; they
shall be set in gold filigree. 21 There shall be twelve stones with names
corresponding to the names of the sons of Israel; they shall be like
signets, each engraved with its name, for the twelve tribes. 22 You shall
make for the breastpiece chains of pure gold, twisted like cords; 23 and
you shall make for the breastpiece two rings of gold, and put the two
rings on the two edges of the breastpiece. 24 You shall put the two
cords of gold in the two rings at the edges of the breastpiece; 25 the
two ends of the two cords you shall attach to the two settings, and so
attach it in front to the shoulder-pieces of the ephod. 26 You shall
make two rings of gold, and put them at the two ends of the
breastpiece, on its inside edge next to the ephod. 27 You shall make
two rings of gold, and attach them in front to the lower part of the
two shoulder-pieces of the ephod, at its joining above the decorated
band of the ephod. 28 The breastpiece shall be bound by its rings to
the rings of the ephod with a blue cord, so that it may lie on the
decorated band of the ephod, and so that the breastpiece shall not
come loose from the ephod. 29 So Aaron shall bear the names of the
sons of Israel in the breastpiece of judgment on his heart when he goes
into the holy place, for a continual remembrance before the LORD. 30 In
the breastpiece of judgment you shall put the Urim and the Thummim,
and they shall be on Aaron's heart when he goes in before the LORD;
thus Aaron shall bear the judgment of the Israelites on his heart before
the LORD continually.

179

EXODUS 180

31 You shall make the robe of the ephod all of blue. 32 It shall have an
opening for the head in the middle of it, with a woven binding around
the opening, like the opening in a coat of mail, so that it may not be
torn. 33 On its lower hem you shall make pomegranates of blue,
purple, and crimson yarns, all around the lower hem, with bells of gold
between them all around — 34 a golden bell and a pomegranate
alternating all around the lower hem of the robe. 35 Aaron shall wear
it when he ministers, and its sound shall be heard when he goes into
the holy place before the LORD, and when he comes out, so that he may
not die.
36 You shall make a rosette of pure gold, and engrave on it, like the
engraving of a signet, "Holy to the LORD." 37 You shall fasten it on the
turban with a blue cord; it shall be on the front of the turban. 38 It
shall be on Aaron's forehead, and Aaron shall take on himself any guilt
incurred in the holy offering that the Israelites consecrate as their
sacred donations; it shall always be on his forehead, in order that they
may find favor before the LORD.
39 You shall make the checkered tunic of fine linen, and you shall
make a turban of fine linen, and you shall make a sash embroidered
with needlework.
40 For Aaron's sons you shall make tunics and sashes and headdresses;
you shall make them for their glorious adornment. 41 You shall put
them on your brother Aaron, and on his sons with him, and shall
anoint them and ordain them and consecrate them, so that they may
serve me as priests. 42 You shall make for them linen undergarments to
cover their naked flesh; they shall reach from the hips to the thighs; 43
Aaron and his sons shall wear them when they go into the tent of
meeting, or when they come near the altar to minister in the holy
place; or they will bring guilt on themselves and die. This shall be a
perpetual ordinance for him and for his descendants after him.

180

EXODUS 181

[Exodus 29]
The ordination service for the priests
1 Now this is what you shall do to them to consecrate them, so that
they may serve me as priests. Take one young bull and two rams
without blemish, 2 and unleavened bread, unleavened cakes mixed
with oil, and unleavened wafers spread with oil. You shall make them
of choice wheat flour. 3 You shall put them in one basket and bring
them in the basket, and bring the bull and the two rams. 4 You shall
bring Aaron and his sons to the entrance of the tent of meeting, and
wash them with water. 5 Then you shall take the vestments, and put
on Aaron the tunic and the robe of the ephod, and the ephod, and the
breastpiece, and gird him with the decorated band of the ephod; 6 and
you shall set the turban on his head, and put the holy diadem on the
turban. 7 You shall take the anointing oil, and pour it on his head and
anoint him. 8 Then you shall bring his sons, and put tunics on them, 9
and you shall gird them with sashes and tie headdresses on them; and
the priesthood shall be theirs by a perpetual ordinance. You shall then
ordain Aaron and his sons.
10 You shall bring the bull in front of the tent of meeting. Aaron and
his sons shall lay their hands on the head of the bull, 11 and you shall
slaughter the bull before the LORD, at the entrance of the tent of
meeting, 12 and shall take some of the blood of the bull and put it on
the horns of the altar with your finger, and all the rest of the blood
you shall pour out at the base of the altar. 13 You shall take all the fat
that covers the entrails, and the appendage of the liver, and the two
kidneys with the fat that is on them, and turn them into smoke on the
altar. 14 But the flesh of the bull, and its skin, and its dung, you shall
burn with fire outside the camp; it is a sin offering.
15 Then you shall take one of the rams, and Aaron and his sons shall lay
their hands on the head of the ram, 16 and you shall slaughter the ram,
and shall take its blood and dash it against all sides of the altar. 17
Then you shall cut the ram into its parts, and wash its entrails and its
legs, and put them with its parts and its head, 18 and turn the whole
ram into smoke on the altar; it is a burnt offering to the LORD; it is a
pleasing odor, an offering by fire to the LORD.

181

EXODUS 182

19 You shall take the other ram; and Aaron and his sons shall lay their
hands on the head of the ram, 20 and you shall slaughter the ram, and
take some of its blood and put it on the lobe of Aaron's right ear and
on the lobes of the right ears of his sons, and on the thumbs of their
right hands, and on the big toes of their right feet, and dash the rest of
the blood against all sides of the altar. 21 Then you shall take some of
the blood that is on the altar, and some of the anointing oil, and
sprinkle it on Aaron and his vestments and on his sons and his sons'
vestments with him; then he and his vestments shall be holy, as well as
his sons and his sons' vestments.
22 You shall also take the fat of the ram, the fat tail, the fat that covers
the entrails, the appendage of the liver, the two kidneys with the fat
that is on them, and the right thigh (for it is a ram of ordination), 23
and one loaf of bread, one cake of bread made with oil, and one
wafer, out of the basket of unleavened bread that is before the LORD;
24 and you shall place all these on the palms of Aaron and on the
palms of his sons, and raise them as an elevation offering before the
LORD. 25 Then you shall take them from their hands, and turn them into
smoke on the altar on top of the burnt offering of pleasing odor
before the LORD; it is an offering by fire to the LORD.
26 You shall take the breast of the ram of Aaron's ordination and raise
it as an elevation offering before the LORD; and it shall be your portion.
27 You shall consecrate the breast that was raised as an elevation
offering and the thigh that was raised as an elevation offering from
the ram of ordination, from that which belonged to Aaron and his
sons. 28 These things shall be a perpetual ordinance for Aaron and his
sons from the Israelites, for this is an offering; and it shall be an
offering by the Israelites from their sacrifice of offerings of well-being,
their offering to the LORD.
29 The sacred vestments of Aaron shall be passed on to his sons after
him; they shall be anointed in them and ordained in them. 30 The son
who is priest in his place shall wear them seven days, when he comes
into the tent of meeting to minister in the holy place.

182

EXODUS 183

31 You shall take the ram of ordination, and boil its flesh in a holy
place; 32 and Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram and the
bread that is in the basket, at the entrance of the tent of meeting. 33
They themselves shall eat the food by which atonement is made, to
ordain and consecrate them, but no one else shall eat of them, because
they are holy. 34 If any of the flesh for the ordination, or of the bread,
remains until the morning, then you shall burn the remainder with fire;
it shall not be eaten, because it is holy.
35 Thus you shall do to Aaron and to his sons, just as I have
commanded you; through seven days you shall ordain them. 36 Also
every day you shall offer a bull as a sin offering for atonement. Also
you shall offer a sin offering for the altar, when you make atonement
for it, and shall anoint it, to consecrate it. 37 Seven days you shall make
atonement for the altar, and consecrate it, and the altar shall be most
holy; whatever touches the altar shall become holy.
The regular burnt offering; the purpose of the entire story
38 Now this is what you shall offer on the altar: two lambs a year old
regularly each day. 39 One lamb you shall offer in the morning, and
the other lamb you shall offer in the evening; 40 and with the first
lamb one-tenth of a measure of choice flour mixed with one-fourth of
a hin of beaten oil, and one-fourth of a hin of wine for a drink
offering. 41 And the other lamb you shall offer in the evening, and
shall offer with it a grain offering and its drink offering, as in the
morning, for a pleasing odor, an offering by fire to the LORD. 42 It shall
be a regular burnt offering throughout your generations at the
entrance of the tent of meeting before the LORD, where I will meet
with you, to speak to you there. 43 I will meet with the Israelites there,
and it shall be sanctified by my glory; 44 I will consecrate the tent of
meeting and the altar; Aaron also and his sons I will consecrate, to
serve me as priests. 45 I will dwell among the Israelites, and I will be
their God. 46 And they shall know that I am the LORD their God, who
brought them out of the land of Egypt that I might dwell among them;
I am the LORD their God.

183

EXODUS 184

[Exodus 30]
Concluding instructions; the incense altar
1 You shall make an altar on which to offer incense; you shall make it
of acacia wood. 2 It shall be one cubit long, and one cubit wide; it shall
be square, and shall be two cubits high; its horns shall be of one piece
with it. 3 You shall overlay it with pure gold, its top, and its sides all
around and its horns; and you shall make for it a molding of gold all
around. 4 And you shall make two golden rings for it; under its
molding on two opposite sides of it you shall make them, and they
shall hold the poles with which to carry it. 5 You shall make the poles
of acacia wood, and overlay them with gold. 6 You shall place it in
front of the curtain that is above the ark of the covenant, in front of
the mercy seat that is over the covenant, where I will meet with you. 7
Aaron shall offer fragrant incense on it; every morning when he
dresses the lamps he shall offer it, 8 and when Aaron sets up the lamps
in the evening, he shall offer it, a regular incense offering before the
LORD throughout your generations. 9 You shall not offer unholy
incense on it, or a burnt offering, or a grain offering; and you shall not
pour a drink offering on it. 10 Once a year Aaron shall perform the rite
of atonement on its horns. Throughout your generations he shall
perform the atonement for it once a year with the blood of the
atoning sin offering. It is most holy to the LORD.
The tax for the support of the sanctuary
11 The LORD spoke to Moses: 12 When you take a census of the Israelites
to register them, at registration all of them shall give a ransom for
their lives to the LORD, so that no plague may come upon them for
being registered. 13 This is what each one who is registered shall give:
half a shekel according to the shekel of the sanctuary (the shekel is
twenty gerahs), half a shekel as an offering to the LORD. 14 Each one
who is registered, from twenty years old and upward, shall give the
LORD's offering. 15 The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not
give less, than the half shekel, when you bring this offering to the LORD
to make atonement for your lives. 16 You shall take the atonement
money from the Israelites and shall designate it for the service of the

184

EXODUS 185

tent of meeting; before the LORD it will be a reminder to the Israelites
of the ransom given for your lives.
The bronze basin for ritual cleaning
17 The LORD spoke to Moses: 18 You shall make a bronze basin with a
bronze stand for washing. You shall put it between the tent of
meeting and the altar, and you shall put water in it; 19 with the water
Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet. 20 When they
go into the tent of meeting, or when they come near the altar to
minister, to make an offering by fire to the LORD, they shall wash with
water, so that they may not die. 21 They shall wash their hands and
their feet, so that they may not die: it shall be a perpetual ordinance
for them, for him and for his descendants throughout their
generations.
The recipe for the holy anointing oil
22 The LORD spoke to Moses: 23 Take the finest spices: of liquid myrrh
five hundred shekels, and of sweet-smelling cinnamon half as much,
that is, two hundred fifty, and two hundred fifty of aromatic cane, 24
and five hundred of cassia — measured by the sanctuary shekel — and
a hin of olive oil; 25 and you shall make of these a sacred anointing oil
blended as by the perfumer; it shall be a holy anointing oil. 26 With it
you shall anoint the tent of meeting and the ark of the covenant, 27
and the table and all its utensils, and the lampstand and its utensils,
and the altar of incense, 28 and the altar of burnt offering with all its
utensils, and the basin with its stand; 29 you shall consecrate them, so
that they may be most holy; whatever touches them will become holy.
30 You shall anoint Aaron and his sons, and consecrate them, in order
that they may serve me as priests. 31 You shall say to the Israelites,
"This shall be my holy anointing oil throughout your generations. 32 It
shall not be used in any ordinary anointing of the body, and you shall
make no other like it in composition; it is holy, and it shall be holy to
you. 33 Whoever compounds any like it or whoever puts any of it on an
unqualified person shall be cut off from the people."

185

EXODUS 186

The recipe for the incense
34 The LORD said to Moses: Take sweet spices, stacte, and onycha, and
galbanum, sweet spices with pure frankincense (an equal part of each),
35 and make an incense blended as by the perfumer, seasoned with
salt, pure and holy; 36 and you shall beat some of it into powder, and
put part of it before the covenant in the tent of meeting where I shall
meet with you; it shall be for you most holy. 37 When you make
incense according to this composition, you shall not make it for
yourselves; it shall be regarded by you as holy to the LORD. 38 Whoever
makes any like it to use as perfume shall be cut off from the people.
[Exodus 31]
The appointment of two leaders of the artisans
1 The LORD spoke to Moses: 2 See, I have called by name Bezalel son of
Uri son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah: 3 and I have filled him with divine
spirit, with ability, intelligence, and knowledge in every kind of craft, 4
to devise artistic designs, to work in gold, silver, and bronze, 5 in
cutting stones for setting, and in carving wood, in every kind of craft. 6
Moreover, I have appointed with him Oholiab son of Ahisamach, of the
tribe of Dan; and I have given skill to all the skillful, so that they may
make all that I have commanded you: 7 the tent of meeting, and the
ark of the covenant, and the mercy seat that is on it, and all the
furnishings of the tent, 8 the table and its utensils, and the pure
lampstand with all its utensils, and the altar of incense, 9 and the altar
of burnt offering with all its utensils, and the basin with its stand, 10
and the finely worked vestments, the holy vestments for the priest
Aaron and the vestments of his sons, for their service as priests, 11 and
the anointing oil and the fragrant incense for the holy place. They shall
do just as I have commanded you.
The sabbath command
12 The LORD said to Moses: 13 You yourself are to speak to the Israelites:
"You shall keep my sabbaths, for this is a sign between me and you
throughout your generations, given in order that you may know that I,
the LORD, sanctify you. 14 You shall keep the sabbath, because it is holy

186

EXODUS 187

for you; everyone who profanes it shall be put to death; whoever does
any work on it shall be cut off from among the people. 15 Six days shall
work be done, but the seventh day is a sabbath of solemn rest, holy to
the LORD; whoever does any work on the sabbath day shall be put to
death. 16 Therefore the Israelites shall keep the sabbath, observing the
sabbath throughout their generations, as a perpetual covenant. 17 It is
a sign forever between me and the people of Israel that in six days the
LORD made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and
was refreshed."
God's gift of the tablets
18 When God finished speaking with Moses on Mount Sinai, he gave
him the two tablets of the covenant, tablets of stone, written with the
finger of God.
[Exodus 32]
The Israelites break the covenant, but God reestablishes it
1 When the people saw that Moses delayed to come down from the
mountain, the people gathered around Aaron, and said to him, "Come,
make gods for us, who shall go before us; as for this Moses, the man
who brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we do not know what has
become of him." 2 Aaron said to them, "Take off the gold rings that
are on the ears of your wives, your sons, and your daughters, and bring
them to me." 3 So all the people took off the gold rings from their
ears, and brought them to Aaron. 4 He took the gold from them,
formed it in a mold, and cast an image of a calf; and they said, "These
are your gods, O Israel, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt!"
5 When Aaron saw this, he built an altar before it; and Aaron made
proclamation and said, "Tomorrow shall be a festival to the LORD." 6
They rose early the next day, and offered burnt offerings and brought
sacrifices of well-being; and the people sat down to eat and drink, and
rose up to revel.

187

EXODUS 188

7 The LORD said to Moses, "Go down at once! Your people, whom you
brought up out of the land of Egypt, have acted perversely; 8 they
have been quick to turn aside from the way that I commanded them;
they have cast for themselves an image of a calf, and have worshiped it
and sacrificed to it, and said, 'These are your gods, O Israel, who
brought you up out of the land of Egypt!'" 9 The LORD said to Moses, "I
have seen this people, how stiff-necked they are. 10 Now let me alone,
so that my wrath may burn hot against them and I may consume them;
and of you I will make a great nation."
11 But Moses implored the LORD his God, and said, "O LORD, why does
your wrath burn hot against your people, whom you brought out of
the land of Egypt with great power and with a mighty hand? 12 Why
should the Egyptians say, 'It was with evil intent that he brought them
out to kill them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face
of the earth'? Turn from your fierce wrath; change your mind and do
not bring disaster on your people. 13 Remember Abraham, Isaac, and
Israel, your servants, how you swore to them by your own self, saying
to them, 'I will multiply your descendants like the stars of heaven, and
all this land that I have promised I will give to your descendants, and
they shall inherit it forever.'" 14 And the LORD changed his mind about
the disaster that he planned to bring on his people.
15 Then Moses turned and went down from the mountain, carrying the
two tablets of the covenant in his hands, tablets that were written on
both sides, written on the front and on the back. 16 The tablets were
the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God, engraved
upon the tablets. 17 When Joshua heard the noise of the people as they
shouted, he said to Moses, "There is a noise of war in the camp." 18
But he said,
"It is not the sound made by victors,
or the sound made by losers;
it is the sound of revelers that I hear."
19 As soon as he came near the camp and saw the calf and the dancing,
Moses' anger burned hot, and he threw the tablets from his hands and
broke them at the foot of the mountain. 20 He took the calf that they
had made, burned it with fire, ground it to powder, scattered it on the
water, and made the Israelites drink it.

188

EXODUS 189

21 Moses said to Aaron, "What did this people do to you that you have
brought so great a sin upon them?" 22 And Aaron said, "Do not let the
anger of my lord burn hot; you know the people, that they are bent on
evil. 23 They said to me, 'Make us gods, who shall go before us; as for
this Moses, the man who brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we
do not know what has become of him.' 24 So I said to them, 'Whoever
has gold, take it off'; so they gave it to me, and I threw it into the fire,
and out came this calf!"
25 When Moses saw that the people were running wild (for Aaron had
let them run wild, to the derision of their enemies), 26 then Moses
stood in the gate of the camp, and said, "Who is on the LORD's side?
Come to me!" And all the sons of Levi gathered around him. 27 He said
to them, "Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, 'Put your sword on
your side, each of you! Go back and forth from gate to gate
throughout the camp, and each of you kill your brother, your friend,
and your neighbor.'" 28 The sons of Levi did as Moses commanded,
and about three thousand of the people fell on that day. 29 Moses
said, "Today you have ordained yourselves for the service of the LORD,
each one at the cost of a son or a brother, and so have brought a
blessing on yourselves this day."
30 On the next day Moses said to the people, "You have sinned a great
sin. But now I will go up to the LORD; perhaps I can make atonement
for your sin." 31 So Moses returned to the LORD and said, "Alas, this
people has sinned a great sin; they have made for themselves gods of
gold. 32 But now, if you will only forgive their sin — but if not, blot me
out of the book that you have written." 33 But the LORD said to Moses,
"Whoever has sinned against me I will blot out of my book. 34 But now
go, lead the people to the place about which I have spoken to you; see,
my angel shall go in front of you. Nevertheless, when the day comes
for punishment, I will punish them for their sin."
35 Then the LORD sent a plague on the people, because they made the
calf — the one that Aaron made.

189

EXODUS 190

[Exodus 33]
Will God be with Israel or not?
1 The LORD said to Moses, "Go, leave this place, you and the people
whom you have brought up out of the land of Egypt, and go to the
land of which I swore to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, saying, 'To your
descendants I will give it.' 2 I will send an angel before you, and I will
drive out the Canaanites, the Amorites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the
Hivites, and the Jebusites. 3 Go up to a land flowing with milk and
honey; but I will not go up among you, or I would consume you on the
way, for you are a stiff-necked people."
4 When the people heard these harsh words, they mourned, and no
one put on ornaments. 5 For the LORD had said to Moses, "Say to the
Israelites, 'You are a stiff-necked people; if for a single moment I
should go up among you, I would consume you. So now take off your
ornaments, and I will decide what to do to you.'" 6 Therefore the
Israelites stripped themselves of their ornaments, from Mount Horeb
onward.
7 Now Moses used to take the tent and pitch it outside the camp, far
off from the camp; he called it the tent of meeting. And everyone who
sought the LORD would go out to the tent of meeting, which was
outside the camp. 8 Whenever Moses went out to the tent, all the
people would rise and stand, each of them, at the entrance of their
tents and watch Moses until he had gone into the tent. 9 When Moses
entered the tent, the pillar of cloud would descend and stand at the
entrance of the tent, and the LORD would speak with Moses. 10 When
all the people saw the pillar of cloud standing at the entrance of the
tent, all the people would rise and bow down, all of them, at the
entrance of their tent. 11 Thus the LORD used to speak to Moses face to
face, as one speaks to a friend. Then he would return to the camp; but
his young assistant, Joshua son of Nun, would not leave the tent.
12 Moses said to the LORD, "See, you have said to me, 'Bring up this
people'; but you have not let me know whom you will send with me.
Yet you have said, 'I know you by name, and you have also found favor
in my sight.' 13 Now if I have found favor in your sight, show me your

190

EXODUS 191

ways, so that I may know you and find favor in your sight. Consider too
that this nation is your people." 14 He said, "My presence will go with
you, and I will give you rest." 15 And he said to him, "If your presence
will not go, do not carry us up from here. 16 For how shall it be known
that I have found favor in your sight, I and your people, unless you go
with us? In this way, we shall be distinct, I and your people, from every
people on the face of the earth."
17 The LORD said to Moses, "I will do the very thing that you have
asked; for you have found favor in my sight, and I know you by name."
18 Moses said, "Show me your glory, I pray." 19 And he said, "I will
make all my goodness pass before you, and will proclaim before you
the name, 'The LORD'; and I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious,
and will show mercy on whom I will show mercy. 20 But," he said, "you
cannot see my face; for no one shall see me and live." 21 And the LORD
continued, "See, there is a place by me where you shall stand on the
rock; 22 and while my glory passes by I will put you in a cleft of the
rock, and I will cover you with my hand until I have passed by; 23 then I
will take away my hand, and you shall see my back; but my face shall
not be seen."
[Exodus 34]
God renews the covenant
1 The LORD said to Moses, "Cut two tablets of stone like the former
ones, and I will write on the tablets the words that were on the former
tablets, which you broke. 2 Be ready in the morning, and come up in
the morning to Mount Sinai and present yourself there to me, on the
top of the mountain. 3 No one shall come up with you, and do not let
anyone be seen throughout all the mountain; and do not let flocks or
herds graze in front of that mountain." 4 So Moses cut two tablets of
stone like the former ones; and he rose early in the morning and went
up on Mount Sinai, as the LORD had commanded him, and took in his
hand the two tablets of stone. 5 The LORD descended in the cloud and
stood with him there, and proclaimed the name, "The LORD." 6 The
LORD passed before him, and proclaimed,

191

EXODUS 192

"The LORD, the LORD,
a God merciful and gracious,
slow to anger,
and abounding in steadfast love and faithfulness,
7
keeping steadfast love for the thousandth generation,
forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin,
yet by no means clearing the guilty,
but visiting the iniquity of the parents
upon the children
and the children's children,
to the third and the fourth generation."
8 And Moses quickly bowed his head toward the earth, and worshiped.
9 He said, "If now I have found favor in your sight, O Lord, I pray, let
the Lord go with us. Although this is a stiff-necked people, pardon our
iniquity and our sin, and take us for your inheritance."
10 He said: I hereby make a covenant. Before all your people I will
perform marvels, such as have not been performed in all the earth or in
any nation; and all the people among whom you live shall see the work
of the LORD; for it is an awesome thing that I will do with you.
11 Observe what I command you today. See, I will drive out before you
the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Hivites,
and the Jebusites. 12 Take care not to make a covenant with the
inhabitants of the land to which you are going, or it will become a
snare among you. 13 You shall tear down their altars, break their
pillars, and cut down their sacred poles 14 (for you shall worship no
other god, because the LORD, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God).
15 You shall not make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, for
when they prostitute themselves to their gods and sacrifice to their
gods, someone among them will invite you, and you will eat of the
sacrifice. 16 And you will take wives from among their daughters for
your sons, and their daughters who prostitute themselves to their gods
will make your sons also prostitute themselves to their gods.
17 You shall not make cast idols.

192

EXODUS 193

18 You shall keep the festival of unleavened bread. Seven days you
shall eat unleavened bread, as I commanded you, at the time
appointed in the month of Abib; for in the month of Abib you came
out from Egypt.
19 All that first opens the womb is mine, all your male livestock, the
firstborn of cow and sheep. 20 The firstborn of a donkey you shall
redeem with a lamb, or if you will not redeem it you shall break its
neck. All the firstborn of your sons you shall redeem.
21 Six days you shall work, but on the seventh day you shall rest; even
in plowing time and in harvest time you shall rest. 22 You shall observe
the festival of weeks, the first fruits of wheat harvest, and the festival
of ingathering at the turn of the year. 23 Three times in the year all
your males shall appear before the LORD God, the God of Israel. 24 For I
will cast out nations before you, and enlarge your borders; no one shall
covet your land when you go up to appear before the LORD your God
three times in the year.
25 You shall not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven, and the
sacrifice of the festival of the passover shall not be left until the
morning.
26 The best of the first fruits of your ground you shall bring to the
house of the LORD your God.
You shall not boil a kid in its mother's milk.
27 The LORD said to Moses: Write these words; in accordance with these
words I have made a covenant with you and with Israel. 28 He was
there with the LORD forty days and forty nights; he neither ate bread
nor drank water. And he wrote on the tablets the words of the
covenant, the ten commandments.
29 Moses came down from Mount Sinai. As he came down from the
mountain with the two tablets of the covenant in his hand, Moses did
not know that the skin of his face shone because he had been talking
with God. 30 When Aaron and all the Israelites saw Moses, the skin of

193

EXODUS 194

his face was shining, and they were afraid to come near him. 31 But
Moses called to them; and Aaron and all the leaders of the
congregation returned to him, and Moses spoke with them. 32
Afterward all the Israelites came near, and he gave them in
commandment all that the LORD had spoken with him on Mount Sinai.
33 When Moses had finished speaking with them, he put a veil on his
face; 34 but whenever Moses went in before the LORD to speak with
him, he would take the veil off, until he came out; and when he came
out, and told the Israelites what he had been commanded, 35 the
Israelites would see the face of Moses, that the skin of his face was
shining; and Moses would put the veil on his face again, until he went
in to speak with him.
[Exodus 35]
Israel obeys instructions, and God takes up residence with them; the
sabbath command
1 Moses assembled all the congregation of the Israelites and said to
them: These are the things that the LORD has commanded you to do:
2 Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day you shall have a
holy sabbath of solemn rest to the LORD; whoever does any work on it
shall be put to death. 3 You shall kindle no fire in all your dwellings on
the sabbath day.
The offering and the skillful craftsmen
4 Moses said to all the congregation of the Israelites: This is the thing
that the LORD has commanded: 5 Take from among you an offering to
the LORD; let whoever is of a generous heart bring the LORD's offering:
gold, silver, and bronze; 6 blue, purple, and crimson yarns, and fine
linen; goats' hair, 7 tanned rams' skins, and fine leather; acacia wood, 8
oil for the light, spices for the anointing oil and for the fragrant
incense, 9 and onyx stones and gems to be set in the ephod and the
breastpiece.
10 All who are skillful among you shall come and make all that the
LORD has commanded: the tabernacle, 11 its tent and its covering, its

194

EXODUS 195

clasps and its frames, its bars, its pillars, and its bases; 12 the ark with its
poles, the mercy seat, and the curtain for the screen; 13 the table with
its poles and all its utensils, and the bread of the Presence; 14 the
lampstand also for the light, with its utensils and its lamps, and the oil
for the light; 15 and the altar of incense, with its poles, and the
anointing oil and the fragrant incense, and the screen for the entrance,
the entrance of the tabernacle; 16 the altar of burnt offering, with its
grating of bronze, its poles, and all its utensils, the basin with its stand;
17 the hangings of the court, its pillars and its bases, and the screen for
the gate of the court; 18 the pegs of the tabernacle and the pegs of the
court, and their cords; 19 the finely worked vestments for ministering in
the holy place, the holy vestments for the priest Aaron, and the
vestments of his sons, for their service as priests.
20 Then all the congregation of the Israelites withdrew from the
presence of Moses. 21 And they came, everyone whose heart was
stirred, and everyone whose spirit was willing, and brought the LORD's
offering to be used for the tent of meeting, and for all its service, and
for the sacred vestments. 22 So they came, both men and women; all
who were of a willing heart brought brooches and earrings and signet
rings and pendants, all sorts of gold objects, everyone bringing an
offering of gold to the LORD. 23 And everyone who possessed blue or
purple or crimson yarn or fine linen or goats' hair or tanned rams' skins
or fine leather, brought them. 24 Everyone who could make an
offering of silver or bronze brought it as the LORD's offering; and
everyone who possessed acacia wood of any use in the work, brought
it. 25 All the skillful women spun with their hands, and brought what
they had spun in blue and purple and crimson yarns and fine linen; 26
all the women whose hearts moved them to use their skill spun the
goats' hair. 27 And the leaders brought onyx stones and gems to be set
in the ephod and the breastpiece, 28 and spices and oil for the light,
and for the anointing oil, and for the fragrant incense. 29 All the
Israelite men and women whose hearts made them willing to bring
anything for the work that the LORD had commanded by Moses to be
done, brought it as a freewill offering to the LORD.

195

EXODUS 196

The artisans
30 Then Moses said to the Israelites: See, the LORD has called by name
Bezalel son of Uri son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah; 31 he has filled him
with divine spirit, with skill, intelligence, and knowledge in every kind
of craft, 32 to devise artistic designs, to work in gold, silver, and
bronze, 33 in cutting stones for setting, and in carving wood, in every
kind of craft. 34 And he has inspired him to teach, both him and
Oholiab son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan. 35 He has filled them
with skill to do every kind of work done by an artisan or by a designer
or by an embroiderer in blue, purple, and crimson yarns, and in fine
linen, or by a weaver — by any sort of artisan or skilled designer.
[Exodus 36]
1 Bezalel and Oholiab and every skillful one to whom the LORD has
given skill and understanding to know how to do any work in the
construction of the sanctuary shall work in accordance with all that the
LORD has commanded.
The freewill offerings continue
2 Moses then called Bezalel and Oholiab and every skillful one to
whom the LORD had given skill, everyone whose heart was stirred to
come to do the work; 3 and they received from Moses all the freewill
offerings that the Israelites had brought for doing the work on the
sanctuary. They still kept bringing him freewill offerings every
morning, 4 so that all the artisans who were doing every sort of task on
the sanctuary came, each from the task being performed, 5 and said to
Moses, "The people are bringing much more than enough for doing
the work that the LORD has commanded us to do." 6 So Moses gave
command, and word was proclaimed throughout the camp: "No man
or woman is to make anything else as an offering for the sanctuary."
So the people were restrained from bringing; 7 for what they had
already brought was more than enough to do all the work.

196

EXODUS 197

The tabernacle
8 All those with skill among the workers made the tabernacle with ten
curtains; they were made of fine twisted linen, and blue, purple, and
crimson yarns, with cherubim skillfully worked into them. 9 The length
of each curtain was twenty-eight cubits, and the width of each curtain
four cubits; all the curtains were of the same size.
10 He joined five curtains to one another, and the other five curtains
he joined to one another. 11 He made loops of blue on the edge of the
outermost curtain of the first set; likewise he made them on the edge
of the outermost curtain of the second set; 12 he made fifty loops on
the one curtain, and he made fifty loops on the edge of the curtain
that was in the second set; the loops were opposite one another. 13
And he made fifty clasps of gold, and joined the curtains one to the
other with clasps; so the tabernacle was one whole.
14 He also made curtains of goats' hair for a tent over the tabernacle;
he made eleven curtains. 15 The length of each curtain was thirty
cubits, and the width of each curtain four cubits; the eleven curtains
were of the same size. 16 He joined five curtains by themselves, and six
curtains by themselves. 17 He made fifty loops on the edge of the
outermost curtain of the one set, and fifty loops on the edge of the
other connecting curtain. 18 He made fifty clasps of bronze to join the
tent together so that it might be one whole. 19 And he made for the
tent a covering of tanned rams' skins and an outer covering of fine
leather.
20 Then he made the upright frames for the tabernacle of acacia
wood. 21 Ten cubits was the length of a frame, and a cubit and a half
the width of each frame. 22 Each frame had two pegs for fitting
together; he did this for all the frames of the tabernacle. 23 The frames
for the tabernacle he made in this way: twenty frames for the south
side; 24 and he made forty bases of silver under the twenty frames, two
bases under the first frame for its two pegs, and two bases under the
next frame for its two pegs. 25 For the second side of the tabernacle,
on the north side, he made twenty frames 26 and their forty bases of
silver, two bases under the first frame and two bases under the next

197

EXODUS 198

frame. 27 For the rear of the tabernacle westward he made six frames.
28 He made two frames for corners of the tabernacle in the rear. 29
They were separate beneath, but joined at the top, at the first ring; he
made two of them in this way, for the two corners. 30 There were
eight frames with their bases of silver: sixteen bases, under every frame
two bases.
31 He made bars of acacia wood, five for the frames of the one side of
the tabernacle, 32 and five bars for the frames of the other side of the
tabernacle, and five bars for the frames of the tabernacle at the rear
westward. 33 He made the middle bar to pass through from end to end
halfway up the frames. 34 And he overlaid the frames with gold, and
made rings of gold for them to hold the bars, and overlaid the bars
with gold.
35 He made the curtain of blue, purple, and crimson yarns, and fine
twisted linen, with cherubim skillfully worked into it. 36 For it he made
four pillars of acacia, and overlaid them with gold; their hooks were of
gold, and he cast for them four bases of silver. 37 He also made a
screen for the entrance to the tent, of blue, purple, and crimson yarns,
and fine twisted linen, embroidered with needlework; 38 and its five
pillars with their hooks. He overlaid their capitals and their bases with
gold, but their five bases were of bronze.
[Exodus 37]
The ark
1 Bezalel made the ark of acacia wood; it was two and a half cubits
long, a cubit and a half wide, and a cubit and a half high. 2 He overlaid
it with pure gold inside and outside, and made a molding of gold
around it. 3 He cast for it four rings of gold for its four feet, two rings
on its one side and two rings on its other side. 4 He made poles of
acacia wood, and overlaid them with gold, 5 and put the poles into the
rings on the sides of the ark, to carry the ark. 6 He made a mercy seat
of pure gold; two cubits and a half was its length, and a cubit and a
half its width. 7 He made two cherubim of hammered gold; at the two
ends of the mercy seat he made them, 8 one cherub at the one end,
and one cherub at the other end; of one piece with the mercy seat he

198

EXODUS 199

made the cherubim at its two ends. 9 The cherubim spread out their
wings above, overshadowing the mercy seat with their wings. They
faced one another; the faces of the cherubim were turned toward the
mercy seat.
The table
10 He also made the table of acacia wood, two cubits long, one cubit
wide, and a cubit and a half high. 11 He overlaid it with pure gold, and
made a molding of gold around it. 12 He made around it a rim a
handbreadth wide, and made a molding of gold around the rim. 13 He
cast for it four rings of gold, and fastened the rings to the four corners
at its four legs. 14 The rings that held the poles used for carrying the
table were close to the rim. 15 He made the poles of acacia wood to
carry the table, and overlaid them with gold. 16 And he made the
vessels of pure gold that were to be on the table, its plates and dishes
for incense, and its bowls and flagons with which to pour drink
offerings.
The lampstand
17 He also made the lampstand of pure gold. The base and the shaft of
the lampstand were made of hammered work; its cups, its calyxes, and
its petals were of one piece with it. 18 There were six branches going
out of its sides, three branches of the lampstand out of one side of it
and three branches of the lampstand out of the other side of it; 19
three cups shaped like almond blossoms, each with calyx and petals, on
one branch, and three cups shaped like almond blossoms, each with
calyx and petals, on the other branch — so for the six branches going
out of the lampstand. 20 On the lampstand itself there were four cups
shaped like almond blossoms, each with its calyxes and petals. 21 There
was a calyx of one piece with it under the first pair of branches, a calyx
of one piece with it under the next pair of branches, and a calyx of one
piece with it under the last pair of branches. 22 Their calyxes and their
branches were of one piece with it, the whole of it one hammered
piece of pure gold. 23 He made its seven lamps and its snuffers and its
trays of pure gold. 24 He made it and all its utensils of a talent of pure
gold.

199

EXODUS 200

The incense altar
25 He made the altar of incense of acacia wood, one cubit long, and
one cubit wide; it was square, and was two cubits high; its horns were
of one piece with it. 26 He overlaid it with pure gold, its top, and its
sides all around, and its horns; and he made for it a molding of gold all
around, 27 and made two golden rings for it under its molding, on two
opposite sides of it, to hold the poles with which to carry it. 28 And he
made the poles of acacia wood, and overlaid them with gold.
The anointing oil and incense
29 He made the holy anointing oil also, and the pure fragrant incense,
blended as by the perfumer.
[Exodus 38]
The sacrificial altar
1 He made the altar of burnt offering also of acacia wood; it was five
cubits long, and five cubits wide; it was square, and three cubits high. 2
He made horns for it on its four corners; its horns were of one piece
with it, and he overlaid it with bronze. 3 He made all the utensils of the
altar, the pots, the shovels, the basins, the forks, and the firepans: all
its utensils he made of bronze. 4 He made for the altar a grating, a
network of bronze, under its ledge, extending halfway down. 5 He cast
four rings on the four corners of the bronze grating to hold the poles;
6 he made the poles of acacia wood, and overlaid them with bronze. 7
And he put the poles through the rings on the sides of the altar, to
carry it with them; he made it hollow, with boards.
The basin
8 He made the basin of bronze with its stand of bronze, from the
mirrors of the women who served at the entrance to the tent of
meeting.

200

EXODUS 201

The court
9 He made the court; for the south side the hangings of the court were
of fine twisted linen, one hundred cubits long; 10 its twenty pillars and
their twenty bases were of bronze, but the hooks of the pillars and
their bands were of silver. 11 For the north side there were hangings
one hundred cubits long; its twenty pillars and their twenty bases were
of bronze, but the hooks of the pillars and their bands were of silver. 12
For the west side there were hangings fifty cubits long, with ten pillars
and ten bases; the hooks of the pillars and their bands were of silver. 13
And for the front to the east, fifty cubits. 14 The hangings for one side
of the gate were fifteen cubits, with three pillars and three bases. 15
And so for the other side; on each side of the gate of the court were
hangings of fifteen cubits, with three pillars and three bases. 16 All the
hangings around the court were of fine twisted linen. 17 The bases for
the pillars were of bronze, but the hooks of the pillars and their bands
were of silver; the overlaying of their capitals was also of silver, and all
the pillars of the court were banded with silver. 18 The screen for the
entrance to the court was embroidered with needlework in blue,
purple, and crimson yarns and fine twisted linen. It was twenty cubits
long and, along the width of it, five cubits high, corresponding to the
hangings of the court. 19 There were four pillars; their four bases were
of bronze, their hooks of silver, and the overlaying of their capitals and
their bands of silver. 20 All the pegs for the tabernacle and for the
court all around were of bronze.
The records
21 These are the records of the tabernacle, the tabernacle of the
covenant, which were drawn up at the commandment of Moses, the
work of the Levites being under the direction of Ithamar son of the
priest Aaron. 22 Bezalel son of Uri son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah,
made all that the LORD commanded Moses; 23 and with him was
Oholiab son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, engraver, designer, and
embroiderer in blue, purple, and crimson yarns, and in fine linen.

201

EXODUS 202

24 All the gold that was used for the work, in all the construction of
the sanctuary, the gold from the offering, was twenty-nine talents and
seven hundred thirty shekels, measured by the sanctuary shekel. 25 The
silver from those of the congregation who were counted was one
hundred talents and one thousand seven hundred seventy-five shekels,
measured by the sanctuary shekel; 26 a beka a head (that is, half a
shekel, measured by the sanctuary shekel), for everyone who was
counted in the census, from twenty years old and upward, for six
hundred three thousand, five hundred fifty men. 27 The hundred
talents of silver were for casting the bases of the sanctuary, and the
bases of the curtain; one hundred bases for the hundred talents, a
talent for a base. 28 Of the thousand seven hundred seventy-five
shekels he made hooks for the pillars, and overlaid their capitals and
made bands for them. 29 The bronze that was contributed was seventy
talents, and two thousand four hundred shekels; 30 with it he made
the bases for the entrance of the tent of meeting, the bronze altar and
the bronze grating for it and all the utensils of the altar, 31 the bases
all around the court, and the bases of the gate of the court, all the
pegs of the tabernacle, and all the pegs around the court.
[Exodus 39]
According to God's instructions; the priests' garments
1 Of the blue, purple, and crimson yarns they made finely worked
vestments, for ministering in the holy place; they made the sacred
vestments for Aaron; as the LORD had commanded Moses.
2 He made the ephod of gold, of blue, purple, and crimson yarns, and
of fine twisted linen. 3 Gold leaf was hammered out and cut into
threads to work into the blue, purple, and crimson yarns and into the
fine twisted linen, in skilled design. 4 They made for the ephod
shoulder-pieces, joined to it at its two edges. 5 The decorated band on
it was of the same materials and workmanship, of gold, of blue,
purple, and crimson yarns, and of fine twisted linen; as the LORD had
commanded Moses.

202

EXODUS 203

6 The onyx stones were prepared, enclosed in settings of gold filigree
and engraved like the engravings of a signet, according to the names
of the sons of Israel. 7 He set them on the shoulder-pieces of the
ephod, to be stones of remembrance for the sons of Israel; as the LORD
had commanded Moses.
8 He made the breastpiece, in skilled work, like the work of the ephod,
of gold, of blue, purple, and crimson yarns, and of fine twisted linen. 9
It was square; the breastpiece was made double, a span in length and a
span in width when doubled. 10 They set in it four rows of stones. A
row of carnelian, chrysolite, and emerald was the first row; 11 and the
second row, a turquoise, a sapphire, and a moonstone; 12 and the third
row, a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst; 13 and the fourth row, a
beryl, an onyx, and a jasper; they were enclosed in settings of gold
filigree. 14 There were twelve stones with names corresponding to the
names of the sons of Israel; they were like signets, each engraved with
its name, for the twelve tribes. 15 They made on the breastpiece chains
of pure gold, twisted like cords; 16 and they made two settings of gold
filigree and two gold rings, and put the two rings on the two edges of
the breastpiece; 17 and they put the two cords of gold in the two rings
at the edges of the breastpiece. 18 Two ends of the two cords they had
attached to the two settings of filigree; in this way they attached it in
front to the shoulder-pieces of the ephod. 19 Then they made two rings
of gold, and put them at the two ends of the breastpiece, on its inside
edge next to the ephod. 20 They made two rings of gold, and attached
them in front to the lower part of the two shoulder-pieces of the
ephod, at its joining above the decorated band of the ephod. 21 They
bound the breastpiece by its rings to the rings of the ephod with a blue
cord, so that it should lie on the decorated band of the ephod, and
that the breastpiece should not come loose from the ephod; as the
LORD had commanded Moses.
22 He also made the robe of the ephod woven all of blue yarn; 23 and
the opening of the robe in the middle of it was like the opening in a
coat of mail, with a binding around the opening, so that it might not
be torn. 24 On the lower hem of the robe they made pomegranates of
blue, purple, and crimson yarns, and of fine twisted linen. 25 They also
made bells of pure gold, and put the bells between the pomegranates

203

EXODUS 204

on the lower hem of the robe all around, between the pomegranates;
26 a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate all around on
the lower hem of the robe for ministering; as the LORD had
commanded Moses.
27 They also made the tunics, woven of fine linen, for Aaron and his
sons, 28 and the turban of fine linen, and the headdresses of fine linen,
and the linen undergarments of fine twisted linen, 29 and the sash of
fine twisted linen, and of blue, purple, and crimson yarns, embroidered
with needlework; as the LORD had commanded Moses.
30 They made the rosette of the holy diadem of pure gold, and wrote
on it an inscription, like the engraving of a signet, "Holy to the LORD."
31 They tied to it a blue cord, to fasten it on the turban above; as the
LORD had commanded Moses.
Inspection
32 In this way all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting was
finished; the Israelites had done everything just as the LORD had
commanded Moses. 33 Then they brought the tabernacle to Moses, the
tent and all its utensils, its hooks, its frames, its bars, its pillars, and its
bases; 34 the covering of tanned rams' skins and the covering of fine
leather, and the curtain for the screen; 35 the ark of the covenant with
its poles and the mercy seat; 36 the table with all its utensils, and the
bread of the Presence; 37 the pure lampstand with its lamps set on it
and all its utensils, and the oil for the light; 38 the golden altar, the
anointing oil and the fragrant incense, and the screen for the entrance
of the tent; 39 the bronze altar, and its grating of bronze, its poles, and
all its utensils; the basin with its stand; 40 the hangings of the court, its
pillars, and its bases, and the screen for the gate of the court, its cords,
and its pegs; and all the utensils for the service of the tabernacle, for
the tent of meeting; 41 the finely worked vestments for ministering in
the holy place, the sacred vestments for the priest Aaron, and the
vestments of his sons to serve as priests. 42 The Israelites had done all
of the work just as the LORD had commanded Moses. 43 When Moses
saw that they had done all the work just as the LORD had commanded,
he blessed them.

204

EXODUS 205

[Exodus 40]
The tabernacle and its furnishings are set up and anointed
1 The LORD spoke to Moses: 2 On the first day of the first month you
shall set up the tabernacle of the tent of meeting. 3 You shall put in it
the ark of the covenant, and you shall screen the ark with the curtain.
4 You shall bring in the table, and arrange its setting; and you shall
bring in the lampstand, and set up its lamps. 5 You shall put the golden
altar for incense before the ark of the covenant, and set up the screen
for the entrance of the tabernacle. 6 You shall set the altar of burnt
offering before the entrance of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting,
7 and place the basin between the tent of meeting and the altar, and
put water in it. 8 You shall set up the court all around, and hang up
the screen for the gate of the court. 9 Then you shall take the
anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle and all that is in it, and
consecrate it and all its furniture, so that it shall become holy. 10 You
shall also anoint the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils, and
consecrate the altar, so that the altar shall be most holy. 11 You shall
also anoint the basin with its stand, and consecrate it. 12 Then you shall
bring Aaron and his sons to the entrance of the tent of meeting, and
shall wash them with water, 13 and put on Aaron the sacred vestments,
and you shall anoint him and consecrate him, so that he may serve me
as priest. 14 You shall bring his sons also and put tunics on them, 15 and
anoint them, as you anointed their father, that they may serve me as
priests: and their anointing shall admit them to a perpetual priesthood
throughout all generations to come.
Moses personally sets up and places each item
16 Moses did everything just as the LORD had commanded him. 17 In the
first month in the second year, on the first day of the month, the
tabernacle was set up. 18 Moses set up the tabernacle; he laid its bases,
and set up its frames, and put in its poles, and raised up its pillars; 19
and he spread the tent over the tabernacle, and put the covering of
the tent over it; as the LORD had commanded Moses. 20 He took the
covenant and put it into the ark, and put the poles on the ark, and set
the mercy seat above the ark; 21 and he brought the ark into the
tabernacle, and set up the curtain for screening, and screened the ark

205

EXODUS 206

of the covenant; as the LORD had commanded Moses. 22 He put the
table in the tent of meeting, on the north side of the tabernacle,
outside the curtain, 23 and set the bread in order on it before the LORD;
as the LORD had commanded Moses. 24 He put the lampstand in the
tent of meeting, opposite the table on the south side of the
tabernacle, 25 and set up the lamps before the LORD; as the LORD had
commanded Moses. 26 He put the golden altar in the tent of meeting
before the curtain, 27 and offered fragrant incense on it; as the LORD
had commanded Moses. 28 He also put in place the screen for the
entrance of the tabernacle. 29 He set the altar of burnt offering at the
entrance of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting, and offered on it
the burnt offering and the grain offering as the LORD had commanded
Moses. 30 He set the basin between the tent of meeting and the altar,
and put water in it for washing, 31 with which Moses and Aaron and
his sons washed their hands and their feet. 32 When they went into the
tent of meeting, and when they approached the altar, they washed; as
the LORD had commanded Moses. 33 He set up the court around the
tabernacle and the altar, and put up the screen at the gate of the
court. So Moses finished the work.
The climax of the book
34 Then the cloud covered the tent of meeting, and the glory of the
LORD filled the tabernacle. 35 Moses was not able to enter the tent of
meeting because the cloud settled upon it, and the glory of the LORD
filled the tabernacle. 36 Whenever the cloud was taken up from the
tabernacle, the Israelites would set out on each stage of their journey;
37 but if the cloud was not taken up, then they did not set out until the
day that it was taken up. 38 For the cloud of the LORD was on the
tabernacle by day, and fire was in the cloud by night, before the eyes
of all the house of Israel at each stage of their journey.

206

LEVITICUS 207

LEVITICUS
Introduction
The third book of the Torah or Pentateuch is chiefly concerned with
matters surrounding the worship of God at his sanctuary. Its English
name, Leviticus, which characterizes the book as having to do with
matters associated with priests, who are of the tribe of Levi, derives
from the early Greek translation.
Leviticus is part of the Priestly writings of the Pentateuch. These
writings are not from a single hand or tradition. The two main
components of the Priestly source in Leviticus are the "Priestly Torah"
and the materials from the "Holiness School," which are largely found
in chs 17-26, the "Holiness Code," or "Holiness Collection." Material
from the Holiness School is found interspersed occasionally in chs 1-16
and to a lesser or greater extent in chapters attributed to the Priestly
source in the other books of the Torah. While many scholars have
viewed the Holiness School materials as earlier than the Priestly Torah,
recent work suggests that Holiness School material often supplements
the Priestly Torah material, and therefore postdates it. Though the
specific dates of these works are disputed, it is reasonable to assume
that the Holiness Collection was produced at the end of the exile (538
BCE) or soon thereafter. The Priestly Torah must have existed before
this, and may have been edited in the form taken up by the Holiness
School in the early exile (after 586 BCE). These dates refer to the
editing of these works; in part, they both incorporate earlier, preexilic
traditions.
Inasmuch as Holiness School supplements Priestly Torah, it depends
upon it and accepts its basic perspectives. But it is novel, especially in
laying out rationalizations for matters such as sacrifice, holiness, the
relationship of God to the people, and the relationship of God and the
people to the land. It thus explains many issues that were present, but
207

LEVITICUS 208

not explained in the Priestly Torah. The Holiness School updates the
Priestly Torah, systematizes it further, and endows it with theological
dynamism. (See further the Introduction to the book of Numbers.)
HT

TH

Leviticus has four main sections and displays a logical development.
(1) Sacrifice (chs 1-7). This is subdivided into (a) basic prescriptions
(1.1-67) and (b) a recapitulation with elements pertinent to priests (6.87.38). This entire section interrupts the narrative flow between the end
of the book of Exodus and Leviticus 8-9 in order to outline the customs
that the priests and people are about to undertake at the sanctuary.
(2) The priestly consecration ceremony and its aftermath (chs 8-16). It
has four subdivisions: (a) the seven-day consecration and eighth-day
concluding ceremony (chs 8-9), which resumes the narrative at the end
of the book of Exodus; (b) the sin of Aaron's sons and rules for priests
(ch 10); (c) impurity laws (chs 11-15), which interrupt the narrative flow
between chs 10 and 16 to provide background on impurity, the central
concern of the ceremony in ch 16; and (d) the Day of Atonement
sanctuary purification ceremony (ch 16).
(3) The "Holiness Code" or "Holiness Collection" (chs 17-26). This has
five subdivisions: (a) sacrificial law (ch 17), which follows from the
subject of ch 16; (b) moral and ethical laws (chs 18-20); (c) priestly and
sacrificial rules (chs 21-22); (d) holy occasions (chs 23-25; ch 24 interrupts
this, giving miscellaneous ritual laws and resuming the narrative left
off in chs 10 and 16); and (e) blessings and curses (ch 26; these conclude
the "Holiness Collection"). Chapters 17-26 roughly follow the outline of
chs 1-16: sacrifice (chs 1-7; 17), priestly duties (chs 8-9; 21-22), and holy
occasions (chs 16; 23; 25).
(4) An appendix dealing with vows and dedications (ch 27).
Leviticus is difficult to understand and appreciate since it is technical
and presumes knowledge of its ritual system almost at every turn. As
the outline above indicates, although there is a narrative that runs
through it, this is meager. Most of the book consists of blocks of laws.
A first reading might include exemplary chapters: chs 16-17 on sacrifice,
ch 8 on the priesthood, chs 11-12 on impurity, ch 23 on festivals, ch 25
on economic laws, and ch 19 on ethical concerns. From here, a reader
can go on to focus on a particular topic or group of laws, as indicated

208

LEVITICUS 209

in the outline. A careful and concentrated exploration of a chapter or
group of related chapters, which tries to discover the system inherent
in it, can provide the reader with knowledge and a sense of how to
read the material that will then elucidate almost any other chapter of
Leviticus, as well as similar chapters in Exodus, Numbers, and
Deuteronomy.

[Leviticus 1]
Basic sacrificial prescriptions; the burnt offering
1 The LORD summoned Moses and spoke to him from the tent of
meeting, saying: 2 Speak to the people of Israel and say to them: When
any of you bring an offering of livestock to the LORD, you shall bring
your offering from the herd or from the flock.
3 If the offering is a burnt offering from the herd, you shall offer a
male without blemish; you shall bring it to the entrance of the tent of
meeting, for acceptance in your behalf before the LORD. 4 You shall lay
your hand on the head of the burnt offering, and it shall be acceptable
in your behalf as atonement for you. 5 The bull shall be slaughtered
before the LORD; and Aaron's sons the priests shall offer the blood,
dashing the blood against all sides of the altar that is at the entrance
of the tent of meeting. 6 The burnt offering shall be flayed and cut up
into its parts. 7 The sons of the priest Aaron shall put fire on the altar
and arrange wood on the fire. 8 Aaron's sons the priests shall arrange
the parts, with the head and the suet, on the wood that is on the fire
on the altar; 9 but its entrails and its legs shall be washed with water.
Then the priest shall turn the whole into smoke on the altar as a burnt
offering, an offering by fire of pleasing odor to the LORD.
10 If your gift for a burnt offering is from the flock, from the sheep or
goats, your offering shall be a male without blemish. 11 It shall be
slaughtered on the north side of the altar before the LORD, and Aaron's
sons the priests shall dash its blood against all sides of the altar. 12 It
shall be cut up into its parts, with its head and its suet, and the priest

209

LEVITICUS 210

shall arrange them on the wood that is on the fire on the altar; 13 but
the entrails and the legs shall be washed with water. Then the priest
shall offer the whole and turn it into smoke on the altar; it is a burnt
offering, an offering by fire of pleasing odor to the LORD.
14 If your offering to the LORD is a burnt offering of birds, you shall
choose your offering from turtledoves or pigeons. 15 The priest shall
bring it to the altar and wring off its head, and turn it into smoke on
the altar; and its blood shall be drained out against the side of the
altar. 16 He shall remove its crop with its contents and throw it at the
east side of the altar, in the place for ashes. 17 He shall tear it open by
its wings without severing it. Then the priest shall turn it into smoke on
the altar, on the wood that is on the fire; it is a burnt offering, an
offering by fire of pleasing odor to the LORD.
[Leviticus 2]
The grain offering
1 When anyone presents a grain offering to the LORD, the offering shall
be of choice flour; the worshiper shall pour oil on it, and put
frankincense on it, 2 and bring it to Aaron's sons the priests. After
taking from it a handful of the choice flour and oil, with all its
frankincense, the priest shall turn this token portion into smoke on the
altar, an offering by fire of pleasing odor to the LORD. 3 And what is
left of the grain offering shall be for Aaron and his sons, a most holy
part of the offerings by fire to the LORD.
4 When you present a grain offering baked in the oven, it shall be of
choice flour: unleavened cakes mixed with oil, or unleavened wafers
spread with oil. 5 If your offering is grain prepared on a griddle, it shall
be of choice flour mixed with oil, unleavened; 6 break it in pieces, and
pour oil on it; it is a grain offering. 7 If your offering is grain prepared
in a pan, it shall be made of choice flour in oil. 8 You shall bring to the
LORD the grain offering that is prepared in any of these ways; and
when it is presented to the priest, he shall take it to the altar. 9 The
priest shall remove from the grain offering its token portion and turn
this into smoke on the altar, an offering by fire of pleasing odor to the

210

LEVITICUS 211

LORD. 10 And what is left of the grain offering shall be for Aaron and
his sons; it is a most holy part of the offerings by fire to the LORD.
11 No grain offering that you bring to the LORD shall be made with
leaven, for you must not turn any leaven or honey into smoke as an
offering by fire to the LORD. 12 You may bring them to the LORD as an
offering of choice products, but they shall not be offered on the altar
for a pleasing odor. 13 You shall not omit from your grain offerings the
salt of the covenant with your God; with all your offerings you shall
offer salt.
14 If you bring a grain offering of first fruits to the LORD, you shall
bring as the grain offering of your first fruits coarse new grain from
fresh ears, parched with fire. 15 You shall add oil to it and lay
frankincense on it; it is a grain offering. 16 And the priest shall turn a
token portion of it into smoke — some of the coarse grain and oil with
all its frankincense; it is an offering by fire to the LORD.
[Leviticus 3]
The well-being offering
1 If the offering is a sacrifice of well-being, if you offer an animal of the
herd, whether male or female, you shall offer one without blemish
before the LORD. 2 You shall lay your hand on the head of the offering
and slaughter it at the entrance of the tent of meeting; and Aaron's
sons the priests shall dash the blood against all sides of the altar. 3 You
shall offer from the sacrifice of well-being, as an offering by fire to the
LORD, the fat that covers the entrails and all the fat that is around the
entrails; 4 the two kidneys with the fat that is on them at the loins, and
the appendage of the liver, which he shall remove with the kidneys. 5
Then Aaron's sons shall turn these into smoke on the altar, with the
burnt offering that is on the wood on the fire, as an offering by fire of
pleasing odor to the LORD.
6 If your offering for a sacrifice of well-being to the LORD is from the
flock, male or female, you shall offer one without blemish. 7 If you
present a sheep as your offering, you shall bring it before the LORD 8
and lay your hand on the head of the offering. It shall be slaughtered

211

LEVITICUS 212

before the tent of meeting, and Aaron's sons shall dash its blood
against all sides of the altar. 9 You shall present its fat from the
sacrifice of well-being, as an offering by fire to the LORD: the whole
broad tail, which shall be removed close to the backbone, the fat that
covers the entrails, and all the fat that is around the entrails; 10 the
two kidneys with the fat that is on them at the loins, and the
appendage of the liver, which you shall remove with the kidneys. 11
Then the priest shall turn these into smoke on the altar as a food
offering by fire to the LORD.
12 If your offering is a goat, you shall bring it before the LORD 13 and
lay your hand on its head; it shall be slaughtered before the tent of
meeting; and the sons of Aaron shall dash its blood against all sides of
the altar. 14 You shall present as your offering from it, as an offering
by fire to the LORD, the fat that covers the entrails, and all the fat that
is around the entrails; 15 the two kidneys with the fat that is on them
at the loins, and the appendage of the liver, which you shall remove
with the kidneys. 16 Then the priest shall turn these into smoke on the
altar as a food offering by fire for a pleasing odor.
All fat is the LORD's. 17 It shall be a perpetual statute throughout your
generations, in all your settlements: you must not eat any fat or any
blood.
[Leviticus 4]
The sin offering
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2 Speak to the people of Israel,
saying: When anyone sins unintentionally in any of the LORD's
commandments about things not to be done, and does any one of
them:
3 If it is the anointed priest who sins, thus bringing guilt on the people,
he shall offer for the sin that he has committed a bull of the herd
without blemish as a sin offering to the LORD. 4 He shall bring the bull
to the entrance of the tent of meeting before the LORD and lay his
hand on the head of the bull; the bull shall be slaughtered before the
LORD. 5 The anointed priest shall take some of the blood of the bull and

212

LEVITICUS 213

bring it into the tent of meeting. 6 The priest shall dip his finger in the
blood and sprinkle some of the blood seven times before the LORD in
front of the curtain of the sanctuary. 7 The priest shall put some of the
blood on the horns of the altar of fragrant incense that is in the tent of
meeting before the LORD; and the rest of the blood of the bull he shall
pour out at the base of the altar of burnt offering, which is at the
entrance of the tent of meeting. 8 He shall remove all the fat from the
bull of sin offering: the fat that covers the entrails and all the fat that
is around the entrails; 9 the two kidneys with the fat that is on them at
the loins; and the appendage of the liver, which he shall remove with
the kidneys, 10 just as these are removed from the ox of the sacrifice of
well-being. The priest shall turn them into smoke upon the altar of
burnt offering. 11 But the skin of the bull and all its flesh, as well as its
head, its legs, its entrails, and its dung — 12 all the rest of the bull — he
shall carry out to a clean place outside the camp, to the ash heap, and
shall burn it on a wood fire; at the ash heap it shall be burned.
13 If the whole congregation of Israel errs unintentionally and the
matter escapes the notice of the assembly, and they do any one of the
things that by the LORD's commandments ought not to be done and
incur guilt; 14 when the sin that they have committed becomes known,
the assembly shall offer a bull of the herd for a sin offering and bring it
before the tent of meeting. 15 The elders of the congregation shall lay
their hands on the head of the bull before the LORD, and the bull shall
be slaughtered before the LORD. 16 The anointed priest shall bring
some of the blood of the bull into the tent of meeting, 17 and the
priest shall dip his finger in the blood and sprinkle it seven times
before the LORD, in front of the curtain. 18 He shall put some of the
blood on the horns of the altar that is before the LORD in the tent of
meeting; and the rest of the blood he shall pour out at the base of the
altar of burnt offering that is at the entrance of the tent of meeting. 19
He shall remove all its fat and turn it into smoke on the altar. 20 He
shall do with the bull just as is done with the bull of sin offering; he
shall do the same with this. The priest shall make atonement for them,
and they shall be forgiven. 21 He shall carry the bull outside the camp,
and burn it as he burned the first bull; it is the sin offering for the
assembly.

213

LEVITICUS 214

22 When a ruler sins, doing unintentionally any one of all the things
that by commandments of the LORD his God ought not to be done and
incurs guilt, 23 once the sin that he has committed is made known to
him, he shall bring as his offering a male goat without blemish. 24 He
shall lay his hand on the head of the goat; it shall be slaughtered at the
spot where the burnt offering is slaughtered before the LORD; it is a sin
offering. 25 The priest shall take some of the blood of the sin offering
with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering,
and pour out the rest of its blood at the base of the altar of burnt
offering. 26 All its fat he shall turn into smoke on the altar, like the fat
of the sacrifice of well-being. Thus the priest shall make atonement on
his behalf for his sin, and he shall be forgiven.
27 If anyone of the ordinary people among you sins unintentionally in
doing any one of the things that by the LORD's commandments ought
not to be done and incurs guilt, 28 when the sin that you have
committed is made known to you, you shall bring a female goat
without blemish as your offering, for the sin that you have committed.
29 You shall lay your hand on the head of the sin offering; and the sin
offering shall be slaughtered at the place of the burnt offering. 30 The
priest shall take some of its blood with his finger and put it on the
horns of the altar of burnt offering, and he shall pour out the rest of
its blood at the base of the altar. 31 He shall remove all its fat, as the
fat is removed from the offering of well-being, and the priest shall turn
it into smoke on the altar for a pleasing odor to the LORD. Thus the
priest shall make atonement on your behalf, and you shall be forgiven.
32 If the offering you bring as a sin offering is a sheep, you shall bring
a female without blemish. 33 You shall lay your hand on the head of
the sin offering; and it shall be slaughtered as a sin offering at the spot
where the burnt offering is slaughtered. 34 The priest shall take some
of the blood of the sin offering with his finger and put it on the horns
of the altar of burnt offering, and pour out the rest of its blood at the
base of the altar. 35 You shall remove all its fat, as the fat of the sheep
is removed from the sacrifice of well-being, and the priest shall turn it
into smoke on the altar, with the offerings by fire to the LORD. Thus the
priest shall make atonement on your behalf for the sin that you have

214

LEVITICUS 215

committed, and you shall be forgiven.
[Leviticus 5]
The graded sin offering
1 When any of you sin in that you have heard a public adjuration to
testify and — though able to testify as one who has seen or learned of
the matter — do not speak up, you are subject to punishment. 2 Or
when any of you touch any unclean thing — whether the carcass of an
unclean beast or the carcass of unclean livestock or the carcass of an
unclean swarming thing — and are unaware of it, you have become
unclean, and are guilty. 3 Or when you touch human uncleanness —
any uncleanness by which one can become unclean — and are unaware
of it, when you come to know it, you shall be guilty. 4 Or when any of
you utter aloud a rash oath for a bad or a good purpose, whatever
people utter in an oath, and are unaware of it, when you come to
know it, you shall in any of these be guilty. 5 When you realize your
guilt in any of these, you shall confess the sin that you have committed.
6 And you shall bring to the LORD, as your penalty for the sin that you
have committed, a female from the flock, a sheep or a goat, as a sin
offering; and the priest shall make atonement on your behalf for your
sin.
7 But if you cannot afford a sheep, you shall bring to the LORD, as your
penalty for the sin that you have committed, two turtledoves or two
pigeons, one for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering. 8
You shall bring them to the priest, who shall offer first the one for the
sin offering, wringing its head at the nape without severing it. 9 He
shall sprinkle some of the blood of the sin offering on the side of the
altar, while the rest of the blood shall be drained out at the base of the
altar; it is a sin offering. 10 And the second he shall offer for a burnt
offering according to the regulation. Thus the priest shall make
atonement on your behalf for the sin that you have committed, and
you shall be forgiven.
11 But if you cannot afford two turtledoves or two pigeons, you shall
bring as your offering for the sin that you have committed one-tenth
of an ephah of choice flour for a sin offering; you shall not put oil on it

215

LEVITICUS 216

or lay frankincense on it, for it is a sin offering. 12 You shall bring it to
the priest, and the priest shall scoop up a handful of it as its memorial
portion, and turn this into smoke on the altar, with the offerings by
fire to the LORD; it is a sin offering. 13 Thus the priest shall make
atonement on your behalf for whichever of these sins you have
committed, and you shall be forgiven. Like the grain offering, the rest
shall be for the priest.
The guilt offering
14 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 15 When any of you commit a
trespass and sin unintentionally in any of the holy things of the LORD,
you shall bring, as your guilt offering to the LORD, a ram without
blemish from the flock, convertible into silver by the sanctuary shekel;
it is a guilt offering. 16 And you shall make restitution for the holy
thing in which you were remiss, and shall add one-fifth to it and give it
to the priest. The priest shall make atonement on your behalf with the
ram of the guilt offering, and you shall be forgiven.
17 If any of you sin without knowing it, doing any of the things that by
the LORD's commandments ought not to be done, you have incurred
guilt, and are subject to punishment. 18 You shall bring to the priest a
ram without blemish from the flock, or the equivalent, as a guilt
offering; and the priest shall make atonement on your behalf for the
error that you committed unintentionally, and you shall be forgiven. 19
It is a guilt offering; you have incurred guilt before the LORD.
[Leviticus 6]
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 2 When any of you sin and commit a
trespass against the LORD by deceiving a neighbor in a matter of a
deposit or a pledge, or by robbery, or if you have defrauded a
neighbor, 3 or have found something lost and lied about it — if you
swear falsely regarding any of the various things that one may do and
sin thereby — 4 when you have sinned and realize your guilt, and
would restore what you took by robbery or by fraud or the deposit
that was committed to you, or the lost thing that you found, 5 or
anything else about which you have sworn falsely, you shall repay the

216

LEVITICUS 217

principal amount and shall add one-fifth to it. You shall pay it to its
owner when you realize your guilt. 6 And you shall bring to the priest,
as your guilt offering to the LORD, a ram without blemish from the
flock, or its equivalent, for a guilt offering. 7 The priest shall make
atonement on your behalf before the LORD, and you shall be forgiven
for any of the things that one may do and incur guilt thereby.
Reprise of sacrificial prescriptions; the burnt offering
8 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 9 Command Aaron and his sons,
saying: This is the ritual of the burnt offering. The burnt offering itself
shall remain on the hearth upon the altar all night until the morning,
while the fire on the altar shall be kept burning. 10 The priest shall put
on his linen vestments after putting on his linen undergarments next to
his body; and he shall take up the ashes to which the fire has reduced
the burnt offering on the altar, and place them beside the altar. 11
Then he shall take off his vestments and put on other garments, and
carry the ashes out to a clean place outside the camp. 12 The fire on the
altar shall be kept burning; it shall not go out. Every morning the priest
shall add wood to it, lay out the burnt offering on it, and turn into
smoke the fat pieces of the offerings of well-being. 13 A perpetual fire
shall be kept burning on the altar; it shall not go out.
Grain offerings
14 This is the ritual of the grain offering: The sons of Aaron shall offer
it before the LORD, in front of the altar. 15 They shall take from it a
handful of the choice flour and oil of the grain offering, with all the
frankincense that is on the offering, and they shall turn its memorial
portion into smoke on the altar as a pleasing odor to the LORD. 16
Aaron and his sons shall eat what is left of it; it shall be eaten as
unleavened cakes in a holy place; in the court of the tent of meeting
they shall eat it. 17 It shall not be baked with leaven. I have given it as
their portion of my offerings by fire; it is most holy, like the sin
offering and the guilt offering. 18 Every male among the descendants
of Aaron shall eat of it, as their perpetual due throughout your
generations, from the LORD's offerings by fire; anything that touches
them shall become holy.

217

LEVITICUS 218

19 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 20 This is the offering that Aaron
and his sons shall offer to the LORD on the day when he is anointed:
one-tenth of an ephah of choice flour as a regular offering, half of it in
the morning and half in the evening. 21 It shall be made with oil on a
griddle; you shall bring it well soaked, as a grain offering of baked
pieces, and you shall present it as a pleasing odor to the LORD. 22 And
so the priest, anointed from among Aaron's descendants as a successor,
shall prepare it; it is the LORD's — a perpetual due — to be turned
entirely into smoke. 23 Every grain offering of a priest shall be wholly
burned; it shall not be eaten.
The sin offering
24 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 25 Speak to Aaron and his sons,
saying: This is the ritual of the sin offering. The sin offering shall be
slaughtered before the LORD at the spot where the burnt offering is
slaughtered; it is most holy. 26 The priest who offers it as a sin offering
shall eat of it; it shall be eaten in a holy place, in the court of the tent
of meeting. 27 Whatever touches its flesh shall become holy; and when
any of its blood is spattered on a garment, you shall wash the
bespattered part in a holy place. 28 An earthen vessel in which it was
boiled shall be broken; but if it is boiled in a bronze vessel, that shall
be scoured and rinsed in water. 29 Every male among the priests shall
eat of it; it is most holy. 30 But no sin offering shall be eaten from
which any blood is brought into the tent of meeting for atonement in
the holy place; it shall be burned with fire.
[Leviticus 7]
The guilt offering
1 This is the ritual of the guilt offering. It is most holy; 2 at the spot
where the burnt offering is slaughtered, they shall slaughter the guilt
offering, and its blood shall be dashed against all sides of the altar. 3
All its fat shall be offered: the broad tail, the fat that covers the
entrails, 4 the two kidneys with the fat that is on them at the loins, and
the appendage of the liver, which shall be removed with the kidneys. 5
The priest shall turn them into smoke on the altar as an offering by fire

218

LEVITICUS 219

to the LORD; it is a guilt offering. 6 Every male among the priests shall
eat of it; it shall be eaten in a holy place; it is most holy.
7 The guilt offering is like the sin offering, there is the same ritual for
them; the priest who makes atonement with it shall have it. 8 So, too,
the priest who offers anyone's burnt offering shall keep the skin of the
burnt offering that he has offered. 9 And every grain offering baked in
the oven, and all that is prepared in a pan or on a griddle, shall belong
to the priest who offers it. 10 But every other grain offering, mixed
with oil or dry, shall belong to all the sons of Aaron equally.
The well-being offering
11 This is the ritual of the sacrifice of the offering of well-being that
one may offer to the LORD. 12 If you offer it for thanksgiving, you shall
offer with the thank offering unleavened cakes mixed with oil,
unleavened wafers spread with oil, and cakes of choice flour well
soaked in oil. 13 With your thanksgiving sacrifice of well-being you
shall bring your offering with cakes of leavened bread. 14 From this
you shall offer one cake from each offering, as a gift to the LORD; it
shall belong to the priest who dashes the blood of the offering of wellbeing. 15 And the flesh of your thanksgiving sacrifice of well-being
shall be eaten on the day it is offered; you shall not leave any of it until
morning. 16 But if the sacrifice you offer is a votive offering or a
freewill offering, it shall be eaten on the day that you offer your
sacrifice, and what is left of it shall be eaten the next day; 17 but what
is left of the flesh of the sacrifice shall be burned up on the third day.
18 If any of the flesh of your sacrifice of well-being is eaten on the
third day, it shall not be acceptable, nor shall it be credited to the one
who offers it; it shall be an abomination, and the one who eats of it
shall incur guilt.
19 Flesh that touches any unclean thing shall not be eaten; it shall be
burned up. As for other flesh, all who are clean may eat such flesh. 20
But those who eat flesh from the LORD's sacrifice of well-being while in
a state of uncleanness shall be cut off from their kin. 21 When any one
of you touches any unclean thing — human uncleanness or an unclean

219

LEVITICUS 220

animal or any unclean creature — and then eats flesh from the LORD's
sacrifice of well-being, you shall be cut off from your kin.
22 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 23 Speak to the people of Israel,
saying: You shall eat no fat of ox or sheep or goat. 24 The fat of an
animal that died or was torn by wild animals may be put to any other
use, but you must not eat it. 25 If any one of you eats the fat from an
animal of which an offering by fire may be made to the LORD, you who
eat it shall be cut off from your kin. 26 You must not eat any blood
whatever, either of bird or of animal, in any of your settlements. 27
Any one of you who eats any blood shall be cut off from your kin.
28 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 29 Speak to the people of Israel,
saying: Any one of you who would offer to the LORD your sacrifice of
well-being must yourself bring to the LORD your offering from your
sacrifice of well-being. 30 Your own hands shall bring the LORD's
offering by fire; you shall bring the fat with the breast, so that the
breast may be raised as an elevation offering before the LORD. 31 The
priest shall turn the fat into smoke on the altar, but the breast shall
belong to Aaron and his sons. 32 And the right thigh from your
sacrifices of well-being you shall give to the priest as an offering; 33 the
one among the sons of Aaron who offers the blood and fat of the
offering of well-being shall have the right thigh for a portion. 34 For I
have taken the breast of the elevation offering, and the thigh that is
offered, from the people of Israel, from their sacrifices of well-being,
and have given them to Aaron the priest and to his sons, as a perpetual
due from the people of Israel. 35 This is the portion allotted to Aaron
and to his sons from the offerings made by fire to the LORD, once they
have been brought forward to serve the LORD as priests; 36 these the
LORD commanded to be given them, when he anointed them, as a
perpetual due from the people of Israel throughout their generations.
37 This is the ritual of the burnt offering, the grain offering, the sin
offering, the guilt offering, the offering of ordination, and the sacrifice
of well-being, 38 which the LORD commanded Moses on Mount Sinai,
when he commanded the people of Israel to bring their offerings to
the LORD, in the wilderness of Sinai.

220

LEVITICUS 221

[Leviticus 8]
The consecration of the sanctuary and priests
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 2 Take Aaron and his sons with him,
the vestments, the anointing oil, the bull of sin offering, the two rams,
and the basket of unleavened bread; 3 and assemble the whole
congregation at the entrance of the tent of meeting. 4 And Moses did
as the LORD commanded him. When the congregation was assembled
at the entrance of the tent of meeting, 5 Moses said to the
congregation, "This is what the LORD has commanded to be done."
6 Then Moses brought Aaron and his sons forward, and washed them
with water. 7 He put the tunic on him, fastened the sash around him,
clothed him with the robe, and put the ephod on him. He then put the
decorated band of the ephod around him, tying the ephod to him with
it. 8 He placed the breastpiece on him, and in the breastpiece he put
the Urim and the Thummim. 9 And he set the turban on his head, and
on the turban, in front, he set the golden ornament, the holy crown, as
the LORD commanded Moses.
10 Then Moses took the anointing oil and anointed the tabernacle and
all that was in it, and consecrated them. 11 He sprinkled some of it on
the altar seven times, and anointed the altar and all its utensils, and
the basin and its base, to consecrate them. 12 He poured some of the
anointing oil on Aaron's head and anointed him, to consecrate him. 13
And Moses brought forward Aaron's sons, and clothed them with
tunics, and fastened sashes around them, and tied headdresses on
them, as the LORD commanded Moses.
14 He led forward the bull of sin offering; and Aaron and his sons laid
their hands upon the head of the bull of sin offering, 15 and it was
slaughtered. Moses took the blood and with his finger put some on
each of the horns of the altar, purifying the altar; then he poured out
the blood at the base of the altar. Thus he consecrated it, to make
atonement for it. 16 Moses took all the fat that was around the
entrails, and the appendage of the liver, and the two kidneys with
their fat, and turned them into smoke on the altar. 17 But the bull

221

LEVITICUS 222

itself, its skin and flesh and its dung, he burned with fire outside the
camp, as the LORD commanded Moses.
18 Then he brought forward the ram of burnt offering. Aaron and his
sons laid their hands on the head of the ram, 19 and it was slaughtered.
Moses dashed the blood against all sides of the altar. 20 The ram was
cut into its parts, and Moses turned into smoke the head and the parts
and the suet. 21 And after the entrails and the legs were washed with
water, Moses turned into smoke the whole ram on the altar; it was a
burnt offering for a pleasing odor, an offering by fire to the LORD, as
the LORD commanded Moses.
22 Then he brought forward the second ram, the ram of ordination.
Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the ram, 23 and it
was slaughtered. Moses took some of its blood and put it on the lobe
of Aaron's right ear and on the thumb of his right hand and on the big
toe of his right foot. 24 After Aaron's sons were brought forward,
Moses put some of the blood on the lobes of their right ears and on
the thumbs of their right hands and on the big toes of their right feet;
and Moses dashed the rest of the blood against all sides of the altar. 25
He took the fat — the broad tail, all the fat that was around the
entrails, the appendage of the liver, and the two kidneys with their fat
— and the right thigh. 26 From the basket of unleavened bread that
was before the LORD, he took one cake of unleavened bread, one cake
of bread with oil, and one wafer, and placed them on the fat and on
the right thigh. 27 He placed all these on the palms of Aaron and on
the palms of his sons, and raised them as an elevation offering before
the LORD. 28 Then Moses took them from their hands and turned them
into smoke on the altar with the burnt offering. This was an ordination
offering for a pleasing odor, an offering by fire to the LORD. 29 Moses
took the breast and raised it as an elevation offering before the LORD;
it was Moses' portion of the ram of ordination, as the LORD
commanded Moses.
30 Then Moses took some of the anointing oil and some of the blood
that was on the altar and sprinkled them on Aaron and his vestments,
and also on his sons and their vestments. Thus he consecrated Aaron
and his vestments, and also his sons and their vestments.

222

LEVITICUS 223

31 And Moses said to Aaron and his sons, "Boil the flesh at the entrance
of the tent of meeting, and eat it there with the bread that is in the
basket of ordination offerings, as I was commanded, 'Aaron and his
sons shall eat it'; 32 and what remains of the flesh and the bread you
shall burn with fire. 33 You shall not go outside the entrance of the
tent of meeting for seven days, until the day when your period of
ordination is completed. For it will take seven days to ordain you; 34 as
has been done today, the LORD has commanded to be done to make
atonement for you. 35 You shall remain at the entrance of the tent of
meeting day and night for seven days, keeping the LORD's charge so
that you do not die; for so I am commanded." 36 Aaron and his sons
did all the things that the LORD commanded through Moses.
[Leviticus 9]
Conclusion of the priestly consecration
1 On the eighth day Moses summoned Aaron and his sons and the
elders of Israel. 2 He said to Aaron, "Take a bull calf for a sin offering
and a ram for a burnt offering, without blemish, and offer them
before the LORD. 3 And say to the people of Israel, 'Take a male goat
for a sin offering; a calf and a lamb, yearlings without blemish, for a
burnt offering; 4 and an ox and a ram for an offering of well-being to
sacrifice before the LORD; and a grain offering mixed with oil. For today
the LORD will appear to you.'" 5 They brought what Moses commanded
to the front of the tent of meeting; and the whole congregation drew
near and stood before the LORD. 6 And Moses said, "This is the thing
that the LORD commanded you to do, so that the glory of the LORD may
appear to you." 7 Then Moses said to Aaron, "Draw near to the altar
and sacrifice your sin offering and your burnt offering, and make
atonement for yourself and for the people; and sacrifice the offering
of the people, and make atonement for them; as the LORD has
commanded."
8 Aaron drew near to the altar, and slaughtered the calf of the sin
offering, which was for himself. 9 The sons of Aaron presented the
blood to him, and he dipped his finger in the blood and put it on the
horns of the altar; and the rest of the blood he poured out at the base
of the altar. 10 But the fat, the kidneys, and the appendage of the liver

223

LEVITICUS 224

from the sin offering he turned into smoke on the altar, as the LORD
commanded Moses; 11 and the flesh and the skin he burned with fire
outside the camp.
12 Then he slaughtered the burnt offering. Aaron's sons brought him
the blood, and he dashed it against all sides of the altar. 13 And they
brought him the burnt offering piece by piece, and the head, which he
turned into smoke on the altar. 14 He washed the entrails and the legs
and, with the burnt offering, turned them into smoke on the altar.
15 Next he presented the people's offering. He took the goat of the sin
offering that was for the people, and slaughtered it, and presented it
as a sin offering like the first one. 16 He presented the burnt offering,
and sacrificed it according to regulation. 17 He presented the grain
offering, and, taking a handful of it, he turned it into smoke on the
altar, in addition to the burnt offering of the morning.
18 He slaughtered the ox and the ram as a sacrifice of well-being for
the people. Aaron's sons brought him the blood, which he dashed
against all sides of the altar, 19 and the fat of the ox and of the ram —
the broad tail, the fat that covers the entrails, the two kidneys and the
fat on them, and the appendage of the liver. 20 They first laid the fat
on the breasts, and the fat was turned into smoke on the altar; 21 and
the breasts and the right thigh Aaron raised as an elevation offering
before the LORD, as Moses had commanded.
22 Aaron lifted his hands toward the people and blessed them; and he
came down after sacrificing the sin offering, the burnt offering, and
the offering of well-being. 23 Moses and Aaron entered the tent of
meeting, and then came out and blessed the people; and the glory of
the LORD appeared to all the people. 24 Fire came out from the LORD
and consumed the burnt offering and the fat on the altar; and when
all the people saw it, they shouted and fell on their faces.

224

LEVITICUS 225

[Leviticus 10]
The aftermath of the priestly consecration
1 Now Aaron's sons, Nadab and Abihu, each took his censer, put fire in
it, and laid incense on it; and they offered unholy fire before the LORD,
such as he had not commanded them. 2 And fire came out from the
presence of the LORD and consumed them, and they died before the
LORD. 3 Then Moses said to Aaron, "This is what the LORD meant when
he said,
'Through those who are near me
I will show myself holy,
and before all the people
I will be glorified.'"
And Aaron was silent.
4 Moses summoned Mishael and Elzaphan, sons of Uzziel the uncle of
Aaron, and said to them, "Come forward, and carry your kinsmen away
from the front of the sanctuary to a place outside the camp." 5 They
came forward and carried them by their tunics out of the camp, as
Moses had ordered. 6 And Moses said to Aaron and to his sons Eleazar
and Ithamar, "Do not dishevel your hair, and do not tear your
vestments, or you will die and wrath will strike all the congregation;
but your kindred, the whole house of Israel, may mourn the burning
that the LORD has sent. 7 You shall not go outside the entrance of the
tent of meeting, or you will die; for the anointing oil of the LORD is on
you." And they did as Moses had ordered.
8 And the LORD spoke to Aaron: 9 Drink no wine or strong drink,
neither you nor your sons, when you enter the tent of meeting, that
you may not die; it is a statute forever throughout your generations. 10
You are to distinguish between the holy and the common, and
between the unclean and the clean; 11 and you are to teach the people
of Israel all the statutes that the LORD has spoken to them through
Moses.
12 Moses spoke to Aaron and to his remaining sons, Eleazar and
Ithamar: Take the grain offering that is left from the LORD's offerings
by fire, and eat it unleavened beside the altar, for it is most holy; 13

225

LEVITICUS 226

you shall eat it in a holy place, because it is your due and your sons'
due, from the offerings by fire to the LORD; for so I am commanded. 14
But the breast that is elevated and the thigh that is raised, you and
your sons and daughters as well may eat in any clean place; for they
have been assigned to you and your children from the sacrifices of the
offerings of well-being of the people of Israel. 15 The thigh that is
raised and the breast that is elevated they shall bring, together with
the offerings by fire of the fat, to raise for an elevation offering before
the LORD; they are to be your due and that of your children forever, as
the LORD has commanded.
16 Then Moses made inquiry about the goat of the sin offering, and —
it had already been burned! He was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar,
Aaron's remaining sons, and said, 17 "Why did you not eat the sin
offering in the sacred area? For it is most holy, and God has given it to
you that you may remove the guilt of the congregation, to make
atonement on their behalf before the LORD. 18 Its blood was not
brought into the inner part of the sanctuary. You should certainly have
eaten it in the sanctuary, as I commanded." 19 And Aaron spoke to
Moses, "See, today they offered their sin offering and their burnt
offering before the LORD; and yet such things as these have befallen
me! If I had eaten the sin offering today, would it have been agreeable
to the LORD?" 20 And when Moses heard that, he agreed.
[Leviticus 11]
Impurity rules; animal impurities and the diet
1 The LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying to them: 2 Speak to the
people of Israel, saying:
From among all the land animals, these are the creatures that you may
eat. 3 Any animal that has divided hoofs and is cleft-footed and chews
the cud — such you may eat. 4 But among those that chew the cud or
have divided hoofs, you shall not eat the following: the camel, for even
though it chews the cud, it does not have divided hoofs; it is unclean
for you. 5 The rock badger, for even though it chews the cud, it does
not have divided hoofs; it is unclean for you. 6 The hare, for even
though it chews the cud, it does not have divided hoofs; it is unclean

226

LEVITICUS 227

for you. 7 The pig, for even though it has divided hoofs and is cleftfooted, it does not chew the cud; it is unclean for you. 8 Of their flesh
you shall not eat, and their carcasses you shall not touch; they are
unclean for you.
9 These you may eat, of all that are in the waters. Everything in the
waters that has fins and scales, whether in the seas or in the streams —
such you may eat. 10 But anything in the seas or the streams that does
not have fins and scales, of the swarming creatures in the waters and
among all the other living creatures that are in the waters — they are
detestable to you 11 and detestable they shall remain. Of their flesh
you shall not eat, and their carcasses you shall regard as detestable. 12
Everything in the waters that does not have fins and scales is
detestable to you.
13 These you shall regard as detestable among the birds. They shall not
be eaten; they are an abomination: the eagle, the vulture, the osprey,
14 the buzzard, the kite of any kind; 15 every raven of any kind; 16 the
ostrich, the nighthawk, the sea gull, the hawk of any kind; 17 the little
owl, the cormorant, the great owl, 18 the water hen, the desert owl,
the carrion vulture, 19 the stork, the heron of any kind, the hoopoe,
and the bat.
20 All winged insects that walk upon all fours are detestable to you. 21
But among the winged insects that walk on all fours you may eat those
that have jointed legs above their feet, with which to leap on the
ground. 22 Of them you may eat: the locust according to its kind, the
bald locust according to its kind, the cricket according to its kind, and
the grasshopper according to its kind. 23 But all other winged insects
that have four feet are detestable to you.
24 By these you shall become unclean; whoever touches the carcass of
any of them shall be unclean until the evening, 25 and whoever carries
any part of the carcass of any of them shall wash his clothes and be
unclean until the evening. 26 Every animal that has divided hoofs but is
not cleft-footed or does not chew the cud is unclean for you; everyone
who touches one of them shall be unclean. 27 All that walk on their
paws, among the animals that walk on all fours, are unclean for you;

227

LEVITICUS 228

whoever touches the carcass of any of them shall be unclean until the
evening, 28 and the one who carries the carcass shall wash his clothes
and be unclean until the evening; they are unclean for you.
29 These are unclean for you among the creatures that swarm upon
the earth: the weasel, the mouse, the great lizard according to its kind,
30 the gecko, the land crocodile, the lizard, the sand lizard, and the
chameleon. 31 These are unclean for you among all that swarm;
whoever touches one of them when they are dead shall be unclean
until the evening. 32 And anything upon which any of them falls when
they are dead shall be unclean, whether an article of wood or cloth or
skin or sacking, any article that is used for any purpose; it shall be
dipped into water, and it shall be unclean until the evening, and then
it shall be clean. 33 And if any of them falls into any earthen vessel, all
that is in it shall be unclean, and you shall break the vessel. 34 Any
food that could be eaten shall be unclean if water from any such vessel
comes upon it; and any liquid that could be drunk shall be unclean if it
was in any such vessel. 35 Everything on which any part of the carcass
falls shall be unclean; whether an oven or stove, it shall be broken in
pieces; they are unclean, and shall remain unclean for you. 36 But a
spring or a cistern holding water shall be clean, while whatever
touches the carcass in it shall be unclean. 37 If any part of their carcass
falls upon any seed set aside for sowing, it is clean; 38 but if water is
put on the seed and any part of their carcass falls on it, it is unclean for
you.
39 If an animal of which you may eat dies, anyone who touches its
carcass shall be unclean until the evening. 40 Those who eat of its
carcass shall wash their clothes and be unclean until the evening; and
those who carry the carcass shall wash their clothes and be unclean
until the evening.
41 All creatures that swarm upon the earth are detestable; they shall
not be eaten. 42 Whatever moves on its belly, and whatever moves on
all fours, or whatever has many feet, all the creatures that swarm upon
the earth, you shall not eat; for they are detestable. 43 You shall not
make yourselves detestable with any creature that swarms; you shall
not defile yourselves with them, and so become unclean. 44 For I am

228

LEVITICUS 229

the LORD your God; sanctify yourselves therefore, and be holy, for I am
holy. You shall not defile yourselves with any swarming creature that
moves on the earth. 45 For I am the LORD who brought you up from the
land of Egypt, to be your God; you shall be holy, for I am holy.
46 This is the law pertaining to land animal and bird and every living
creature that moves through the waters and every creature that
swarms upon the earth, 47 to make a distinction between the unclean
and the clean, and between the living creature that may be eaten and
the living creature that may not be eaten.
[Leviticus 12]
Childbirth
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 2 Speak to the people of Israel,
saying:
If a woman conceives and bears a male child, she shall be ceremonially
unclean seven days; as at the time of her menstruation, she shall be
unclean. 3 On the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be
circumcised. 4 Her time of blood purification shall be thirty-three days;
she shall not touch any holy thing, or come into the sanctuary, until the
days of her purification are completed. 5 If she bears a female child,
she shall be unclean two weeks, as in her menstruation; her time of
blood purification shall be sixty-six days.
6 When the days of her purification are completed, whether for a son
or for a daughter, she shall bring to the priest at the entrance of the
tent of meeting a lamb in its first year for a burnt offering, and a
pigeon or a turtledove for a sin offering. 7 He shall offer it before the
LORD, and make atonement on her behalf; then she shall be clean from
her flow of blood. This is the law for her who bears a child, male or
female. 8 If she cannot afford a sheep, she shall take two turtledoves
or two pigeons, one for a burnt offering and the other for a sin
offering; and the priest shall make atonement on her behalf, and she
shall be clean.

229

LEVITICUS 230

[Leviticus 13]
Surface affliction in humans
1 The LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:
2 When a person has on the skin of his body a swelling or an eruption
or a spot, and it turns into a leprous disease on the skin of his body, he
shall be brought to Aaron the priest or to one of his sons the priests. 3
The priest shall examine the disease on the skin of his body, and if the
hair in the diseased area has turned white and the disease appears to
be deeper than the skin of his body, it is a leprous disease; after the
priest has examined him he shall pronounce him ceremonially unclean.
4 But if the spot is white in the skin of his body, and appears no deeper
than the skin, and the hair in it has not turned white, the priest shall
confine the diseased person for seven days. 5 The priest shall examine
him on the seventh day, and if he sees that the disease is checked and
the disease has not spread in the skin, then the priest shall confine him
seven days more. 6 The priest shall examine him again on the seventh
day, and if the disease has abated and the disease has not spread in the
skin, the priest shall pronounce him clean; it is only an eruption; and he
shall wash his clothes, and be clean. 7 But if the eruption spreads in the
skin after he has shown himself to the priest for his cleansing, he shall
appear again before the priest. 8 The priest shall make an examination,
and if the eruption has spread in the skin, the priest shall pronounce
him unclean; it is a leprous disease.
9 When a person contracts a leprous disease, he shall be brought to the
priest. 10 The priest shall make an examination, and if there is a white
swelling in the skin that has turned the hair white, and there is quick
raw flesh in the swelling, 11 it is a chronic leprous disease in the skin of
his body. The priest shall pronounce him unclean; he shall not confine
him, for he is unclean. 12 But if the disease breaks out in the skin, so
that it covers all the skin of the diseased person from head to foot, so
far as the priest can see, 13 then the priest shall make an examination,
and if the disease has covered all his body, he shall pronounce him
clean of the disease; since it has all turned white, he is clean. 14 But if
raw flesh ever appears on him, he shall be unclean; 15 the priest shall
examine the raw flesh and pronounce him unclean. Raw flesh is

230

LEVITICUS 231

unclean, for it is a leprous disease. 16 But if the raw flesh again turns
white, he shall come to the priest; 17 the priest shall examine him, and
if the disease has turned white, the priest shall pronounce the diseased
person clean. He is clean.
18 When there is on the skin of one's body a boil that has healed, 19
and in the place of the boil there appears a white swelling or a
reddish-white spot, it shall be shown to the priest. 20 The priest shall
make an examination, and if it appears deeper than the skin and its
hair has turned white, the priest shall pronounce him unclean; this is a
leprous disease, broken out in the boil. 21 But if the priest examines it
and the hair on it is not white, nor is it deeper than the skin but has
abated, the priest shall confine him seven days. 22 If it spreads in the
skin, the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is diseased. 23 But if the
spot remains in one place and does not spread, it is the scar of the boil;
the priest shall pronounce him clean.
24 Or, when the body has a burn on the skin and the raw flesh of the
burn becomes a spot, reddish-white or white, 25 the priest shall
examine it. If the hair in the spot has turned white and it appears
deeper than the skin, it is a leprous disease; it has broken out in the
burn, and the priest shall pronounce him unclean. This is a leprous
disease. 26 But if the priest examines it and the hair in the spot is not
white, and it is no deeper than the skin but has abated, the priest shall
confine him seven days. 27 The priest shall examine him the seventh
day; if it is spreading in the skin, the priest shall pronounce him
unclean. This is a leprous disease. 28 But if the spot remains in one
place and does not spread in the skin but has abated, it is a swelling
from the burn, and the priest shall pronounce him clean; for it is the
scar of the burn.
29 When a man or woman has a disease on the head or in the beard,
30 the priest shall examine the disease. If it appears deeper than the
skin and the hair in it is yellow and thin, the priest shall pronounce him
unclean; it is an itch, a leprous disease of the head or the beard. 31 If
the priest examines the itching disease, and it appears no deeper than
the skin and there is no black hair in it, the priest shall confine the
person with the itching disease for seven days. 32 On the seventh day

231

LEVITICUS 232

the priest shall examine the itch; if the itch has not spread, and there is
no yellow hair in it, and the itch appears to be no deeper than the skin,
33 he shall shave, but the itch he shall not shave. The priest shall
confine the person with the itch for seven days more. 34 On the
seventh day the priest shall examine the itch; if the itch has not spread
in the skin and it appears to be no deeper than the skin, the priest shall
pronounce him clean. He shall wash his clothes and be clean. 35 But if
the itch spreads in the skin after he was pronounced clean, 36 the
priest shall examine him. If the itch has spread in the skin, the priest
need not seek for the yellow hair; he is unclean. 37 But if in his eyes the
itch is checked, and black hair has grown in it, the itch is healed, he is
clean; and the priest shall pronounce him clean.
38 When a man or a woman has spots on the skin of the body, white
spots, 39 the priest shall make an examination, and if the spots on the
skin of the body are of a dull white, it is a rash that has broken out on
the skin; he is clean.
40 If anyone loses the hair from his head, he is bald but he is clean. 41
If he loses the hair from his forehead and temples, he has baldness of
the forehead but he is clean. 42 But if there is on the bald head or the
bald forehead a reddish-white diseased spot, it is a leprous disease
breaking out on his bald head or his bald forehead. 43 The priest shall
examine him; if the diseased swelling is reddish-white on his bald head
or on his bald forehead, which resembles a leprous disease in the skin
of the body, 44 he is leprous, he is unclean. The priest shall pronounce
him unclean; the disease is on his head.
45 The person who has the leprous disease shall wear torn clothes and
let the hair of his head be disheveled; and he shall cover his upper lip
and cry out, "Unclean, unclean." 46 He shall remain unclean as long as
he has the disease; he is unclean. He shall live alone; his dwelling shall
be outside the camp.

232

LEVITICUS 233

Surface affliction in fabrics
47 Concerning clothing: when a leprous disease appears in it, in woolen
or linen cloth, 48 in warp or woof of linen or wool, or in a skin or in
anything made of skin, 49 if the disease shows greenish or reddish in
the garment, whether in warp or woof or in skin or in anything made
of skin, it is a leprous disease and shall be shown to the priest. 50 The
priest shall examine the disease, and put the diseased article aside for
seven days. 51 He shall examine the disease on the seventh day. If the
disease has spread in the cloth, in warp or woof, or in the skin,
whatever be the use of the skin, this is a spreading leprous disease; it is
unclean. 52 He shall burn the clothing, whether diseased in warp or
woof, woolen or linen, or anything of skin, for it is a spreading leprous
disease; it shall be burned in fire.
53 If the priest makes an examination, and the disease has not spread
in the clothing, in warp or woof or in anything of skin, 54 the priest
shall command them to wash the article in which the disease appears,
and he shall put it aside seven days more. 55 The priest shall examine
the diseased article after it has been washed. If the diseased spot has
not changed color, though the disease has not spread, it is unclean;
you shall burn it in fire, whether the leprous spot is on the inside or on
the outside.
56 If the priest makes an examination, and the disease has abated after
it is washed, he shall tear the spot out of the cloth, in warp or woof, or
out of skin. 57 If it appears again in the garment, in warp or woof, or in
anything of skin, it is spreading; you shall burn with fire that in which
the disease appears. 58 But the cloth, warp or woof, or anything of
skin from which the disease disappears when you have washed it, shall
then be washed a second time, and it shall be clean.
59 This is the ritual for a leprous disease in a cloth of wool or linen,
either in warp or woof, or in anything of skin, to decide whether it is
clean or unclean.

233

LEVITICUS 234

[Leviticus 14]
Purifying after recovery
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 2 This shall be the ritual for the
leprous person at the time of his cleansing:
He shall be brought to the priest; 3 the priest shall go out of the camp,
and the priest shall make an examination. If the disease is healed in the
leprous person, 4 the priest shall command that two living clean birds
and cedarwood and crimson yarn and hyssop be brought for the one
who is to be cleansed. 5 The priest shall command that one of the birds
be slaughtered over fresh water in an earthen vessel. 6 He shall take
the living bird with the cedarwood and the crimson yarn and the
hyssop, and dip them and the living bird in the blood of the bird that
was slaughtered over the fresh water. 7 He shall sprinkle it seven times
upon the one who is to be cleansed of the leprous disease; then he
shall pronounce him clean, and he shall let the living bird go into the
open field. 8 The one who is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes, and
shave off all his hair, and bathe himself in water, and he shall be clean.
After that he shall come into the camp, but shall live outside his tent
seven days. 9 On the seventh day he shall shave all his hair: of head,
beard, eyebrows; he shall shave all his hair. Then he shall wash his
clothes, and bathe his body in water, and he shall be clean.
10 On the eighth day he shall take two male lambs without blemish,
and one ewe lamb in its first year without blemish, and a grain
offering of three-tenths of an ephah of choice flour mixed with oil,
and one log of oil. 11 The priest who cleanses shall set the person to be
cleansed, along with these things, before the LORD, at the entrance of
the tent of meeting. 12 The priest shall take one of the lambs, and offer
it as a guilt offering, along with the log of oil, and raise them as an
elevation offering before the LORD. 13 He shall slaughter the lamb in
the place where the sin offering and the burnt offering are
slaughtered in the holy place; for the guilt offering, like the sin
offering, belongs to the priest: it is most holy. 14 The priest shall take
some of the blood of the guilt offering and put it on the lobe of the
right ear of the one to be cleansed, and on the thumb of the right
hand, and on the big toe of the right foot. 15 The priest shall take

234

LEVITICUS 235

some of the log of oil and pour it into the palm of his own left hand, 16
and dip his right finger in the oil that is in his left hand and sprinkle
some oil with his finger seven times before the LORD. 17 Some of the oil
that remains in his hand the priest shall put on the lobe of the right ear
of the one to be cleansed, and on the thumb of the right hand, and on
the big toe of the right foot, on top of the blood of the guilt offering.
18 The rest of the oil that is in the priest's hand he shall put on the
head of the one to be cleansed. Then the priest shall make atonement
on his behalf before the LORD: 19 the priest shall offer the sin offering,
to make atonement for the one to be cleansed from his uncleanness.
Afterward he shall slaughter the burnt offering; 20 and the priest shall
offer the burnt offering and the grain offering on the altar. Thus the
priest shall make atonement on his behalf and he shall be clean.
21 But if he is poor and cannot afford so much, he shall take one male
lamb for a guilt offering to be elevated, to make atonement on his
behalf, and one-tenth of an ephah of choice flour mixed with oil for a
grain offering and a log of oil; 22 also two turtledoves or two pigeons,
such as he can afford, one for a sin offering and the other for a burnt
offering. 23 On the eighth day he shall bring them for his cleansing to
the priest, to the entrance of the tent of meeting, before the LORD; 24
and the priest shall take the lamb of the guilt offering and the log of
oil, and the priest shall raise them as an elevation offering before the
LORD. 25 The priest shall slaughter the lamb of the guilt offering and
shall take some of the blood of the guilt offering, and put it on the
lobe of the right ear of the one to be cleansed, and on the thumb of
the right hand, and on the big toe of the right foot. 26 The priest shall
pour some of the oil into the palm of his own left hand, 27 and shall
sprinkle with his right finger some of the oil that is in his left hand
seven times before the LORD. 28 The priest shall put some of the oil that
is in his hand on the lobe of the right ear of the one to be cleansed,
and on the thumb of the right hand, and the big toe of the right foot,
where the blood of the guilt offering was placed. 29 The rest of the oil
that is in the priest's hand he shall put on the head of the one to be
cleansed, to make atonement on his behalf before the LORD. 30 And he
shall offer, of the turtledoves or pigeons such as he can afford, 31 one
for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering, along with a grain
offering; and the priest shall make atonement before the LORD on

235

LEVITICUS 236

behalf of the one being cleansed. 32 This is the ritual for the one who
has a leprous disease, who cannot afford the offerings for his
cleansing.
Surface affliction in houses
33 The LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:
34 When you come into the land of Canaan, which I give you for a
possession, and I put a leprous disease in a house in the land of your
possession, 35 the owner of the house shall come and tell the priest,
saying, "There seems to me to be some sort of disease in my house." 36
The priest shall command that they empty the house before the priest
goes to examine the disease, or all that is in the house will become
unclean; and afterward the priest shall go in to inspect the house. 37
He shall examine the disease; if the disease is in the walls of the house
with greenish or reddish spots, and if it appears to be deeper than the
surface, 38 the priest shall go outside to the door of the house and
shut up the house seven days. 39 The priest shall come again on the
seventh day and make an inspection; if the disease has spread in the
walls of the house, 40 the priest shall command that the stones in
which the disease appears be taken out and thrown into an unclean
place outside the city. 41 He shall have the inside of the house scraped
thoroughly, and the plaster that is scraped off shall be dumped in an
unclean place outside the city. 42 They shall take other stones and put
them in the place of those stones, and take other plaster and plaster
the house.
43 If the disease breaks out again in the house, after he has taken out
the stones and scraped the house and plastered it, 44 the priest shall
go and make inspection; if the disease has spread in the house, it is a
spreading leprous disease in the house; it is unclean. 45 He shall have
the house torn down, its stones and timber and all the plaster of the
house, and taken outside the city to an unclean place. 46 All who enter
the house while it is shut up shall be unclean until the evening; 47 and
all who sleep in the house shall wash their clothes; and all who eat in
the house shall wash their clothes.

236

LEVITICUS 237

48 If the priest comes and makes an inspection, and the disease has not
spread in the house after the house was plastered, the priest shall
pronounce the house clean; the disease is healed. 49 For the cleansing
of the house he shall take two birds, with cedarwood and crimson yarn
and hyssop, 50 and shall slaughter one of the birds over fresh water in
an earthen vessel, 51 and shall take the cedarwood and the hyssop and
the crimson yarn, along with the living bird, and dip them in the blood
of the slaughtered bird and the fresh water, and sprinkle the house
seven times. 52 Thus he shall cleanse the house with the blood of the
bird, and with the fresh water, and with the living bird, and with the
cedarwood and hyssop and crimson yarn; 53 and he shall let the living
bird go out of the city into the open field; so he shall make atonement
for the house, and it shall be clean.
54 This is the ritual for any leprous disease: for an itch, 55 for leprous
diseases in clothing and houses, 56 and for a swelling or an eruption or
a spot, 57 to determine when it is unclean and when it is clean. This is
the ritual for leprous diseases.
[Leviticus 15]
Sexual discharges
1 The LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying: 2 Speak to the people of
Israel and say to them:
When any man has a discharge from his member, his discharge makes
him ceremonially unclean. 3 The uncleanness of his discharge is this:
whether his member flows with his discharge, or his member is stopped
from discharging, it is uncleanness for him. 4 Every bed on which the
one with the discharge lies shall be unclean; and everything on which
he sits shall be unclean. 5 Anyone who touches his bed shall wash his
clothes, and bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening. 6 All
who sit on anything on which the one with the discharge has sat shall
wash their clothes, and bathe in water, and be unclean until the
evening. 7 All who touch the body of the one with the discharge shall
wash their clothes, and bathe in water, and be unclean until the
evening. 8 If the one with the discharge spits on persons who are
clean, then they shall wash their clothes, and bathe in water, and be

237

LEVITICUS 238

unclean until the evening. 9 Any saddle on which the one with the
discharge rides shall be unclean. 10 All who touch anything that was
under him shall be unclean until the evening, and all who carry such a
thing shall wash their clothes, and bathe in water, and be unclean until
the evening. 11 All those whom the one with the discharge touches
without his having rinsed his hands in water shall wash their clothes,
and bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening. 12 Any earthen
vessel that the one with the discharge touches shall be broken; and
every vessel of wood shall be rinsed in water.
13 When the one with a discharge is cleansed of his discharge, he shall
count seven days for his cleansing; he shall wash his clothes and bathe
his body in fresh water, and he shall be clean. 14 On the eighth day he
shall take two turtledoves or two pigeons and come before the LORD to
the entrance of the tent of meeting and give them to the priest. 15 The
priest shall offer them, one for a sin offering and the other for a burnt
offering; and the priest shall make atonement on his behalf before the
LORD for his discharge.
16 If a man has an emission of semen, he shall bathe his whole body in
water, and be unclean until the evening. 17 Everything made of cloth
or of skin on which the semen falls shall be washed with water, and be
unclean until the evening. 18 If a man lies with a woman and has an
emission of semen, both of them shall bathe in water, and be unclean
until the evening.
19 When a woman has a discharge of blood that is her regular
discharge from her body, she shall be in her impurity for seven days,
and whoever touches her shall be unclean until the evening. 20
Everything upon which she lies during her impurity shall be unclean;
everything also upon which she sits shall be unclean. 21 Whoever
touches her bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe in water, and be
unclean until the evening. 22 Whoever touches anything upon which
she sits shall wash his clothes, and bathe in water, and be unclean until
the evening; 23 whether it is the bed or anything upon which she sits,
when he touches it he shall be unclean until the evening. 24 If any man
lies with her, and her impurity falls on him, he shall be unclean seven
days; and every bed on which he lies shall be unclean.

238

LEVITICUS 239

25 If a woman has a discharge of blood for many days, not at the time
of her impurity, or if she has a discharge beyond the time of her
impurity, all the days of the discharge she shall continue in
uncleanness; as in the days of her impurity, she shall be unclean. 26
Every bed on which she lies during all the days of her discharge shall be
treated as the bed of her impurity; and everything on which she sits
shall be unclean, as in the uncleanness of her impurity. 27 Whoever
touches these things shall be unclean, and shall wash his clothes, and
bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening. 28 If she is cleansed
of her discharge, she shall count seven days, and after that she shall be
clean. 29 On the eighth day she shall take two turtledoves or two
pigeons and bring them to the priest at the entrance of the tent of
meeting. 30 The priest shall offer one for a sin offering and the other
for a burnt offering; and the priest shall make atonement on her
behalf before the LORD for her unclean discharge.
31 Thus you shall keep the people of Israel separate from their
uncleanness, so that they do not die in their uncleanness by defiling my
tabernacle that is in their midst.
32 This is the ritual for those who have a discharge: for him who has an
emission of semen, becoming unclean thereby, 33 for her who is in the
infirmity of her period, for anyone, male or female, who has a
discharge, and for the man who lies with a woman who is unclean.
[Leviticus 16]
The Day of Atonement
1 The LORD spoke to Moses after the death of the two sons of Aaron,
when they drew near before the LORD and died. 2 The LORD said to
Moses:
Tell your brother Aaron not to come just at any time into the sanctuary
inside the curtain before the mercy seat that is upon the ark, or he will
die; for I appear in the cloud upon the mercy seat. 3 Thus shall Aaron
come into the holy place: with a young bull for a sin offering and a
ram for a burnt offering. 4 He shall put on the holy linen tunic, and
shall have the linen undergarments next to his body, fasten the linen

239

LEVITICUS 240

sash, and wear the linen turban; these are the holy vestments. He shall
bathe his body in water, and then put them on. 5 He shall take from
the congregation of the people of Israel two male goats for a sin
offering, and one ram for a burnt offering.
6 Aaron shall offer the bull as a sin offering for himself, and shall make
atonement for himself and for his house. 7 He shall take the two goats
and set them before the LORD at the entrance of the tent of meeting; 8
and Aaron shall cast lots on the two goats, one lot for the LORD and the
other lot for Azazel. 9 Aaron shall present the goat on which the lot
fell for the LORD, and offer it as a sin offering; 10 but the goat on which
the lot fell for Azazel shall be presented alive before the LORD to make
atonement over it, that it may be sent away into the wilderness to
Azazel.
11 Aaron shall present the bull as a sin offering for himself, and shall
make atonement for himself and for his house; he shall slaughter the
bull as a sin offering for himself. 12 He shall take a censer full of coals
of fire from the altar before the LORD, and two handfuls of crushed
sweet incense, and he shall bring it inside the curtain 13 and put the
incense on the fire before the LORD, that the cloud of the incense may
cover the mercy seat that is upon the covenant, or he will die. 14 He
shall take some of the blood of the bull, and sprinkle it with his finger
on the front of the mercy seat, and before the mercy seat he shall
sprinkle the blood with his finger seven times.
15 He shall slaughter the goat of the sin offering that is for the people
and bring its blood inside the curtain, and do with its blood as he did
with the blood of the bull, sprinkling it upon the mercy seat and
before the mercy seat. 16 Thus he shall make atonement for the
sanctuary, because of the uncleannesses of the people of Israel, and
because of their transgressions, all their sins; and so he shall do for the
tent of meeting, which remains with them in the midst of their
uncleannesses. 17 No one shall be in the tent of meeting from the time
he enters to make atonement in the sanctuary until he comes out and
has made atonement for himself and for his house and for all the
assembly of Israel. 18 Then he shall go out to the altar that is before
the LORD and make atonement on its behalf, and shall take some of the

240

LEVITICUS 241

blood of the bull and of the blood of the goat, and put it on each of
the horns of the altar. 19 He shall sprinkle some of the blood on it with
his finger seven times, and cleanse it and hallow it from the
uncleannesses of the people of Israel.
20 When he has finished atoning for the holy place and the tent of
meeting and the altar, he shall present the live goat. 21 Then Aaron
shall lay both his hands on the head of the live goat, and confess over
it all the iniquities of the people of Israel, and all their transgressions,
all their sins, putting them on the head of the goat, and sending it
away into the wilderness by means of someone designated for the
task. 22 The goat shall bear on itself all their iniquities to a barren
region; and the goat shall be set free in the wilderness.
23 Then Aaron shall enter the tent of meeting, and shall take off the
linen vestments that he put on when he went into the holy place, and
shall leave them there. 24 He shall bathe his body in water in a holy
place, and put on his vestments; then he shall come out and offer his
burnt offering and the burnt offering of the people, making
atonement for himself and for the people. 25 The fat of the sin
offering he shall turn into smoke on the altar. 26 The one who sets the
goat free for Azazel shall wash his clothes and bathe his body in water,
and afterward may come into the camp. 27 The bull of the sin offering
and the goat of the sin offering, whose blood was brought in to make
atonement in the holy place, shall be taken outside the camp; their
skin and their flesh and their dung shall be consumed in fire. 28 The
one who burns them shall wash his clothes and bathe his body in
water, and afterward may come into the camp.
29 This shall be a statute to you forever: In the seventh month, on the
tenth day of the month, you shall deny yourselves, and shall do no
work, neither the citizen nor the alien who resides among you. 30 For
on this day atonement shall be made for you, to cleanse you; from all
your sins you shall be clean before the LORD. 31 It is a sabbath of
complete rest to you, and you shall deny yourselves; it is a statute
forever. 32 The priest who is anointed and consecrated as priest in his
father's place shall make atonement, wearing the linen vestments, the
holy vestments. 33 He shall make atonement for the sanctuary, and he

241

LEVITICUS 242

shall make atonement for the tent of meeting and for the altar, and he
shall make atonement for the priests and for all the people of the
assembly. 34 This shall be an everlasting statute for you, to make
atonement for the people of Israel once in the year for all their sins.
And Moses did as the LORD had commanded him.
[Leviticus 17]
Slaughter at the sanctuary
1 The LORD spoke to Moses:
2 Speak to Aaron and his sons and to all the people of Israel and say to
them: This is what the LORD has commanded. 3 If anyone of the house
of Israel slaughters an ox or a lamb or a goat in the camp, or slaughters
it outside the camp, 4 and does not bring it to the entrance of the tent
of meeting, to present it as an offering to the LORD before the
tabernacle of the LORD, he shall be held guilty of bloodshed; he has
shed blood, and he shall be cut off from the people. 5 This is in order
that the people of Israel may bring their sacrifices that they offer in the
open field, that they may bring them to the LORD, to the priest at the
entrance of the tent of meeting, and offer them as sacrifices of wellbeing to the LORD. 6 The priest shall dash the blood against the altar of
the LORD at the entrance of the tent of meeting, and turn the fat into
smoke as a pleasing odor to the LORD, 7 so that they may no longer
offer their sacrifices for goat-demons, to whom they prostitute
themselves. This shall be a statute forever to them throughout their
generations.
8 And say to them further: Anyone of the house of Israel or of the
aliens who reside among them who offers a burnt offering or sacrifice,
9 and does not bring it to the entrance of the tent of meeting, to
sacrifice it to the LORD, shall be cut off from the people.
10 If anyone of the house of Israel or of the aliens who reside among
them eats any blood, I will set my face against that person who eats
blood, and will cut that person off from the people. 11 For the life of
the flesh is in the blood; and I have given it to you for making
atonement for your lives on the altar; for, as life, it is the blood that

242

LEVITICUS 243

makes atonement. 12 Therefore I have said to the people of Israel: No
person among you shall eat blood, nor shall any alien who resides
among you eat blood. 13 And anyone of the people of Israel, or of the
aliens who reside among them, who hunts down an animal or bird that
may be eaten shall pour out its blood and cover it with earth.
14 For the life of every creature — its blood is its life; therefore I have
said to the people of Israel: You shall not eat the blood of any
creature, for the life of every creature is its blood; whoever eats it shall
be cut off. 15 All persons, citizens or aliens, who eat what dies of itself
or what has been torn by wild animals, shall wash their clothes, and
bathe themselves in water, and be unclean until the evening; then they
shall be clean. 16 But if they do not wash themselves or bathe their
body, they shall bear their guilt.
[Leviticus 18]
Sexual prohibitions
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying:
2 Speak to the people of Israel and say to them: I am the LORD your
God. 3 You shall not do as they do in the land of Egypt, where you
lived, and you shall not do as they do in the land of Canaan, to which I
am bringing you. You shall not follow their statutes. 4 My ordinances
you shall observe and my statutes you shall keep, following them: I am
the LORD your God. 5 You shall keep my statutes and my ordinances; by
doing so one shall live: I am the LORD.
6 None of you shall approach anyone near of kin to uncover
nakedness: I am the LORD. 7 You shall not uncover the nakedness of
your father, which is the nakedness of your mother; she is your mother,
you shall not uncover her nakedness. 8 You shall not uncover the
nakedness of your father's wife; it is the nakedness of your father. 9
You shall not uncover the nakedness of your sister, your father's
daughter or your mother's daughter, whether born at home or born
abroad. 10 You shall not uncover the nakedness of your son's daughter
or of your daughter's daughter, for their nakedness is your own
nakedness. 11 You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father's

243

LEVITICUS 244

wife's daughter, begotten by your father, since she is your sister. 12
You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father's sister; she is your
father's flesh. 13 You shall not uncover the nakedness of your mother's
sister, for she is your mother's flesh. 14 You shall not uncover the
nakedness of your father's brother, that is, you shall not approach his
wife; she is your aunt. 15 You shall not uncover the nakedness of your
daughter-in-law: she is your son's wife; you shall not uncover her
nakedness. 16 You shall not uncover the nakedness of your brother's
wife; it is your brother's nakedness. 17 You shall not uncover the
nakedness of a woman and her daughter, and you shall not take her
son's daughter or her daughter's daughter to uncover her nakedness;
they are your flesh; it is depravity. 18 And you shall not take a woman
as a rival to her sister, uncovering her nakedness while her sister is still
alive.
19 You shall not approach a woman to uncover her nakedness while
she is in her menstrual uncleanness. 20 You shall not have sexual
relations with your kinsman's wife, and defile yourself with her. 21 You
shall not give any of your offspring to sacrifice them to Molech, and so
profane the name of your God: I am the LORD. 22 You shall not lie with
a male as with a woman; it is an abomination. 23 You shall not have
sexual relations with any animal and defile yourself with it, nor shall
any woman give herself to an animal to have sexual relations with it: it
is perversion.
24 Do not defile yourselves in any of these ways, for by all these
practices the nations I am casting out before you have defiled
themselves. 25 Thus the land became defiled; and I punished it for its
iniquity, and the land vomited out its inhabitants. 26 But you shall keep
my statutes and my ordinances and commit none of these
abominations, either the citizen or the alien who resides among you 27
(for the inhabitants of the land, who were before you, committed all
of these abominations, and the land became defiled); 28 otherwise the
land will vomit you out for defiling it, as it vomited out the nation that
was before you. 29 For whoever commits any of these abominations
shall be cut off from their people. 30 So keep my charge not to commit
any of these abominations that were done before you, and not to
defile yourselves by them: I am the LORD your God.

244

LEVITICUS 245

[Leviticus 19]
Various laws
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying:
2 Speak to all the congregation of the people of Israel and say to them:
You shall be holy, for I the LORD your God am holy. 3 You shall each
revere your mother and father, and you shall keep my sabbaths: I am
the LORD your God. 4 Do not turn to idols or make cast images for
yourselves: I am the LORD your God.
5 When you offer a sacrifice of well-being to the LORD, offer it in such a
way that it is acceptable in your behalf. 6 It shall be eaten on the same
day you offer it, or on the next day; and anything left over until the
third day shall be consumed in fire. 7 If it is eaten at all on the third
day, it is an abomination; it will not be acceptable. 8 All who eat it
shall be subject to punishment, because they have profaned what is
holy to the LORD; and any such person shall be cut off from the people.
9 When you reap the harvest of your land, you shall not reap to the
very edges of your field, or gather the gleanings of your harvest. 10
You shall not strip your vineyard bare, or gather the fallen grapes of
your vineyard; you shall leave them for the poor and the alien: I am the
LORD your God.
11 You shall not steal; you shall not deal falsely; and you shall not lie to
one another. 12 And you shall not swear falsely by my name, profaning
the name of your God: I am the LORD.
13 You shall not defraud your neighbor; you shall not steal; and you
shall not keep for yourself the wages of a laborer until morning. 14
You shall not revile the deaf or put a stumbling block before the blind;
you shall fear your God: I am the LORD.
15 You shall not render an unjust judgment; you shall not be partial to
the poor or defer to the great: with justice you shall judge your
neighbor. 16 You shall not go around as a slanderer among your

245

LEVITICUS 246

people, and you shall not profit by the blood of your neighbor: I am
the LORD.
17 You shall not hate in your heart anyone of your kin; you shall
reprove your neighbor, or you will incur guilt yourself. 18 You shall not
take vengeance or bear a grudge against any of your people, but you
shall love your neighbor as yourself: I am the LORD.
19 You shall keep my statutes. You shall not let your animals breed
with a different kind; you shall not sow your field with two kinds of
seed; nor shall you put on a garment made of two different materials.
20 If a man has sexual relations with a woman who is a slave,
designated for another man but not ransomed or given her freedom,
an inquiry shall be held. They shall not be put to death, since she has
not been freed; 21 but he shall bring a guilt offering for himself to the
LORD, at the entrance of the tent of meeting, a ram as guilt offering. 22
And the priest shall make atonement for him with the ram of guilt
offering before the LORD for his sin that he committed; and the sin he
committed shall be forgiven him.
23 When you come into the land and plant all kinds of trees for food,
then you shall regard their fruit as forbidden; three years it shall be
forbidden to you, it must not be eaten. 24 In the fourth year all their
fruit shall be set apart for rejoicing in the LORD. 25 But in the fifth year
you may eat of their fruit, that their yield may be increased for you: I
am the LORD your God.
26 You shall not eat anything with its blood. You shall not practice
augury or witchcraft. 27 You shall not round off the hair on your
temples or mar the edges of your beard. 28 You shall not make any
gashes in your flesh for the dead or tattoo any marks upon you: I am
the LORD.
29 Do not profane your daughter by making her a prostitute, that the
land not become prostituted and full of depravity. 30 You shall keep
my sabbaths and reverence my sanctuary: I am the LORD.

246

LEVITICUS 247

31 Do not turn to mediums or wizards; do not seek them out, to be
defiled by them: I am the LORD your God.
32 You shall rise before the aged, and defer to the old; and you shall
fear your God: I am the LORD.
33 When an alien resides with you in your land, you shall not oppress
the alien. 34 The alien who resides with you shall be to you as the
citizen among you; you shall love the alien as yourself, for you were
aliens in the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your God.
35 You shall not cheat in measuring length, weight, or quantity. 36 You
shall have honest balances, honest weights, an honest ephah, and an
honest hin: I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land
of Egypt. 37 You shall keep all my statutes and all my ordinances, and
observe them: I am the LORD.
[Leviticus 20]
Sexual and other prohibitions
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 2 Say further to the people of Israel:
Any of the people of Israel, or of the aliens who reside in Israel, who
give any of their offspring to Molech shall be put to death; the people
of the land shall stone them to death. 3 I myself will set my face against
them, and will cut them off from the people, because they have given
of their offspring to Molech, defiling my sanctuary and profaning my
holy name. 4 And if the people of the land should ever close their eyes
to them, when they give of their offspring to Molech, and do not put
them to death, 5 I myself will set my face against them and against
their family, and will cut them off from among their people, them and
all who follow them in prostituting themselves to Molech.
6 If any turn to mediums and wizards, prostituting themselves to them,
I will set my face against them, and will cut them off from the people.
7 Consecrate yourselves therefore, and be holy; for I am the LORD your
God. 8 Keep my statutes, and observe them; I am the LORD; I sanctify

247

LEVITICUS 248

you. 9 All who curse father or mother shall be put to death; having
cursed father or mother, their blood is upon them.
10 If a man commits adultery with the wife of his neighbor, both the
adulterer and the adulteress shall be put to death. 11 The man who lies
with his father's wife has uncovered his father's nakedness; both of
them shall be put to death; their blood is upon them. 12 If a man lies
with his daughter-in-law, both of them shall be put to death; they have
committed perversion, their blood is upon them. 13 If a man lies with a
male as with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination;
they shall be put to death; their blood is upon them. 14 If a man takes a
wife and her mother also, it is depravity; they shall be burned to death,
both he and they, that there may be no depravity among you. 15 If a
man has sexual relations with an animal, he shall be put to death; and
you shall kill the animal. 16 If a woman approaches any animal and has
sexual relations with it, you shall kill the woman and the animal; they
shall be put to death, their blood is upon them.
17 If a man takes his sister, a daughter of his father or a daughter of his
mother, and sees her nakedness, and she sees his nakedness, it is a
disgrace, and they shall be cut off in the sight of their people; he has
uncovered his sister's nakedness, he shall be subject to punishment. 18
If a man lies with a woman having her sickness and uncovers her
nakedness, he has laid bare her flow and she has laid bare her flow of
blood; both of them shall be cut off from their people. 19 You shall not
uncover the nakedness of your mother's sister or of your father's sister,
for that is to lay bare one's own flesh; they shall be subject to
punishment. 20 If a man lies with his uncle's wife, he has uncovered his
uncle's nakedness; they shall be subject to punishment; they shall die
childless. 21 If a man takes his brother's wife, it is impurity; he has
uncovered his brother's nakedness; they shall be childless.
22 You shall keep all my statutes and all my ordinances, and observe
them, so that the land to which I bring you to settle in may not vomit
you out. 23 You shall not follow the practices of the nation that I am
driving out before you. Because they did all these things, I abhorred
them. 24 But I have said to you: You shall inherit their land, and I will
give it to you to possess, a land flowing with milk and honey. I am the

248

LEVITICUS 249

LORD your God; I have separated you from the peoples. 25 You shall
therefore make a distinction between the clean animal and the
unclean, and between the unclean bird and the clean; you shall not
bring abomination on yourselves by animal or by bird or by anything
with which the ground teems, which I have set apart for you to hold
unclean. 26 You shall be holy to me; for I the LORD am holy, and I have
separated you from the other peoples to be mine.
27 A man or a woman who is a medium or a wizard shall be put to
death; they shall be stoned to death, their blood is upon them.
[Leviticus 21]
Priestly restrictions and sacrificial requirements
1 The LORD said to Moses: Speak to the priests, the sons of Aaron, and
say to them:
No one shall defile himself for a dead person among his relatives, 2
except for his nearest kin: his mother, his father, his son, his daughter,
his brother; 3 likewise, for a virgin sister, close to him because she has
had no husband, he may defile himself for her. 4 But he shall not defile
himself as a husband among his people and so profane himself. 5 They
shall not make bald spots upon their heads, or shave off the edges of
their beards, or make any gashes in their flesh. 6 They shall be holy to
their God, and not profane the name of their God; for they offer the
LORD's offerings by fire, the food of their God; therefore they shall be
holy. 7 They shall not marry a prostitute or a woman who has been
defiled; neither shall they marry a woman divorced from her husband.
For they are holy to their God, 8 and you shall treat them as holy, since
they offer the food of your God; they shall be holy to you, for I the
LORD, I who sanctify you, am holy. 9 When the daughter of a priest
profanes herself through prostitution, she profanes her father; she
shall be burned to death.
10 The priest who is exalted above his fellows, on whose head the
anointing oil has been poured and who has been consecrated to wear
the vestments, shall not dishevel his hair, nor tear his vestments. 11 He
shall not go where there is a dead body; he shall not defile himself

249

LEVITICUS 250

even for his father or mother. 12 He shall not go outside the sanctuary
and thus profane the sanctuary of his God; for the consecration of the
anointing oil of his God is upon him: I am the LORD. 13 He shall marry
only a woman who is a virgin. 14 A widow, or a divorced woman, or a
woman who has been defiled, a prostitute, these he shall not marry.
He shall marry a virgin of his own kin, 15 that he may not profane his
offspring among his kin; for I am the LORD; I sanctify him.
16 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 17 Speak to Aaron and say: No one
of your offspring throughout their generations who has a blemish may
approach to offer the food of his God. 18 For no one who has a
blemish shall draw near, one who is blind or lame, or one who has a
mutilated face or a limb too long, 19 or one who has a broken foot or a
broken hand, 20 or a hunchback, or a dwarf, or a man with a blemish
in his eyes or an itching disease or scabs or crushed testicles. 21 No
descendant of Aaron the priest who has a blemish shall come near to
offer the LORD's offerings by fire; since he has a blemish, he shall not
come near to offer the food of his God. 22 He may eat the food of his
God, of the most holy as well as of the holy. 23 But he shall not come
near the curtain or approach the altar, because he has a blemish, that
he may not profane my sanctuaries; for I am the LORD; I sanctify them.
24 Thus Moses spoke to Aaron and to his sons and to all the people of
Israel.
[Leviticus 22]
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 2 Direct Aaron and his sons to deal
carefully with the sacred donations of the people of Israel, which they
dedicate to me, so that they may not profane my holy name; I am the
LORD. 3 Say to them: If anyone among all your offspring throughout
your generations comes near the sacred donations, which the people
of Israel dedicate to the LORD, while he is in a state of uncleanness, that
person shall be cut off from my presence: I am the LORD. 4 No one of
Aaron's offspring who has a leprous disease or suffers a discharge may
eat of the sacred donations until he is clean. Whoever touches
anything made unclean by a corpse or a man who has had an emission
of semen, 5 and whoever touches any swarming thing by which he may
be made unclean or any human being by whom he may be made

250

LEVITICUS 251

unclean — whatever his uncleanness may be — 6 the person who
touches any such shall be unclean until evening and shall not eat of the
sacred donations unless he has washed his body in water. 7 When the
sun sets he shall be clean; and afterward he may eat of the sacred
donations, for they are his food. 8 That which died or was torn by wild
animals he shall not eat, becoming unclean by it: I am the LORD. 9 They
shall keep my charge, so that they may not incur guilt and die in the
sanctuary for having profaned it: I am the LORD; I sanctify them.
10 No lay person shall eat of the sacred donations. No bound or hired
servant of the priest shall eat of the sacred donations; 11 but if a priest
acquires anyone by purchase, the person may eat of them; and those
that are born in his house may eat of his food. 12 If a priest's daughter
marries a layman, she shall not eat of the offering of the sacred
donations; 13 but if a priest's daughter is widowed or divorced, without
offspring, and returns to her father's house, as in her youth, she may
eat of her father's food. No lay person shall eat of it. 14 If a man eats of
the sacred donation unintentionally, he shall add one-fifth of its value
to it, and give the sacred donation to the priest. 15 No one shall
profane the sacred donations of the people of Israel, which they offer
to the LORD, 16 causing them to bear guilt requiring a guilt offering, by
eating their sacred donations: for I am the LORD; I sanctify them.
17 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 18 Speak to Aaron and his sons and
all the people of Israel and say to them: When anyone of the house of
Israel or of the aliens residing in Israel presents an offering, whether in
payment of a vow or as a freewill offering that is offered to the LORD
as a burnt offering, 19 to be acceptable in your behalf it shall be a male
without blemish, of the cattle or the sheep or the goats. 20 You shall
not offer anything that has a blemish, for it will not be acceptable in
your behalf.
21 When anyone offers a sacrifice of well-being to the LORD, in
fulfillment of a vow or as a freewill offering, from the herd or from the
flock, to be acceptable it must be perfect; there shall be no blemish in
it. 22 Anything blind, or injured, or maimed, or having a discharge or
an itch or scabs — these you shall not offer to the LORD or put any of
them on the altar as offerings by fire to the LORD. 23 An ox or a lamb

251

LEVITICUS 252

that has a limb too long or too short you may present for a freewill
offering; but it will not be accepted for a vow. 24 Any animal that has
its testicles bruised or crushed or torn or cut, you shall not offer to the
LORD; such you shall not do within your land, 25 nor shall you accept
any such animals from a foreigner to offer as food to your God; since
they are mutilated, with a blemish in them, they shall not be accepted
in your behalf.
26 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 27 When an ox or a sheep or a
goat is born, it shall remain seven days with its mother, and from the
eighth day on it shall be acceptable as the LORD's offering by fire. 28
But you shall not slaughter, from the herd or the flock, an animal with
its young on the same day. 29 When you sacrifice a thanksgiving
offering to the LORD, you shall sacrifice it so that it may be acceptable
in your behalf. 30 It shall be eaten on the same day; you shall not leave
any of it until morning: I am the LORD.
31 Thus you shall keep my commandments and observe them: I am the
LORD. 32 You shall not profane my holy name, that I may be sanctified
among the people of Israel: I am the LORD; I sanctify you, 33 I who
brought you out of the land of Egypt to be your God: I am the LORD.
[Leviticus 23]
The ritual calendar
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 2 Speak to the people of Israel and
say to them: These are the appointed festivals of the LORD that you
shall proclaim as holy convocations, my appointed festivals.
3 Six days shall work be done; but the seventh day is a sabbath of
complete rest, a holy convocation; you shall do no work: it is a sabbath
to the LORD throughout your settlements.
4 These are the appointed festivals of the LORD, the holy convocations,
which you shall celebrate at the time appointed for them. 5 In the first
month, on the fourteenth day of the month, at twilight, there shall be
a passover offering to the LORD, 6 and on the fifteenth day of the same
month is the festival of unleavened bread to the LORD; seven days you

252

LEVITICUS 253

shall eat unleavened bread. 7 On the first day you shall have a holy
convocation; you shall not work at your occupations. 8 For seven days
you shall present the LORD's offerings by fire; on the seventh day there
shall be a holy convocation: you shall not work at your occupations.
9 The LORD spoke to Moses: 10 Speak to the people of Israel and say to
them: When you enter the land that I am giving you and you reap its
harvest, you shall bring the sheaf of the first fruits of your harvest to
the priest. 11 He shall raise the sheaf before the LORD, that you may find
acceptance; on the day after the sabbath the priest shall raise it. 12 On
the day when you raise the sheaf, you shall offer a lamb a year old,
without blemish, as a burnt offering to the LORD. 13 And the grain
offering with it shall be two-tenths of an ephah of choice flour mixed
with oil, an offering by fire of pleasing odor to the LORD; and the drink
offering with it shall be of wine, one-fourth of a hin. 14 You shall eat
no bread or parched grain or fresh ears until that very day, until you
have brought the offering of your God: it is a statute forever
throughout your generations in all your settlements.
15 And from the day after the sabbath, from the day on which you
bring the sheaf of the elevation offering, you shall count off seven
weeks; they shall be complete. 16 You shall count until the day after
the seventh sabbath, fifty days; then you shall present an offering of
new grain to the LORD. 17 You shall bring from your settlements two
loaves of bread as an elevation offering, each made of two-tenths of
an ephah; they shall be of choice flour, baked with leaven, as first fruits
to the LORD. 18 You shall present with the bread seven lambs a year old
without blemish, one young bull, and two rams; they shall be a burnt
offering to the LORD, along with their grain offering and their drink
offerings, an offering by fire of pleasing odor to the LORD. 19 You shall
also offer one male goat for a sin offering, and two male lambs a year
old as a sacrifice of well-being. 20 The priest shall raise them with the
bread of the first fruits as an elevation offering before the LORD,
together with the two lambs; they shall be holy to the LORD for the
priest. 21 On that same day you shall make proclamation; you shall hold
a holy convocation; you shall not work at your occupations. This is a
statute forever in all your settlements throughout your generations.

253

LEVITICUS 254

22 When you reap the harvest of your land, you shall not reap to the
very edges of your field, or gather the gleanings of your harvest; you
shall leave them for the poor and for the alien: I am the LORD your God.
23 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 24 Speak to the people of Israel,
saying: In the seventh month, on the first day of the month, you shall
observe a day of complete rest, a holy convocation commemorated
with trumpet blasts. 25 You shall not work at your occupations; and
you shall present the LORD's offering by fire.
26 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 27 Now, the tenth day of this
seventh month is the day of atonement; it shall be a holy convocation
for you: you shall deny yourselves and present the LORD's offering by
fire; 28 and you shall do no work during that entire day; for it is a day
of atonement, to make atonement on your behalf before the LORD
your God. 29 For anyone who does not practice self-denial during that
entire day shall be cut off from the people. 30 And anyone who does
any work during that entire day, such a one I will destroy from the
midst of the people. 31 You shall do no work: it is a statute forever
throughout your generations in all your settlements. 32 It shall be to
you a sabbath of complete rest, and you shall deny yourselves; on the
ninth day of the month at evening, from evening to evening you shall
keep your sabbath.
33 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 34 Speak to the people of Israel,
saying: On the fifteenth day of this seventh month, and lasting seven
days, there shall be the festival of booths to the LORD. 35 The first day
shall be a holy convocation; you shall not work at your occupations. 36
Seven days you shall present the LORD's offerings by fire; on the eighth
day you shall observe a holy convocation and present the LORD's
offerings by fire; it is a solemn assembly; you shall not work at your
occupations.

254

LEVITICUS 255

37 These are the appointed festivals of the LORD, which you shall
celebrate as times of holy convocation, for presenting to the LORD
offerings by fire — burnt offerings and grain offerings, sacrifices and
drink offerings, each on its proper day — 38 apart from the sabbaths of
the LORD, and apart from your gifts, and apart from all your votive
offerings, and apart from all your freewill offerings, which you give to
the LORD.
39 Now, the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when you have
gathered in the produce of the land, you shall keep the festival of the
LORD, lasting seven days; a complete rest on the first day, and a
complete rest on the eighth day. 40 On the first day you shall take the
fruit of majestic trees, branches of palm trees, boughs of leafy trees,
and willows of the brook; and you shall rejoice before the LORD your
God for seven days. 41 You shall keep it as a festival to the LORD seven
days in the year; you shall keep it in the seventh month as a statute
forever throughout your generations. 42 You shall live in booths for
seven days; all that are citizens in Israel shall live in booths, 43 so that
your generations may know that I made the people of Israel live in
booths when I brought them out of the land of Egypt: I am the LORD
your God.
44 Thus Moses declared to the people of Israel the appointed festivals
of the LORD.
[Leviticus 24]
Various laws
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 2 Command the people of Israel to
bring you pure oil of beaten olives for the lamp, that a light may be
kept burning regularly. 3 Aaron shall set it up in the tent of meeting,
outside the curtain of the covenant, to burn from evening to morning
before the LORD regularly; it shall be a statute forever throughout your
generations. 4 He shall set up the lamps on the lampstand of pure gold
before the LORD regularly.

255

LEVITICUS 256

5 You shall take choice flour, and bake twelve loaves of it; two-tenths
of an ephah shall be in each loaf. 6 You shall place them in two rows,
six in a row, on the table of pure gold. 7 You shall put pure
frankincense with each row, to be a token offering for the bread, as an
offering by fire to the LORD. 8 Every sabbath day Aaron shall set them
in order before the LORD regularly as a commitment of the people of
Israel, as a covenant forever. 9 They shall be for Aaron and his
descendants, who shall eat them in a holy place, for they are most holy
portions for him from the offerings by fire to the LORD, a perpetual
due.
10 A man whose mother was an Israelite and whose father was an
Egyptian came out among the people of Israel; and the Israelite
woman's son and a certain Israelite began fighting in the camp. 11 The
Israelite woman's son blasphemed the Name in a curse. And they
brought him to Moses — now his mother's name was Shelomith,
daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan — 12 and they put him in
custody, until the decision of the LORD should be made clear to them.
13 The LORD said to Moses, saying: 14 Take the blasphemer outside the
camp; and let all who were within hearing lay their hands on his head,
and let the whole congregation stone him. 15 And speak to the people
of Israel, saying: Anyone who curses God shall bear the sin. 16 One who
blasphemes the name of the LORD shall be put to death; the whole
congregation shall stone the blasphemer. Aliens as well as citizens,
when they blaspheme the Name, shall be put to death. 17 Anyone who
kills a human being shall be put to death. 18 Anyone who kills an
animal shall make restitution for it, life for life. 19 Anyone who maims
another shall suffer the same injury in return: 20 fracture for fracture,
eye for eye, tooth for tooth; the injury inflicted is the injury to be
suffered. 21 One who kills an animal shall make restitution for it; but
one who kills a human being shall be put to death. 22 You shall have
one law for the alien and for the citizen: for I am the LORD your God. 23
Moses spoke thus to the people of Israel; and they took the
blasphemer outside the camp, and stoned him to death. The people of
Israel did as the LORD had commanded Moses.

256

LEVITICUS 257

[Leviticus 25]
The sabbatical and jubilee years
1 The LORD spoke to Moses on Mount Sinai, saying: 2 Speak to the
people of Israel and say to them: When you enter the land that I am
giving you, the land shall observe a sabbath for the LORD. 3 Six years
you shall sow your field, and six years you shall prune your vineyard,
and gather in their yield; 4 but in the seventh year there shall be a
sabbath of complete rest for the land, a sabbath for the LORD: you shall
not sow your field or prune your vineyard. 5 You shall not reap the
aftergrowth of your harvest or gather the grapes of your unpruned
vine: it shall be a year of complete rest for the land. 6 You may eat
what the land yields during its sabbath — you, your male and female
slaves, your hired and your bound laborers who live with you; 7 for
your livestock also, and for the wild animals in your land all its yield
shall be for food.
8 You shall count off seven weeks of years, seven times seven years, so
that the period of seven weeks of years gives forty-nine years. 9 Then
you shall have the trumpet sounded loud; on the tenth day of the
seventh month — on the day of atonement — you shall have the
trumpet sounded throughout all your land. 10 And you shall hallow the
fiftieth year and you shall proclaim liberty throughout the land to all
its inhabitants. It shall be a jubilee for you: you shall return, every one
of you, to your property and every one of you to your family. 11 That
fiftieth year shall be a jubilee for you: you shall not sow, or reap the
aftergrowth, or harvest the unpruned vines. 12 For it is a jubilee; it shall
be holy to you: you shall eat only what the field itself produces.
13 In this year of jubilee you shall return, every one of you, to your
property. 14 When you make a sale to your neighbor or buy from your
neighbor, you shall not cheat one another. 15 When you buy from your
neighbor, you shall pay only for the number of years since the jubilee;
the seller shall charge you only for the remaining crop years. 16 If the
years are more, you shall increase the price, and if the years are fewer,
you shall diminish the price; for it is a certain number of harvests that
are being sold to you. 17 You shall not cheat one another, but you shall
fear your God; for I am the LORD your God.

257

LEVITICUS 258

18 You shall observe my statutes and faithfully keep my ordinances, so
that you may live on the land securely. 19 The land will yield its fruit,
and you will eat your fill and live on it securely. 20 Should you ask,
"What shall we eat in the seventh year, if we may not sow or gather in
our crop?" 21 I will order my blessing for you in the sixth year, so that it
will yield a crop for three years. 22 When you sow in the eighth year,
you will be eating from the old crop; until the ninth year, when its
produce comes in, you shall eat the old. 23 The land shall not be sold in
perpetuity, for the land is mine; with me you are but aliens and
tenants. 24 Throughout the land that you hold, you shall provide for
the redemption of the land.
25 If anyone of your kin falls into difficulty and sells a piece of
property, then the next of kin shall come and redeem what the relative
has sold. 26 If the person has no one to redeem it, but then prospers
and finds sufficient means to do so, 27 the years since its sale shall be
computed and the difference shall be refunded to the person to whom
it was sold, and the property shall be returned. 28 But if there are not
sufficient means to recover it, what was sold shall remain with the
purchaser until the year of jubilee; in the jubilee it shall be released,
and the property shall be returned.
29 If anyone sells a dwelling house in a walled city, it may be redeemed
until a year has elapsed since its sale; the right of redemption shall be
one year. 30 If it is not redeemed before a full year has elapsed, a
house that is in a walled city shall pass in perpetuity to the purchaser,
throughout the generations; it shall not be released in the jubilee. 31
But houses in villages that have no walls around them shall be classed
as open country; they may be redeemed, and they shall be released in
the jubilee. 32 As for the cities of the Levites, the Levites shall forever
have the right of redemption of the houses in the cities belonging to
them. 33 Such property as may be redeemed from the Levites — houses
sold in a city belonging to them — shall be released in the jubilee;
because the houses in the cities of the Levites are their possession
among the people of Israel. 34 But the open land around their cities
may not be sold; for that is their possession for all time.

258

LEVITICUS 259

35 If any of your kin fall into difficulty and become dependent on you,
you shall support them; they shall live with you as though resident
aliens. 36 Do not take interest in advance or otherwise make a profit
from them, but fear your God; let them live with you. 37 You shall not
lend them your money at interest taken in advance, or provide them
food at a profit. 38 I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of
the land of Egypt, to give you the land of Canaan, to be your God.
39 If any who are dependent on you become so impoverished that they
sell themselves to you, you shall not make them serve as slaves. 40 They
shall remain with you as hired or bound laborers. They shall serve with
you until the year of the jubilee. 41 Then they and their children with
them shall be free from your authority; they shall go back to their own
family and return to their ancestral property. 42 For they are my
servants, whom I brought out of the land of Egypt; they shall not be
sold as slaves are sold. 43 You shall not rule over them with harshness,
but shall fear your God. 44 As for the male and female slaves whom
you may have, it is from the nations around you that you may acquire
male and female slaves. 45 You may also acquire them from among the
aliens residing with you, and from their families that are with you, who
have been born in your land; and they may be your property. 46 You
may keep them as a possession for your children after you, for them to
inherit as property. These you may treat as slaves, but as for your
fellow Israelites, no one shall rule over the other with harshness.
47 If resident aliens among you prosper, and if any of your kin fall into
difficulty with one of them and sell themselves to an alien, or to a
branch of the alien's family, 48 after they have sold themselves they
shall have the right of redemption; one of their brothers may redeem
them, 49 or their uncle or their uncle's son may redeem them, or
anyone of their family who is of their own flesh may redeem them; or
if they prosper they may redeem themselves. 50 They shall compute
with the purchaser the total from the year when they sold themselves
to the alien until the jubilee year; the price of the sale shall be applied
to the number of years: the time they were with the owner shall be
rated as the time of a hired laborer. 51 If many years remain, they shall
pay for their redemption in proportion to the purchase price; 52 and if
few years remain until the jubilee year, they shall compute thus:

259

LEVITICUS 260

according to the years involved they shall make payment for their
redemption. 53 As a laborer hired by the year they shall be under the
alien's authority, who shall not, however, rule with harshness over
them in your sight. 54 And if they have not been redeemed in any of
these ways, they and their children with them shall go free in the
jubilee year. 55 For to me the people of Israel are servants; they are my
servants whom I brought out from the land of Egypt: I am the LORD
your God.
[Leviticus 26]
Blessings and curses
1 You shall make for yourselves no idols and erect no carved images or
pillars, and you shall not place figured stones in your land, to worship
at them; for I am the LORD your God. 2 You shall keep my sabbaths and
reverence my sanctuary: I am the LORD.
3 If you follow my statutes and keep my commandments and observe
them faithfully, 4 I will give you your rains in their season, and the land
shall yield its produce, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit. 5
Your threshing shall overtake the vintage, and the vintage shall
overtake the sowing; you shall eat your bread to the full, and live
securely in your land. 6 And I will grant peace in the land, and you shall
lie down, and no one shall make you afraid; I will remove dangerous
animals from the land, and no sword shall go through your land. 7 You
shall give chase to your enemies, and they shall fall before you by the
sword. 8 Five of you shall give chase to a hundred, and a hundred of
you shall give chase to ten thousand; your enemies shall fall before you
by the sword. 9 I will look with favor upon you and make you fruitful
and multiply you; and I will maintain my covenant with you. 10 You
shall eat old grain long stored, and you shall have to clear out the old
to make way for the new. 11 I will place my dwelling in your midst, and
I shall not abhor you. 12 And I will walk among you, and will be your
God, and you shall be my people. 13 I am the LORD your God who
brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be their slaves no more; I have
broken the bars of your yoke and made you walk erect.

260

LEVITICUS 261

14 But if you will not obey me, and do not observe all these
commandments, 15 if you spurn my statutes, and abhor my ordinances,
so that you will not observe all my commandments, and you break my
covenant, 16 I in turn will do this to you: I will bring terror on you;
consumption and fever that waste the eyes and cause life to pine away.
You shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it. 17 I will
set my face against you, and you shall be struck down by your enemies;
your foes shall rule over you, and you shall flee though no one pursues
you. 18 And if in spite of this you will not obey me, I will continue to
punish you sevenfold for your sins. 19 I will break your proud glory, and
I will make your sky like iron and your earth like copper. 20 Your
strength shall be spent to no purpose: your land shall not yield its
produce, and the trees of the land shall not yield their fruit.
21 If you continue hostile to me, and will not obey me, I will continue
to plague you sevenfold for your sins. 22 I will let loose wild animals
against you, and they shall bereave you of your children and destroy
your livestock; they shall make you few in number, and your roads shall
be deserted.
23 If in spite of these punishments you have not turned back to me, but
continue hostile to me, 24 then I too will continue hostile to you: I
myself will strike you sevenfold for your sins. 25 I will bring the sword
against you, executing vengeance for the covenant; and if you
withdraw within your cities, I will send pestilence among you, and you
shall be delivered into enemy hands. 26 When I break your staff of
bread, ten women shall bake your bread in a single oven, and they
shall dole out your bread by weight; and though you eat, you shall not
be satisfied.
27 But if, despite this, you disobey me, and continue hostile to me, 28 I
will continue hostile to you in fury; I in turn will punish you myself
sevenfold for your sins. 29 You shall eat the flesh of your sons, and you
shall eat the flesh of your daughters. 30 I will destroy your high places
and cut down your incense altars; I will heap your carcasses on the
carcasses of your idols. I will abhor you. 31 I will lay your cities waste,
will make your sanctuaries desolate, and I will not smell your pleasing
odors. 32 I will devastate the land, so that your enemies who come to

261

LEVITICUS 262

settle in it shall be appalled at it. 33 And you I will scatter among the
nations, and I will unsheathe the sword against you; your land shall be
a desolation, and your cities a waste.
34 Then the land shall enjoy its sabbath years as long as it lies desolate,
while you are in the land of your enemies; then the land shall rest, and
enjoy its sabbath years. 35 As long as it lies desolate, it shall have the
rest it did not have on your sabbaths when you were living on it. 36
And as for those of you who survive, I will send faintness into their
hearts in the lands of their enemies; the sound of a driven leaf shall put
them to flight, and they shall flee as one flees from the sword, and
they shall fall though no one pursues. 37 They shall stumble over one
another, as if to escape a sword, though no one pursues; and you shall
have no power to stand against your enemies. 38 You shall perish
among the nations, and the land of your enemies shall devour you. 39
And those of you who survive shall languish in the land of your
enemies because of their iniquities; also they shall languish because of
the iniquities of their ancestors.
40 But if they confess their iniquity and the iniquity of their ancestors,
in that they committed treachery against me and, moreover, that they
continued hostile to me — 41 so that I, in turn, continued hostile to
them and brought them into the land of their enemies; if then their
uncircumcised heart is humbled and they make amends for their
iniquity, 42 then will I remember my covenant with Jacob; I will
remember also my covenant with Isaac and also my covenant with
Abraham, and I will remember the land. 43 For the land shall be
deserted by them, and enjoy its sabbath years by lying desolate
without them, while they shall make amends for their iniquity, because
they dared to spurn my ordinances, and they abhorred my statutes. 44
Yet for all that, when they are in the land of their enemies, I will not
spurn them, or abhor them so as to destroy them utterly and break my
covenant with them; for I am the LORD their God; 45 but I will
remember in their favor the covenant with their ancestors whom I
brought out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the nations, to be their
God: I am the LORD.

262

LEVITICUS 263

46 These are the statutes and ordinances and laws that the LORD
established between himself and the people of Israel on Mount Sinai
through Moses.
[Leviticus 27]
Dedications and holy gifts
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 2 Speak to the people of Israel and
say to them: When a person makes an explicit vow to the LORD
concerning the equivalent for a human being, 3 the equivalent for a
male shall be: from twenty to sixty years of age the equivalent shall be
fifty shekels of silver by the sanctuary shekel. 4 If the person is a
female, the equivalent is thirty shekels. 5 If the age is from five to
twenty years of age, the equivalent is twenty shekels for a male and
ten shekels for a female. 6 If the age is from one month to five years,
the equivalent for a male is five shekels of silver, and for a female the
equivalent is three shekels of silver. 7 And if the person is sixty years
old or over, then the equivalent for a male is fifteen shekels, and for a
female ten shekels. 8 If any cannot afford the equivalent, they shall be
brought before the priest and the priest shall assess them; the priest
shall assess them according to what each one making a vow can afford.
9 If it concerns an animal that may be brought as an offering to the
LORD, any such that may be given to the LORD shall be holy. 10 Another
shall not be exchanged or substituted for it, either good for bad or bad
for good; and if one animal is substituted for another, both that one
and its substitute shall be holy. 11 If it concerns any unclean animal that
may not be brought as an offering to the LORD, the animal shall be
presented before the priest. 12 The priest shall assess it: whether good
or bad, according to the assessment of the priest, so it shall be. 13 But if
it is to be redeemed, one-fifth must be added to the assessment.
14 If a person consecrates a house to the LORD, the priest shall assess it:
whether good or bad, as the priest assesses it, so it shall stand. 15 And
if the one who consecrates the house wishes to redeem it, one-fifth
shall be added to its assessed value, and it shall revert to the original
owner.

263

LEVITICUS 264

16 If a person consecrates to the LORD any inherited landholding, its
assessment shall be in accordance with its seed requirements: fifty
shekels of silver to a homer of barley seed. 17 If the person consecrates
the field as of the year of jubilee, that assessment shall stand; 18 but if
the field is consecrated after the jubilee, the priest shall compute the
price for it according to the years that remain until the year of jubilee,
and the assessment shall be reduced. 19 And if the one who consecrates
the field wishes to redeem it, then one-fifth shall be added to its
assessed value, and it shall revert to the original owner; 20 but if the
field is not redeemed, or if it has been sold to someone else, it shall no
longer be redeemable. 21 But when the field is released in the jubilee,
it shall be holy to the LORD as a devoted field; it becomes the priest's
holding. 22 If someone consecrates to the LORD a field that has been
purchased, which is not a part of the inherited landholding, 23 the
priest shall compute for it the proportionate assessment up to the year
of jubilee, and the assessment shall be paid as of that day, a sacred
donation to the LORD. 24 In the year of jubilee the field shall return to
the one from whom it was bought, whose holding the land is. 25 All
assessments shall be by the sanctuary shekel: twenty gerahs shall make
a shekel.
26 A firstling of animals, however, which as a firstling belongs to the
LORD, cannot be consecrated by anyone; whether ox or sheep, it is the
LORD's. 27 If it is an unclean animal, it shall be ransomed at its
assessment, with one-fifth added; if it is not redeemed, it shall be sold
at its assessment.
28 Nothing that a person owns that has been devoted to destruction
for the LORD, be it human or animal, or inherited landholding, may be
sold or redeemed; every devoted thing is most holy to the LORD. 29 No
human beings who have been devoted to destruction can be
ransomed; they shall be put to death.
30 All tithes from the land, whether the seed from the ground or the
fruit from the tree, are the LORD's; they are holy to the LORD. 31 If
persons wish to redeem any of their tithes, they must add one-fifth to
them. 32 All tithes of herd and flock, every tenth one that passes under
the shepherd's staff, shall be holy to the LORD. 33 Let no one inquire

264

LEVITICUS 265

whether it is good or bad, or make substitution for it; if one makes
substitution for it, then both it and the substitute shall be holy and
cannot be redeemed.
34 These are the commandments that the LORD gave to Moses for the
people of Israel on Mount Sinai.

265

NUMBERS 266

NUMBERS
Introduction
Numbers, the fourth book of the Torah or Pentateuch, is concerned
with events during the Israelites' travels in the wilderness. Its English
name, which derives from that of early Greek translation, refers to the
censuses that occur at the beginning and end of the wilderness period
chs 1 and 26).
The book consists of prescriptions woven around a narrative thread. It
has two main sources: the Priestly writings (chs 1-9; 15; 17-19; 26-31; 3436; and parts of 10; 13-14; 16; 20; 25; 32-33), mostly legal in character but
having their own basic narrative; and a non-Priestly narrative source
(the remaining portions). Neither of these is a single, unified body of
work. The Priestly materials consist of the "Priestly Torah" (PT) and the
"Holiness School" (HS). Of the two, HS largely predominates. Some of
the chief concerns of the HS include the centrality of the sanctuary and,
with this, God's presence among the people, and the installation of the
Levites as sanctuary servants. The non-Priestly narrative sections have
been ascribed to a combination of the Yahwist (Jahwist) and Elohist
sources (JE), which are not easily distinguished in Numbers. For possible
dates of PT and HS, see the Introduction to Leviticus. Though the date
and extent of the non-Priestly material is debated by scholars, it
predates the Priestly Torah/Holiness School portions.
HT

TH

The book has three main sections.
(1) Preparations for travel in the wilderness (chs 1-10). This section is
mainly prescriptive. Its focus is the census and camp arrangement of
the Israelites (chs 1-2; 5.1-4); the census, camp arrangement, duties, and
consecration of the Levites (chs 3-4; 7-8); and the arrangement of the
tribes and sanctuary while on the march (9.15-10.36). Interspersed in
this are various prescriptions or descriptions concerning the guilt
offering, suspected adultery, the nazirite vow, and the priestly blessing
266

NUMBERS 267

(5.5-6.27); and the delayed passover (9.1-4). It is not always clear why
these laws are placed where they are now found. The section is almost
entirely Priestly in origin.
(2) Travels in the wilderness (chs 11-25). This is mostly narrative, and
combines Priestly and non-Priestly materials. The narrative elements
include rebellions and complaints by Israelites, Miriam and Aaron, and
the scouts (chs 11-14); the rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram (chs
16-17); and Israel's encounters with various enemies, Balaam's blessing,
and the Baal-peor incident (chs 20-25). Sections of prescriptions
interspersed among these chapters include rules on offerings, sabbath
violation (in a narrative context), and wearing fringes (ch 15);
priesthood and Levitical duties (ch 18); and corpse contamination (ch
19).
(3) The end of the wilderness travels and preparations for entering
the land of Canaan (chs 26-36). This section is mostly prescriptive.
Portions that are closely connected with the narrative flow or the topic
of acquiring the land of Canaan include the second census (ch 26); laws
on female inheritance (27.1-11); the transfer of civil leadership to Joshua
(27.12-23); revenge against the Midianites (ch 31); the distribution of the
Transjordan land (ch 32); Levitical cities and homicide laws (ch 35); and
a supplement to laws of female inheritance (ch 36). Portions less visibly
connected with the narrative context are the ritual calendar (chs 2829); and rules about women's vows (ch 30). This section is almost
entirely Priestly in origin.
At first reading the book might begin with the main narrative, chs 1;
10-14; 16-17; 20-27; 31-33. The legal sections are more difficult to
understand, and my best be read according to different topics: the
Levites (chs 3-4; 7-8; 18; 35); priestly and Levitical duties (chs 3-4; 16-17;
18; 35); the arrangement of camp (chs 2-3; 10); laws pertaining to
women (ch 5; 27.1-11; chs 30; 36); holy days (9.1-14; 15.32-36; chs 28-29);
impurity and holiness (5.1-4; chs 6; 16-17; 19; 35); sacrifices and offerings
(chs 7; 15; 28-29); and distribution of the land (27.1-11; chs 32; 34-36). For
suggestions on reading legal sections, see the Introduction to the book
of Leviticus. Any reading of the legal material in Numbers must
ultimately be done in the larger context of the Priestly writings in
Leviticus and Exodus. Numbers also contains a few poetic passages.
Some of these are especially difficult, and might be studied together
HT

TH

267

NUMBERS 268

and in connection with the style of the Psalms (6.24-26; 10.35-36; 20.1415, 17-18, 27-30; 23.7-10, 18-24; 24.3-9, 15-24).

[Numbers 1]
The first Israelite census
1 The LORD spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the tent of
meeting, on the first day of the second month, in the second year after
they had come out of the land of Egypt, saying: 2 Take a census of the
whole congregation of Israelites, in their clans, by ancestral houses,
according to the number of names, every male individually; 3 from
twenty years old and upward, everyone in Israel able to go to war. You
and Aaron shall enroll them, company by company. 4 A man from each
tribe shall be with you, each man the head of his ancestral house. 5
These are the names of the men who shall assist you:
From Reuben, Elizur son of Shedeur.
6 From Simeon, Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai.
7 From Judah, Nahshon son of Amminadab.
8 From Issachar, Nethanel son of Zuar.
9 From Zebulun, Eliab son of Helon.
10 From the sons of Joseph:
from Ephraim, Elishama son of Ammihud;
from Manasseh, Gamaliel son of Pedahzur.
11 From Benjamin, Abidan son of Gideoni.
12 From Dan, Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai.
13 From Asher, Pagiel son of Ochran.
14 From Gad, Eliasaph son of Deuel.
15 From Naphtali, Ahira son of Enan.
16 These were the ones chosen from the congregation, the leaders of
their ancestral tribes, the heads of the divisions of Israel.
17 Moses and Aaron took these men who had been designated by
name, 18 and on the first day of the second month they assembled the
whole congregation together. They registered themselves in their

268

NUMBERS 269

clans, by their ancestral houses, according to the number of names
from twenty years old and upward, individually, 19 as the LORD
commanded Moses. So he enrolled them in the wilderness of Sinai.
20 The descendants of Reuben, Israel's firstborn, their lineage, in their
clans, by their ancestral houses, according to the number of names,
individually, every male from twenty years old and upward, everyone
able to go to war: 21 those enrolled of the tribe of Reuben were fortysix thousand five hundred.
22 The descendants of Simeon, their lineage, in their clans, by their
ancestral houses, those of them that were numbered, according to the
number of names, individually, every male from twenty years old and
upward, everyone able to go to war: 23 those enrolled of the tribe of
Simeon were fifty-nine thousand three hundred.
24 The descendants of Gad, their lineage, in their clans, by their
ancestral houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty
years old and upward, everyone able to go to war: 25 those enrolled of
the tribe of Gad were forty-five thousand six hundred fifty.
26 The descendants of Judah, their lineage, in their clans, by their
ancestral houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years
old and upward, everyone able to go to war: 27 those enrolled of the
tribe of Judah were seventy-four thousand six hundred.
28 The descendants of Issachar, their lineage, in their clans, by their
ancestral houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years
old and upward, everyone able to go to war: 29 those enrolled of the
tribe of Issachar were fifty-four thousand four hundred.
30 The descendants of Zebulun, their lineage, in their clans, by their
ancestral houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years
old and upward, everyone able to go to war: 31 those enrolled of the
tribe of Zebulun were fifty-seven thousand four hundred.

269

NUMBERS 270

32 The descendants of Joseph, namely, the descendants of Ephraim,
their lineage, in their clans, by their ancestral houses, according to the
number of names, from twenty years old and upward, everyone able to
go to war: 33 those enrolled of the tribe of Ephraim were forty
thousand five hundred.
34 The descendants of Manasseh, their lineage, in their clans, by their
ancestral houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years
old and upward, everyone able to go to war: 35 those enrolled of the
tribe of Manasseh were thirty-two thousand two hundred.
36 The descendants of Benjamin, their lineage, in their clans, by their
ancestral houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years
old and upward, everyone able to go to war: 37 those enrolled of the
tribe of Benjamin were thirty-five thousand four hundred.
38 The descendants of Dan, their lineage, in their clans, by their
ancestral houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years
old and upward, everyone able to go to war: 39 those enrolled of the
tribe of Dan were sixty-two thousand seven hundred.
40 The descendants of Asher, their lineage, in their clans, by their
ancestral houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years
old and upward, everyone able to go to war: 41 those enrolled of the
tribe of Asher were forty-one thousand five hundred.
42 The descendants of Naphtali, their lineage, in their clans, by their
ancestral houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years
old and upward, everyone able to go to war: 43 those enrolled of the
tribe of Naphtali were fifty-three thousand four hundred.
44 These are those who were enrolled, whom Moses and Aaron
enrolled with the help of the leaders of Israel, twelve men, each
representing his ancestral house. 45 So the whole number of the
Israelites, by their ancestral houses, from twenty years old and upward,
everyone able to go to war in Israel — 46 their whole number was six
hundred three thousand five hundred fifty. 47 The Levites, however,
were not numbered by their ancestral tribe along with them.

270

NUMBERS 271

48 The LORD had said to Moses: 49 Only the tribe of Levi you shall not
enroll, and you shall not take a census of them with the other
Israelites. 50 Rather you shall appoint the Levites over the tabernacle of
the covenant, and over all its equipment, and over all that belongs to
it; they are to carry the tabernacle and all its equipment, and they shall
tend it, and shall camp around the tabernacle. 51 When the tabernacle
is to set out, the Levites shall take it down; and when the tabernacle is
to be pitched, the Levites shall set it up. And any outsider who comes
near shall be put to death. 52 The other Israelites shall camp in their
respective regimental camps, by companies; 53 but the Levites shall
camp around the tabernacle of the covenant, that there may be no
wrath on the congregation of the Israelites; and the Levites shall
perform the guard duty of the tabernacle of the covenant. 54 The
Israelites did so; they did just as the LORD commanded Moses.
[Numbers 2]
The plan of the wilderness camp
1 The LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying: 2 The Israelites shall
camp each in their respective regiments, under ensigns by their
ancestral houses; they shall camp facing the tent of meeting on every
side. 3 Those to camp on the east side toward the sunrise shall be of
the regimental encampment of Judah by companies. The leader of the
people of Judah shall be Nahshon son of Amminadab, 4 with a
company as enrolled of seventy-four thousand six hundred. 5 Those to
camp next to him shall be the tribe of Issachar. The leader of the
Issacharites shall be Nethanel son of Zuar, 6 with a company as enrolled
of fifty-four thousand four hundred. 7 Then the tribe of Zebulun: The
leader of the Zebulunites shall be Eliab son of Helon, 8 with a company
as enrolled of fifty-seven thousand four hundred. 9 The total
enrollment of the camp of Judah, by companies, is one hundred eightysix thousand four hundred. They shall set out first on the march.
10 On the south side shall be the regimental encampment of Reuben
by companies. The leader of the Reubenites shall be Elizur son of
Shedeur, 11 with a company as enrolled of forty-six thousand five
hundred. 12 And those to camp next to him shall be the tribe of
Simeon. The leader of the Simeonites shall be Shelumiel son of

271

NUMBERS 272

Zurishaddai, 13 with a company as enrolled of fifty-nine thousand three
hundred. 14 Then the tribe of Gad: The leader of the Gadites shall be
Eliasaph son of Reuel, 15 with a company as enrolled of forty-five
thousand six hundred fifty. 16 The total enrollment of the camp of
Reuben, by companies, is one hundred fifty-one thousand four
hundred fifty. They shall set out second.
17 The tent of meeting, with the camp of the Levites, shall set out in
the center of the camps; they shall set out just as they camp, each in
position, by their regiments.
18 On the west side shall be the regimental encampment of Ephraim by
companies. The leader of the people of Ephraim shall be Elishama son
of Ammihud, 19 with a company as enrolled of forty thousand five
hundred. 20 Next to him shall be the tribe of Manasseh. The leader of
the people of Manasseh shall be Gamaliel son of Pedahzur, 21 with a
company as enrolled of thirty-two thousand two hundred. 22 Then the
tribe of Benjamin: The leader of the Benjaminites shall be Abidan son
of Gideoni, 23 with a company as enrolled of thirty-five thousand four
hundred. 24 The total enrollment of the camp of Ephraim, by
companies, is one hundred eight thousand one hundred. They shall set
out third on the march.
25 On the north side shall be the regimental encampment of Dan by
companies. The leader of the Danites shall be Ahiezer son of
Ammishaddai, 26 with a company as enrolled of sixty-two thousand
seven hundred. 27 Those to camp next to him shall be the tribe of
Asher. The leader of the Asherites shall be Pagiel son of Ochran, 28
with a company as enrolled of forty-one thousand five hundred. 29
Then the tribe of Naphtali: The leader of the Naphtalites shall be Ahira
son of Enan, 30 with a company as enrolled of fifty-three thousand
four hundred. 31 The total enrollment of the camp of Dan is one
hundred fifty-seven thousand six hundred. They shall set out last, by
companies.
32 This was the enrollment of the Israelites by their ancestral houses;
the total enrollment in the camps by their companies was six hundred

272

NUMBERS 273

three thousand five hundred fifty. 33 Just as the LORD had commanded
Moses, the Levites were not enrolled among the other Israelites.
34 The Israelites did just as the LORD had commanded Moses: They
camped by regiments, and they set out the same way, everyone by
clans, according to ancestral houses.
[Numbers 3]
The first Levitical census
1 This is the lineage of Aaron and Moses at the time when the LORD
spoke with Moses on Mount Sinai. 2 These are the names of the sons of
Aaron: Nadab the firstborn, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar; 3 these
are the names of the sons of Aaron, the anointed priests, whom he
ordained to minister as priests. 4 Nadab and Abihu died before the
LORD when they offered unholy fire before the LORD in the wilderness
of Sinai, and they had no children. Eleazar and Ithamar served as
priests in the lifetime of their father Aaron.
5 Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 6 Bring the tribe of Levi near,
and set them before Aaron the priest, so that they may assist him. 7
They shall perform duties for him and for the whole congregation in
front of the tent of meeting, doing service at the tabernacle; 8 they
shall be in charge of all the furnishings of the tent of meeting, and
attend to the duties for the Israelites as they do service at the
tabernacle. 9 You shall give the Levites to Aaron and his descendants;
they are unreservedly given to him from among the Israelites. 10 But
you shall make a register of Aaron and his descendants; it is they who
shall attend to the priesthood, and any outsider who comes near shall
be put to death.
11 Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 12 I hereby accept the Levites
from among the Israelites as substitutes for all the firstborn that open
the womb among the Israelites. The Levites shall be mine, 13 for all the
firstborn are mine; when I killed all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, I
consecrated for my own all the firstborn in Israel, both human and
animal; they shall be mine. I am the LORD.

273

NUMBERS 274

14 Then the LORD spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, saying: 15
Enroll the Levites by ancestral houses and by clans. You shall enroll
every male from a month old and upward. 16 So Moses enrolled them
according to the word of the LORD, as he was commanded. 17 The
following were the sons of Levi, by their names: Gershon, Kohath, and
Merari. 18 These are the names of the sons of Gershon by their clans:
Libni and Shimei. 19 The sons of Kohath by their clans: Amram, Izhar,
Hebron, and Uzziel. 20 The sons of Merari by their clans: Mahli and
Mushi. These are the clans of the Levites, by their ancestral houses.
21 To Gershon belonged the clan of the Libnites and the clan of the
Shimeites; these were the clans of the Gershonites. 22 Their enrollment,
counting all the males from a month old and upward, was seven
thousand five hundred. 23 The clans of the Gershonites were to camp
behind the tabernacle on the west, 24 with Eliasaph son of Lael as head
of the ancestral house of the Gershonites. 25 The responsibility of the
sons of Gershon in the tent of meeting was to be the tabernacle, the
tent with its covering, the screen for the entrance of the tent of
meeting, 26 the hangings of the court, the screen for the entrance of
the court that is around the tabernacle and the altar, and its cords —
all the service pertaining to these.
27 To Kohath belonged the clan of the Amramites, the clan of the
Izharites, the clan of the Hebronites, and the clan of the Uzzielites;
these are the clans of the Kohathites. 28 Counting all the males, from a
month old and upward, there were eight thousand six hundred,
attending to the duties of the sanctuary. 29 The clans of the Kohathites
were to camp on the south side of the tabernacle, 30 with Elizaphan
son of Uzziel as head of the ancestral house of the clans of the
Kohathites. 31 Their responsibility was to be the ark, the table, the
lampstand, the altars, the vessels of the sanctuary with which the
priests minister, and the screen — all the service pertaining to these. 32
Eleazar son of Aaron the priest was to be chief over the leaders of the
Levites, and to have oversight of those who had charge of the
sanctuary.

274

NUMBERS 275

33 To Merari belonged the clan of the Mahlites and the clan of the
Mushites: these are the clans of Merari. 34 Their enrollment, counting
all the males from a month old and upward, was six thousand two
hundred. 35 The head of the ancestral house of the clans of Merari was
Zuriel son of Abihail; they were to camp on the north side of the
tabernacle. 36 The responsibility assigned to the sons of Merari was to
be the frames of the tabernacle, the bars, the pillars, the bases, and all
their accessories — all the service pertaining to these; 37 also the pillars
of the court all around, with their bases and pegs and cords.
38 Those who were to camp in front of the tabernacle on the east — in
front of the tent of meeting toward the east — were Moses and Aaron
and Aaron's sons, having charge of the rites within the sanctuary,
whatever had to be done for the Israelites; and any outsider who came
near was to be put to death. 39 The total enrollment of the Levites
whom Moses and Aaron enrolled at the commandment of the LORD, by
their clans, all the males from a month old and upward, was twentytwo thousand.
40 Then the LORD said to Moses: Enroll all the firstborn males of the
Israelites, from a month old and upward, and count their names. 41 But
you shall accept the Levites for me — I am the LORD — as substitutes for
all the firstborn among the Israelites, and the livestock of the Levites as
substitutes for all the firstborn among the livestock of the Israelites. 42
So Moses enrolled all the firstborn among the Israelites, as the LORD
commanded him. 43 The total enrollment, all the firstborn males from
a month old and upward, counting the number of names, was twentytwo thousand two hundred seventy-three.
44 Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 45 Accept the Levites as
substitutes for all the firstborn among the Israelites, and the livestock
of the Levites as substitutes for their livestock; and the Levites shall be
mine. I am the LORD. 46 As the price of redemption of the two hundred
seventy-three of the firstborn of the Israelites, over and above the
number of the Levites, 47 you shall accept five shekels apiece,
reckoning by the shekel of the sanctuary, a shekel of twenty gerahs. 48
Give to Aaron and his sons the money by which the excess number of
them is redeemed. 49 So Moses took the redemption money from

275

NUMBERS 276

those who were over and above those redeemed by the Levites; 50
from the firstborn of the Israelites he took the money, one thousand
three hundred sixty-five shekels, reckoned by the shekel of the
sanctuary; 51 and Moses gave the redemption money to Aaron and his
sons, according to the word of the LORD, as the LORD had commanded
Moses.
[Numbers 4]
The second Levitical census;
1 The LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying: 2 Take a census of the
Kohathites separate from the other Levites, by their clans and their
ancestral houses, 3 from thirty years old up to fifty years old, all who
qualify to do work relating to the tent of meeting. 4 The service of the
Kohathites relating to the tent of meeting concerns the most holy
things.
5 When the camp is to set out, Aaron and his sons shall go in and take
down the screening curtain, and cover the ark of the covenant with it;
6 then they shall put on it a covering of fine leather, and spread over
that a cloth all of blue, and shall put its poles in place. 7 Over the table
of the bread of the Presence they shall spread a blue cloth, and put on
it the plates, the dishes for incense, the bowls, and the flagons for the
drink offering; the regular bread also shall be on it; 8 then they shall
spread over them a crimson cloth, and cover it with a covering of fine
leather, and shall put its poles in place. 9 They shall take a blue cloth,
and cover the lampstand for the light, with its lamps, its snuffers, its
trays, and all the vessels for oil with which it is supplied; 10 and they
shall put it with all its utensils in a covering of fine leather, and put it
on the carrying frame. 11 Over the golden altar they shall spread a blue
cloth, and cover it with a covering of fine leather, and shall put its
poles in place; 12 and they shall take all the utensils of the service that
are used in the sanctuary, and put them in a blue cloth, and cover them
with a covering of fine leather, and put them on the carrying frame. 13
They shall take away the ashes from the altar, and spread a purple
cloth over it; 14 and they shall put on it all the utensils of the altar,
which are used for the service there, the firepans, the forks, the
shovels, and the basins, all the utensils of the altar; and they shall

276

NUMBERS 277

spread on it a covering of fine leather, and shall put its poles in place.
15 When Aaron and his sons have finished covering the sanctuary and
all the furnishings of the sanctuary, as the camp sets out, after that the
Kohathites shall come to carry these, but they must not touch the holy
things, or they will die. These are the things of the tent of meeting
that the Kohathites are to carry.
16 Eleazar son of Aaron the priest shall have charge of the oil for the
light, the fragrant incense, the regular grain offering, and the
anointing oil, the oversight of all the tabernacle and all that is in it, in
the sanctuary and in its utensils.
17 Then the LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying: 18 You must not
let the tribe of the clans of the Kohathites be destroyed from among
the Levites. 19 This is how you must deal with them in order that they
may live and not die when they come near to the most holy things:
Aaron and his sons shall go in and assign each to a particular task or
burden. 20 But the Kohathites must not go in to look on the holy
things even for a moment; otherwise they will die.
21 Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 22 Take a census of the
Gershonites also, by their ancestral houses and by their clans; 23 from
thirty years old up to fifty years old you shall enroll them, all who
qualify to do work in the tent of meeting. 24 This is the service of the
clans of the Gershonites, in serving and bearing burdens: 25 They shall
carry the curtains of the tabernacle, and the tent of meeting with its
covering, and the outer covering of fine leather that is on top of it, and
the screen for the entrance of the tent of meeting, 26 and the
hangings of the court, and the screen for the entrance of the gate of
the court that is around the tabernacle and the altar, and their cords,
and all the equipment for their service; and they shall do all that needs
to be done with regard to them. 27 All the service of the Gershonites
shall be at the command of Aaron and his sons, in all that they are to
carry, and in all that they have to do; and you shall assign to their
charge all that they are to carry. 28 This is the service of the clans of
the Gershonites relating to the tent of meeting, and their
responsibilities are to be under the oversight of Ithamar son of Aaron
the priest.

277

NUMBERS 278

29 As for the Merarites, you shall enroll them by their clans and their
ancestral houses; 30 from thirty years old up to fifty years old you shall
enroll them, everyone who qualifies to do the work of the tent of
meeting. 31 This is what they are charged to carry, as the whole of their
service in the tent of meeting: the frames of the tabernacle, with its
bars, pillars, and bases, 32 and the pillars of the court all around with
their bases, pegs, and cords, with all their equipment and all their
related service; and you shall assign by name the objects that they are
required to carry. 33 This is the service of the clans of the Merarites, the
whole of their service relating to the tent of meeting, under the hand
of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest.
34 So Moses and Aaron and the leaders of the congregation enrolled
the Kohathites, by their clans and their ancestral houses, 35 from thirty
years old up to fifty years old, everyone who qualified for work
relating to the tent of meeting; 36 and their enrollment by clans was
two thousand seven hundred fifty. 37 This was the enrollment of the
clans of the Kohathites, all who served at the tent of meeting, whom
Moses and Aaron enrolled according to the commandment of the LORD
by Moses.
38 The enrollment of the Gershonites, by their clans and their ancestral
houses, 39 from thirty years old up to fifty years old, everyone who
qualified for work relating to the tent of meeting — 40 their
enrollment by their clans and their ancestral houses was two thousand
six hundred thirty. 41 This was the enrollment of the clans of the
Gershonites, all who served at the tent of meeting, whom Moses and
Aaron enrolled according to the commandment of the LORD.
42 The enrollment of the clans of the Merarites, by their clans and their
ancestral houses, 43 from thirty years old up to fifty years old, everyone
who qualified for work relating to the tent of meeting — 44 their
enrollment by their clans was three thousand two hundred. 45 This is
the enrollment of the clans of the Merarites, whom Moses and Aaron
enrolled according to the commandment of the LORD by Moses.

278

NUMBERS 279

46 All those who were enrolled of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron
and the leaders of Israel enrolled, by their clans and their ancestral
houses, 47 from thirty years old up to fifty years old, everyone who
qualified to do the work of service and the work of bearing burdens
relating to the tent of meeting, 48 their enrollment was eight
thousand five hundred eighty. 49 According to the commandment of
the LORD through Moses they were appointed to their several tasks of
serving or carrying; thus they were enrolled by him, as the LORD
commanded Moses.
[Numbers 5]
Expulsion of impure persons
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 2 Command the Israelites to put out
of the camp everyone who is leprous, or has a discharge, and everyone
who is unclean through contact with a corpse; 3 you shall put out both
male and female, putting them outside the camp; they must not defile
their camp, where I dwell among them. 4 The Israelites did so, putting
them outside the camp; as the LORD had spoken to Moses, so the
Israelites did.
The guilt offering
5 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 6 Speak to the Israelites: When a
man or a woman wrongs another, breaking faith with the LORD, that
person incurs guilt 7 and shall confess the sin that has been committed.
The person shall make full restitution for the wrong, adding one-fifth
to it, and giving it to the one who was wronged. 8 If the injured party
has no next of kin to whom restitution may be made for the wrong,
the restitution for wrong shall go to the LORD for the priest, in addition
to the ram of atonement with which atonement is made for the guilty
party. 9 Among all the sacred donations of the Israelites, every gift that
they bring to the priest shall be his. 10 The sacred donations of all are
their own; whatever anyone gives to the priest shall be his.

279

NUMBERS 280

A suspected adultress
11 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 12 Speak to the Israelites and say to
them: If any man's wife goes astray and is unfaithful to him, 13 if a man
has had intercourse with her but it is hidden from her husband, so that
she is undetected though she has defiled herself, and there is no
witness against her since she was not caught in the act; 14 if a spirit of
jealousy comes on him, and he is jealous of his wife who has defiled
herself; or if a spirit of jealousy comes on him, and he is jealous of his
wife, though she has not defiled herself; 15 then the man shall bring
his wife to the priest. And he shall bring the offering required for her,
one-tenth of an ephah of barley flour. He shall pour no oil on it and
put no frankincense on it, for it is a grain offering of jealousy, a grain
offering of remembrance, bringing iniquity to remembrance.
16 Then the priest shall bring her near, and set her before the LORD; 17
the priest shall take holy water in an earthen vessel, and take some of
the dust that is on the floor of the tabernacle and put it into the water.
18 The priest shall set the woman before the LORD, dishevel the
woman's hair, and place in her hands the grain offering of
remembrance, which is the grain offering of jealousy. In his own hand
the priest shall have the water of bitterness that brings the curse. 19
Then the priest shall make her take an oath, saying, "If no man has lain
with you, if you have not turned aside to uncleanness while under your
husband's authority, be immune to this water of bitterness that brings
the curse. 20 But if you have gone astray while under your husband's
authority, if you have defiled yourself and some man other than your
husband has had intercourse with you," 21 — let the priest make the
woman take the oath of the curse and say to the woman — "the LORD
make you an execration and an oath among your people, when the
LORD makes your uterus drop, your womb discharge; 22 now may this
water that brings the curse enter your bowels and make your womb
discharge, your uterus drop!" And the woman shall say, "Amen.
Amen."
23 Then the priest shall put these curses in writing, and wash them off
into the water of bitterness. 24 He shall make the woman drink the
water of bitterness that brings the curse, and the water that brings the

280

NUMBERS 281

curse shall enter her and cause bitter pain. 25 The priest shall take the
grain offering of jealousy out of the woman's hand, and shall elevate
the grain offering before the LORD and bring it to the altar; 26 and the
priest shall take a handful of the grain offering, as its memorial
portion, and turn it into smoke on the altar, and afterward shall make
the woman drink the water. 27 When he has made her drink the water,
then, if she has defiled herself and has been unfaithful to her husband,
the water that brings the curse shall enter into her and cause bitter
pain, and her womb shall discharge, her uterus drop, and the woman
shall become an execration among her people. 28 But if the woman
has not defiled herself and is clean, then she shall be immune and be
able to conceive children.
29 This is the law in cases of jealousy, when a wife, while under her
husband's authority, goes astray and defiles herself, 30 or when a spirit
of jealousy comes on a man and he is jealous of his wife; then he shall
set the woman before the LORD, and the priest shall apply this entire
law to her. 31 The man shall be free from iniquity, but the woman shall
bear her iniquity.
[Numbers 6]
The nazirite vow
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 2 Speak to the Israelites and say to
them: When either men or women make a special vow, the vow of a
nazirite, to separate themselves to the LORD, 3 they shall separate
themselves from wine and strong drink; they shall drink no wine
vinegar or other vinegar, and shall not drink any grape juice or eat
grapes, fresh or dried. 4 All their days as nazirites they shall eat
nothing that is produced by the grapevine, not even the seeds or the
skins.
5 All the days of their nazirite vow no razor shall come upon the head;
until the time is completed for which they separate themselves to the
LORD, they shall be holy; they shall let the locks of the head grow long.
6 All the days that they separate themselves to the LORD they shall not
go near a corpse. 7 Even if their father or mother, brother or sister,

281

NUMBERS 282

should die, they may not defile themselves; because their consecration
to God is upon the head. 8 All their days as nazirites they are holy to
the LORD.
9 If someone dies very suddenly nearby, defiling the consecrated head,
then they shall shave the head on the day of their cleansing; on the
seventh day they shall shave it. 10 On the eighth day they shall bring
two turtledoves or two young pigeons to the priest at the entrance of
the tent of meeting, 11 and the priest shall offer one as a sin offering
and the other as a burnt offering, and make atonement for them,
because they incurred guilt by reason of the corpse. They shall sanctify
the head that same day, 12 and separate themselves to the LORD for
their days as nazirites, and bring a male lamb a year old as a guilt
offering. The former time shall be void, because the consecrated head
was defiled.
13 This is the law for the nazirites when the time of their consecration
has been completed: they shall be brought to the entrance of the tent
of meeting, 14 and they shall offer their gift to the LORD, one male
lamb a year old without blemish as a burnt offering, one ewe lamb a
year old without blemish as a sin offering, one ram without blemish as
an offering of well-being, 15 and a basket of unleavened bread, cakes
of choice flour mixed with oil and unleavened wafers spread with oil,
with their grain offering and their drink offerings. 16 The priest shall
present them before the LORD and offer their sin offering and burnt
offering, 17 and shall offer the ram as a sacrifice of well-being to the
LORD, with the basket of unleavened bread; the priest also shall make
the accompanying grain offering and drink offering. 18 Then the
nazirites shall shave the consecrated head at the entrance of the tent
of meeting, and shall take the hair from the consecrated head and put
it on the fire under the sacrifice of well-being. 19 The priest shall take
the shoulder of the ram, when it is boiled, and one unleavened cake
out of the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and shall put them in
the palms of the nazirites, after they have shaved the consecrated
head. 20 Then the priest shall elevate them as an elevation offering
before the LORD; they are a holy portion for the priest, together with
the breast that is elevated and the thigh that is offered. After that the
nazirites may drink wine.

282

NUMBERS 283

21 This is the law for the nazirites who take a vow. Their offering to the
LORD must be in accordance with the nazirite vow, apart from what
else they can afford. In accordance with whatever vow they take, so
they shall do, following the law for their consecration.
The priestly blessing
22 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 23 Speak to Aaron and his sons,
saying, Thus you shall bless the Israelites: You shall say to them,
24 The LORD bless you and keep you;
25 the LORD make his face to shine upon you, and be gracious to you;
26 the LORD lift up his countenance upon you, and give you peace.
27 So they shall put my name on the Israelites, and I will bless them.
[Numbers 7]
Sanctuary dedication offerings
1 On the day when Moses had finished setting up the tabernacle, and
had anointed and consecrated it with all its furnishings, and had
anointed and consecrated the altar with all its utensils, 2 the leaders of
Israel, heads of their ancestral houses, the leaders of the tribes, who
were over those who were enrolled, made offerings. 3 They brought
their offerings before the LORD, six covered wagons and twelve oxen, a
wagon for every two of the leaders, and for each one an ox; they
presented them before the tabernacle. 4 Then the LORD said to Moses:
5 Accept these from them, that they may be used in doing the service
of the tent of meeting, and give them to the Levites, to each according
to his service. 6 So Moses took the wagons and the oxen, and gave
them to the Levites. 7 Two wagons and four oxen he gave to the
Gershonites, according to their service; 8 and four wagons and eight
oxen he gave to the Merarites, according to their service, under the
direction of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest. 9 But to the Kohathites he
gave none, because they were charged with the care of the holy things
that had to be carried on the shoulders.
10 The leaders also presented offerings for the dedication of the altar
at the time when it was anointed; the leaders presented their offering

283

NUMBERS 284

before the altar. 11 The LORD said to Moses: They shall present their
offerings, one leader each day, for the dedication of the altar.
12 The one who presented his offering the first day was Nahshon son of
Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah; 13 his offering was one silver plate
weighing one hundred thirty shekels, one silver basin weighing seventy
shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of
choice flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; 14 one golden dish
weighing ten shekels, full of incense; 15 one young bull, one ram, one
male lamb a year old, for a burnt offering; 16 one male goat for a sin
offering; 17 and for the sacrifice of well-being, two oxen, five rams, five
male goats, and five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of
Nahshon son of Amminadab.
18 On the second day Nethanel son of Zuar, the leader of Issachar,
presented an offering; 19 he presented for his offering one silver plate
weighing one hundred thirty shekels, one silver basin weighing seventy
shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of
choice flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; 20 one golden dish
weighing ten shekels, full of incense; 21 one young bull, one ram, one
male lamb a year old, as a burnt offering; 22 one male goat as a sin
offering; 23 and for the sacrifice of well-being, two oxen, five rams,
five male goats, and five male lambs a year old. This was the offering
of Nethanel son of Zuar.
24 On the third day Eliab son of Helon, the leader of the Zebulunites:
25 his offering was one silver plate weighing one hundred thirty
shekels, one silver basin weighing seventy shekels, according to the
shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of choice flour mixed with oil
for a grain offering; 26 one golden dish weighing ten shekels, full of
incense; 27 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year old, for a
burnt offering; 28 one male goat for a sin offering; 29 and for the
sacrifice of well-being, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five
male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Eliab son of Helon.
30 On the fourth day Elizur son of Shedeur, the leader of the
Reubenites: 31 his offering was one silver plate weighing one hundred
thirty shekels, one silver basin weighing seventy shekels, according to
the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of choice flour mixed
with oil for a grain offering; 32 one golden dish weighing ten shekels,

284

NUMBERS 285

full of incense; 33 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year old,
for a burnt offering; 34 one male goat for a sin offering; 35 and for the
sacrifice of well-being, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five
male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Elizur son of Shedeur.
36 On the fifth day Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai, the leader of the
Simeonites: 37 his offering was one silver plate weighing one hundred
thirty shekels, one silver basin weighing seventy shekels, according to
the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of choice flour mixed
with oil for a grain offering; 38 one golden dish weighing ten shekels,
full of incense; 39 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year old,
for a burnt offering; 40 one male goat for a sin offering; 41 and for the
sacrifice of well-being, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five
male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Shelumiel son of
Zurishaddai.
42 On the sixth day Eliasaph son of Deuel, the leader of the Gadites: 43
his offering was one silver plate weighing one hundred thirty shekels,
one silver basin weighing seventy shekels, according to the shekel of
the sanctuary, both of them full of choice flour mixed with oil for a
grain offering; 44 one golden dish weighing ten shekels, full of
incense; 45 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year old, for a
burnt offering; 46 one male goat for a sin offering; 47 and for the
sacrifice of well-being, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five
male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Eliasaph son of Deuel.
48 On the seventh day Elishama son of Ammihud, the leader of the
Ephraimites: 49 his offering was one silver plate weighing one hundred
thirty shekels, one silver basin weighing seventy shekels, according to
the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of choice flour mixed
with oil for a grain offering; 50 one golden dish weighing ten shekels,
full of incense; 51 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year old,
for a burnt offering; 52 one male goat for a sin offering; 53 and for the
sacrifice of well-being, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five
male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Elishama son of
Ammihud.

285

NUMBERS 286

54 On the eighth day Gamaliel son of Pedahzur, the leader of the
Manassites: 55 his offering was one silver plate weighing one hundred
thirty shekels, one silver basin weighing seventy shekels, according to
the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of choice flour mixed
with oil for a grain offering; 56 one golden dish weighing ten shekels,
full of incense; 57 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year old,
for a burnt offering; 58 one male goat for a sin offering; 59 and for the
sacrifice of well-being, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five
male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Gamaliel son of
Pedahzur.
60 On the ninth day Abidan son of Gideoni, the leader of the
Benjaminites: 61 his offering was one silver plate weighing one
hundred thirty shekels, one silver basin weighing seventy shekels,
according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of choice
flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; 62 one golden dish weighing
ten shekels, full of incense; 63 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb
a year old, for a burnt offering; 64 one male goat for a sin offering; 65
and for the sacrifice of well-being, two oxen, five rams, five male
goats, and five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Abidan
son of Gideoni.
66 On the tenth day Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai, the leader of the
Danites: 67 his offering was one silver plate weighing one hundred
thirty shekels, one silver basin weighing seventy shekels, according to
the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of choice flour mixed
with oil for a grain offering; 68 one golden dish weighing ten shekels,
full of incense; 69 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year old,
for a burnt offering; 70 one male goat for a sin offering; 71 and for the
sacrifice of well-being, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five
male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Ahiezer son of
Ammishaddai.
72 On the eleventh day Pagiel son of Ochran, the leader of the
Asherites: 73 his offering was one silver plate weighing one hundred
thirty shekels, one silver basin weighing seventy shekels, according to
the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of choice flour mixed
with oil for a grain offering; 74 one golden dish weighing ten shekels,

286

NUMBERS 287

full of incense; 75 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year old,
for a burnt offering; 76 one male goat for a sin offering; 77 and for the
sacrifice of well-being, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five
male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Pagiel son of Ochran.
78 On the twelfth day Ahira son of Enan, the leader of the Naphtalites:
79 his offering was one silver plate weighing one hundred thirty
shekels, one silver basin weighing seventy shekels, according to the
shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of choice flour mixed with oil
for a grain offering; 80 one golden dish weighing ten shekels, full of
incense; 81 one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a year old, for a
burnt offering; 82 one male goat for a sin offering; 83 and for the
sacrifice of well-being, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five
male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Ahira son of Enan.
84 This was the dedication offering for the altar, at the time when it
was anointed, from the leaders of Israel: twelve silver plates, twelve
silver basins, twelve golden dishes, 85 each silver plate weighing one
hundred thirty shekels and each basin seventy, all the silver of the
vessels two thousand four hundred shekels according to the shekel of
the sanctuary, 86 the twelve golden dishes, full of incense, weighing
ten shekels apiece according to the shekel of the sanctuary, all the gold
of the dishes being one hundred twenty shekels; 87 all the livestock for
the burnt offering twelve bulls, twelve rams, twelve male lambs a year
old, with their grain offering; and twelve male goats for a sin offering;
88 and all the livestock for the sacrifice of well-being twenty-four bulls,
the rams sixty, the male goats sixty, the male lambs a year old sixty.
This was the dedication offering for the altar, after it was anointed.
89 When Moses went into the tent of meeting to speak with the LORD,
he would hear the voice speaking to him from above the mercy seat
that was on the ark of the covenant from between the two cherubim;
thus it spoke to him.

287

NUMBERS 288

[Numbers 8]
The lampstand
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 2 Speak to Aaron and say to him:
When you set up the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light in front of
the lampstand. 3 Aaron did so; he set up its lamps to give light in front
of the lampstand, as the LORD had commanded Moses. 4 Now this was
how the lampstand was made, out of hammered work of gold. From its
base to its flowers, it was hammered work; according to the pattern
that the LORD had shown Moses, so he made the lampstand.
The dedication of the Levites
5 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 6 Take the Levites from among the
Israelites and cleanse them. 7 Thus you shall do to them, to cleanse
them: sprinkle the water of purification on them, have them shave
their whole body with a razor and wash their clothes, and so cleanse
themselves. 8 Then let them take a young bull and its grain offering of
choice flour mixed with oil, and you shall take another young bull for a
sin offering. 9 You shall bring the Levites before the tent of meeting,
and assemble the whole congregation of the Israelites. 10 When you
bring the Levites before the LORD, the Israelites shall lay their hands on
the Levites, 11 and Aaron shall present the Levites before the LORD as an
elevation offering from the Israelites, that they may do the service of
the LORD. 12 The Levites shall lay their hands on the heads of the bulls,
and he shall offer the one for a sin offering and the other for a burnt
offering to the LORD, to make atonement for the Levites. 13 Then you
shall have the Levites stand before Aaron and his sons, and you shall
present them as an elevation offering to the LORD.
14 Thus you shall separate the Levites from among the other Israelites,
and the Levites shall be mine. 15 Thereafter the Levites may go in to do
service at the tent of meeting, once you have cleansed them and
presented them as an elevation offering. 16 For they are unreservedly
given to me from among the Israelites; I have taken them for myself, in
place of all that open the womb, the firstborn of all the Israelites. 17
For all the firstborn among the Israelites are mine, both human and
animal. On the day that I struck down all the firstborn in the land of

288

NUMBERS 289

Egypt I consecrated them for myself, 18 but I have taken the Levites in
place of all the firstborn among the Israelites. 19 Moreover, I have
given the Levites as a gift to Aaron and his sons from among the
Israelites, to do the service for the Israelites at the tent of meeting, and
to make atonement for the Israelites, in order that there may be no
plague among the Israelites for coming too close to the sanctuary.
20 Moses and Aaron and the whole congregation of the Israelites did
with the Levites accordingly; the Israelites did with the Levites just as
the LORD had commanded Moses concerning them. 21 The Levites
purified themselves from sin and washed their clothes; then Aaron
presented them as an elevation offering before the LORD, and Aaron
made atonement for them to cleanse them. 22 Thereafter the Levites
went in to do their service in the tent of meeting in attendance on
Aaron and his sons. As the LORD had commanded Moses concerning the
Levites, so they did with them.
23 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 24 This applies to the Levites: from
twenty-five years old and upward they shall begin to do duty in the
service of the tent of meeting; 25 and from the age of fifty years they
shall retire from the duty of the service and serve no more. 26 They
may assist their brothers in the tent of meeting in carrying out their
duties, but they shall perform no service. Thus you shall do with the
Levites in assigning their duties.
[Numbers 9]
The passover
1 The LORD spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the first month
of the second year after they had come out of the land of Egypt,
saying: 2 Let the Israelites keep the passover at its appointed time. 3 On
the fourteenth day of this month, at twilight, you shall keep it at its
appointed time; according to all its statutes and all its regulations you
shall keep it. 4 So Moses told the Israelites that they should keep the
passover. 5 They kept the passover in the first month, on the
fourteenth day of the month, at twilight, in the wilderness of Sinai.
Just as the LORD had commanded Moses, so the Israelites did. 6 Now
there were certain people who were unclean through touching a

289

NUMBERS 290

corpse, so that they could not keep the passover on that day. They
came before Moses and Aaron on that day, 7 and said to him,
"Although we are unclean through touching a corpse, why must we be
kept from presenting the LORD's offering at its appointed time among
the Israelites?" 8 Moses spoke to them, "Wait, so that I may hear what
the LORD will command concerning you."
9 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 10 Speak to the Israelites, saying:
Anyone of you or your descendants who is unclean through touching a
corpse, or is away on a journey, shall still keep the passover to the
LORD. 11 In the second month on the fourteenth day, at twilight, they
shall keep it; they shall eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs.
12 They shall leave none of it until morning, nor break a bone of it;
according to all the statute for the passover they shall keep it. 13 But
anyone who is clean and is not on a journey, and yet refrains from
keeping the passover, shall be cut off from the people for not
presenting the LORD's offering at its appointed time; such a one shall
bear the consequences for the sin. 14 Any alien residing among you
who wishes to keep the passover to the LORD shall do so according to
the statute of the passover and according to its regulation; you shall
have one statute for both the resident alien and the native.
The divine fire cloud
15 On the day the tabernacle was set up, the cloud covered the
tabernacle, the tent of the covenant; and from evening until morning
it was over the tabernacle, having the appearance of fire. 16 It was
always so: the cloud covered it by day and the appearance of fire by
night. 17 Whenever the cloud lifted from over the tent, then the
Israelites would set out; and in the place where the cloud settled down,
there the Israelites would camp. 18 At the command of the LORD the
Israelites would set out, and at the command of the LORD they would
camp. As long as the cloud rested over the tabernacle, they would
remain in camp. 19 Even when the cloud continued over the tabernacle
many days, the Israelites would keep the charge of the LORD, and
would not set out. 20 Sometimes the cloud would remain a few days
over the tabernacle, and according to the command of the LORD they
would remain in camp; then according to the command of the LORD

290

NUMBERS 291

they would set out. 21 Sometimes the cloud would remain from
evening until morning; and when the cloud lifted in the morning, they
would set out, or if it continued for a day and a night, when the cloud
lifted they would set out. 22 Whether it was two days, or a month, or a
longer time, that the cloud continued over the tabernacle, resting
upon it, the Israelites would remain in camp and would not set out; but
when it lifted they would set out. 23 At the command of the LORD they
would camp, and at the command of the LORD they would set out. They
kept the charge of the LORD, at the command of the LORD by Moses.
[Numbers 10]
Signal trumpets
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 2 Make two silver trumpets; you
shall make them of hammered work; and you shall use them for
summoning the congregation, and for breaking camp. 3 When both
are blown, the whole congregation shall assemble before you at the
entrance of the tent of meeting. 4 But if only one is blown, then the
leaders, the heads of the tribes of Israel, shall assemble before you. 5
When you blow an alarm, the camps on the east side shall set out; 6
when you blow a second alarm, the camps on the south side shall set
out. An alarm is to be blown whenever they are to set out. 7 But when
the assembly is to be gathered, you shall blow, but you shall not sound
an alarm. 8 The sons of Aaron, the priests, shall blow the trumpets; this
shall be a perpetual institution for you throughout your generations. 9
When you go to war in your land against the adversary who oppresses
you, you shall sound an alarm with the trumpets, so that you may be
remembered before the LORD your God and be saved from your
enemies. 10 Also on your days of rejoicing, at your appointed festivals,
and at the beginnings of your months, you shall blow the trumpets
over your burnt offerings and over your sacrifices of well-being; they
shall serve as a reminder on your behalf before the LORD your God: I am
the LORD your God.

291

NUMBERS 292

Breaking camp and traveling
11 In the second year, in the second month, on the twentieth day of the
month, the cloud lifted from over the tabernacle of the covenant. 12
Then the Israelites set out by stages from the wilderness of Sinai, and
the cloud settled down in the wilderness of Paran. 13 They set out for
the first time at the command of the LORD by Moses. 14 The standard of
the camp of Judah set out first, company by company, and over the
whole company was Nahshon son of Amminadab. 15 Over the company
of the tribe of Issachar was Nethanel son of Zuar; 16 and over the
company of the tribe of Zebulun was Eliab son of Helon.
17 Then the tabernacle was taken down, and the Gershonites and the
Merarites, who carried the tabernacle, set out. 18 Next the standard of
the camp of Reuben set out, company by company; and over the whole
company was Elizur son of Shedeur. 19 Over the company of the tribe
of Simeon was Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai, 20 and over the company
of the tribe of Gad was Eliasaph son of Deuel.
21 Then the Kohathites, who carried the holy things, set out; and the
tabernacle was set up before their arrival. 22 Next the standard of the
Ephraimite camp set out, company by company, and over the whole
company was Elishama son of Ammihud. 23 Over the company of the
tribe of Manasseh was Gamaliel son of Pedahzur, 24 and over the
company of the tribe of Benjamin was Abidan son of Gideoni.
25 Then the standard of the camp of Dan, acting as the rear guard of
all the camps, set out, company by company, and over the whole
company was Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai. 26 Over the company of
the tribe of Asher was Pagiel son of Ochran, 27 and over the company
of the tribe of Naphtali was Ahira son of Enan. 28 This was the order of
march of the Israelites, company by company, when they set out.
29 Moses said to Hobab son of Reuel the Midianite, Moses' father-inlaw, "We are setting out for the place of which the LORD said, 'I will
give it to you'; come with us, and we will treat you well; for the LORD
has promised good to Israel." 30 But he said to him, "I will not go, but I
will go back to my own land and to my kindred." 31 He said, "Do not

292

NUMBERS 293

leave us, for you know where we should camp in the wilderness, and
you will serve as eyes for us. 32 Moreover, if you go with us, whatever
good the LORD does for us, the same we will do for you."
33 So they set out from the mount of the LORD three days' journey with
the ark of the covenant of the LORD going before them three days'
journey, to seek out a resting place for them, 34 the cloud of the LORD
being over them by day when they set out from the camp.
35 Whenever the ark set out, Moses would say,
"Arise, O LORD, let your enemies be scattered,
and your foes flee before you."
36 And whenever it came to rest, he would say,
"Return, O LORD of the ten thousand thousands of Israel."
[Numbers 11]
Two complaint stories
1 Now when the people complained in the hearing of the LORD about
their misfortunes, the LORD heard it and his anger was kindled. Then
the fire of the LORD burned against them, and consumed some outlying
parts of the camp. 2 But the people cried out to Moses; and Moses
prayed to the LORD, and the fire abated. 3 So that place was called
Taberah, because the fire of the LORD burned against them.
4 The rabble among them had a strong craving; and the Israelites also
wept again, and said, "If only we had meat to eat! 5 We remember the
fish we used to eat in Egypt for nothing, the cucumbers, the melons,
the leeks, the onions, and the garlic; 6 but now our strength is dried
up, and there is nothing at all but this manna to look at."
7 Now the manna was like coriander seed, and its color was like the
color of gum resin. 8 The people went around and gathered it, ground
it in mills or beat it in mortars, then boiled it in pots and made cakes of
it; and the taste of it was like the taste of cakes baked with oil. 9 When
the dew fell on the camp in the night, the manna would fall with it.

293

NUMBERS 294

10 Moses heard the people weeping throughout their families, all at
the entrances of their tents. Then the LORD became very angry, and
Moses was displeased. 11 So Moses said to the LORD, "Why have you
treated your servant so badly? Why have I not found favor in your
sight, that you lay the burden of all this people on me? 12 Did I
conceive all this people? Did I give birth to them, that you should say
to me, 'Carry them in your bosom, as a nurse carries a sucking child,' to
the land that you promised on oath to their ancestors? 13 Where am I
to get meat to give to all this people? For they come weeping to me
and say, 'Give us meat to eat!' 14 I am not able to carry all this people
alone, for they are too heavy for me. 15 If this is the way you are going
to treat me, put me to death at once — if I have found favor in your
sight — and do not let me see my misery."
16 So the LORD said to Moses, "Gather for me seventy of the elders of
Israel, whom you know to be the elders of the people and officers over
them; bring them to the tent of meeting, and have them take their
place there with you. 17 I will come down and talk with you there; and
I will take some of the spirit that is on you and put it on them; and
they shall bear the burden of the people along with you so that you
will not bear it all by yourself. 18 And say to the people: Consecrate
yourselves for tomorrow, and you shall eat meat; for you have wailed
in the hearing of the LORD, saying, 'If only we had meat to eat! Surely it
was better for us in Egypt.' Therefore the LORD will give you meat, and
you shall eat. 19 You shall eat not only one day, or two days, or five
days, or ten days, or twenty days, 20 but for a whole month — until it
comes out of your nostrils and becomes loathsome to you — because
you have rejected the LORD who is among you, and have wailed before
him, saying, 'Why did we ever leave Egypt?'" 21 But Moses said, "The
people I am with number six hundred thousand on foot; and you say, 'I
will give them meat, that they may eat for a whole month'! 22 Are
there enough flocks and herds to slaughter for them? Are there
enough fish in the sea to catch for them?" 23 The LORD said to Moses,
"Is the LORD's power limited? Now you shall see whether my word will
come true for you or not."

294

NUMBERS 295

24 So Moses went out and told the people the words of the LORD; and
he gathered seventy elders of the people, and placed them all around
the tent. 25 Then the LORD came down in the cloud and spoke to him,
and took some of the spirit that was on him and put it on the seventy
elders; and when the spirit rested upon them, they prophesied. But
they did not do so again.
26 Two men remained in the camp, one named Eldad, and the other
named Medad, and the spirit rested on them; they were among those
registered, but they had not gone out to the tent, and so they
prophesied in the camp. 27 And a young man ran and told Moses,
"Eldad and Medad are prophesying in the camp." 28 And Joshua son
of Nun, the assistant of Moses, one of his chosen men, said, "My lord
Moses, stop them!" 29 But Moses said to him, "Are you jealous for my
sake? Would that all the LORD's people were prophets, and that the
LORD would put his spirit on them!" 30 And Moses and the elders of
Israel returned to the camp.
31 Then a wind went out from the LORD, and it brought quails from the
sea and let them fall beside the camp, about a day's journey on this
side and a day's journey on the other side, all around the camp, about
two cubits deep on the ground. 32 So the people worked all that day
and night and all the next day, gathering the quails; the least anyone
gathered was ten homers; and they spread them out for themselves all
around the camp. 33 But while the meat was still between their teeth,
before it was consumed, the anger of the LORD was kindled against the
people, and the LORD struck the people with a very great plague. 34 So
that place was called Kibroth-hattaavah, because there they buried the
people who had the craving. 35 From Kibroth-hattaavah the people
journeyed to Hazeroth.
[Numbers 12]
Miriam's and Aaron's complaint
1 While they were at Hazeroth, Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses
because of the Cushite woman whom he had married (for he had
indeed married a Cushite woman); 2 and they said, "Has the LORD
spoken only through Moses? Has he not spoken through us also?" And

295

NUMBERS 296

the LORD heard it. 3 Now the man Moses was very humble, more so
than anyone else on the face of the earth. 4 Suddenly the LORD said to
Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, "Come out, you three, to the tent of
meeting." So the three of them came out. 5 Then the LORD came down
in a pillar of cloud, and stood at the entrance of the tent, and called
Aaron and Miriam; and they both came forward. 6 And he said, "Hear
my words:
When there are prophets among you,
I the LORD make myself known to them in visions;
I speak to them in dreams.
7 Not so with my servant Moses;
he is entrusted with all my house.
8 With him I speak face to face — clearly, not in riddles;
and he beholds the form of the LORD.
Why then were you not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?" 9
And the anger of the LORD was kindled against them, and he departed.
10 When the cloud went away from over the tent, Miriam had become
leprous, as white as snow. And Aaron turned towards Miriam and saw
that she was leprous. 11 Then Aaron said to Moses, "Oh, my lord, do
not punish us for a sin that we have so foolishly committed. 12 Do not
let her be like one stillborn, whose flesh is half consumed when it
comes out of its mother's womb." 13 And Moses cried to the LORD, "O
God, please heal her." 14 But the LORD said to Moses, "If her father had
but spit in her face, would she not bear her shame for seven days? Let
her be shut out of the camp for seven days, and after that she may be
brought in again." 15 So Miriam was shut out of the camp for seven
days; and the people did not set out on the march until Miriam had
been brought in again. 16 After that the people set out from Hazeroth,
and camped in the wilderness of Paran.
[Numbers 13]
Scouting the land of Canaan
1 The LORD said to Moses, 2 "Send men to spy out the land of Canaan,
which I am giving to the Israelites; from each of their ancestral tribes
you shall send a man, every one a leader among them." 3 So Moses
sent them from the wilderness of Paran, according to the command of

296

NUMBERS 297

the LORD, all of them leading men among the Israelites. 4 These were
their names: From the tribe of Reuben, Shammua son of Zaccur; 5 from
the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat son of Hori; 6 from the tribe of Judah,
Caleb son of Jephunneh; 7 from the tribe of Issachar, Igal son of
Joseph; 8 from the tribe of Ephraim, Hoshea son of Nun; 9 from the
tribe of Benjamin, Palti son of Raphu; 10 from the tribe of Zebulun,
Gaddiel son of Sodi; 11 from the tribe of Joseph (that is, from the tribe
of Manasseh), Gaddi son of Susi; 12 from the tribe of Dan, Ammiel son
of Gemalli; 13 from the tribe of Asher, Sethur son of Michael; 14 from
the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi son of Vophsi; 15 from the tribe of Gad,
Geuel son of Machi. 16 These were the names of the men whom Moses
sent to spy out the land. And Moses changed the name of Hoshea son
of Nun to Joshua.
17 Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canaan, and said to them,
"Go up there into the Negeb, and go up into the hill country, 18 and
see what the land is like, and whether the people who live in it are
strong or weak, whether they are few or many, 19 and whether the
land they live in is good or bad, and whether the towns that they live
in are unwalled or fortified, 20 and whether the land is rich or poor,
and whether there are trees in it or not. Be bold, and bring some of
the fruit of the land." Now it was the season of the first ripe grapes.
21 So they went up and spied out the land from the wilderness of Zin
to Rehob, near Lebo-hamath. 22 They went up into the Negeb, and
came to Hebron; and Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, the Anakites, were
there. (Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.) 23 And
they came to the Wadi Eshcol, and cut down from there a branch with
a single cluster of grapes, and they carried it on a pole between two of
them. They also brought some pomegranates and figs. 24 That place
was called the Wadi Eshcol, because of the cluster that the Israelites cut
down from there.
25 At the end of forty days they returned from spying out the land. 26
And they came to Moses and Aaron and to all the congregation of the
Israelites in the wilderness of Paran, at Kadesh; they brought back
word to them and to all the congregation, and showed them the fruit
of the land. 27 And they told him, "We came to the land to which you

297

NUMBERS 298

sent us; it flows with milk and honey, and this is its fruit. 28 Yet the
people who live in the land are strong, and the towns are fortified and
very large; and besides, we saw the descendants of Anak there. 29 The
Amalekites live in the land of the Negeb; the Hittites, the Jebusites,
and the Amorites live in the hill country; and the Canaanites live by the
sea, and along the Jordan."
30 But Caleb quieted the people before Moses, and said, "Let us go up
at once and occupy it, for we are well able to overcome it." 31 Then the
men who had gone up with him said, "We are not able to go up
against this people, for they are stronger than we." 32 So they brought
to the Israelites an unfavorable report of the land that they had spied
out, saying, "The land that we have gone through as spies is a land
that devours its inhabitants; and all the people that we saw in it are of
great size. 33 There we saw the Nephilim (the Anakites come from the
Nephilim); and to ourselves we seemed like grasshoppers, and so we
seemed to them."
[Numbers 14]
1 Then all the congregation raised a loud cry, and the people wept that
night. 2 And all the Israelites complained against Moses and Aaron; the
whole congregation said to them, "Would that we had died in the land
of Egypt! Or would that we had died in this wilderness! 3 Why is the
LORD bringing us into this land to fall by the sword? Our wives and our
little ones will become booty; would it not be better for us to go back
to Egypt?" 4 So they said to one another, "Let us choose a captain, and
go back to Egypt."
5 Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly of
the congregation of the Israelites. 6 And Joshua son of Nun and Caleb
son of Jephunneh, who were among those who had spied out the land,
tore their clothes 7 and said to all the congregation of the Israelites,
"The land that we went through as spies is an exceedingly good land. 8
If the LORD is pleased with us, he will bring us into this land and give it
to us, a land that flows with milk and honey. 9 Only, do not rebel
against the LORD; and do not fear the people of the land, for they are
no more than bread for us; their protection is removed from them, and

298

NUMBERS 299

the LORD is with us; do not fear them." 10 But the whole congregation
threatened to stone them.
Then the glory of the LORD appeared at the tent of meeting to all the
Israelites. 11 And the LORD said to Moses, "How long will this people
despise me? And how long will they refuse to believe in me, in spite of
all the signs that I have done among them? 12 I will strike them with
pestilence and disinherit them, and I will make of you a nation greater
and mightier than they."
13 But Moses said to the LORD, "Then the Egyptians will hear of it, for in
your might you brought up this people from among them, 14 and they
will tell the inhabitants of this land. They have heard that you, O LORD,
are in the midst of this people; for you, O LORD, are seen face to face,
and your cloud stands over them and you go in front of them, in a
pillar of cloud by day and in a pillar of fire by night. 15 Now if you kill
this people all at one time, then the nations who have heard about you
will say, 16 'It is because the LORD was not able to bring this people into
the land he swore to give them that he has slaughtered them in the
wilderness.' 17 And now, therefore, let the power of the LORD be great
in the way that you promised when you spoke, saying,
18 'The LORD is slow to anger,
and abounding in steadfast love,
forgiving iniquity and transgression,
but by no means clearing the guilty,
visiting the iniquity of the parents
upon the children
to the third and the fourth generation.'
19 Forgive the iniquity of this people according to the greatness of your
steadfast love, just as you have pardoned this people, from Egypt even
until now."
20 Then the LORD said, "I do forgive, just as you have asked; 21
nevertheless — as I live, and as all the earth shall be filled with the
glory of the LORD — 22 none of the people who have seen my glory and
the signs that I did in Egypt and in the wilderness, and yet have tested
me these ten times and have not obeyed my voice, 23 shall see the land

299

NUMBERS 300

that I swore to give to their ancestors; none of those who despised me
shall see it. 24 But my servant Caleb, because he has a different spirit
and has followed me wholeheartedly, I will bring into the land into
which he went, and his descendants shall possess it. 25 Now, since the
Amalekites and the Canaanites live in the valleys, turn tomorrow and
set out for the wilderness by the way to the Red Sea."
26 And the LORD spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying: 27 How long
shall this wicked congregation complain against me? I have heard the
complaints of the Israelites, which they complain against me. 28 Say to
them, "As I live," says the LORD, "I will do to you the very things I heard
you say: 29 your dead bodies shall fall in this very wilderness; and of all
your number, included in the census, from twenty years old and
upward, who have complained against me, 30 not one of you shall
come into the land in which I swore to settle you, except Caleb son of
Jephunneh and Joshua son of Nun. 31 But your little ones, who you said
would become booty, I will bring in, and they shall know the land that
you have despised. 32 But as for you, your dead bodies shall fall in this
wilderness. 33 And your children shall be shepherds in the wilderness
for forty years, and shall suffer for your faithlessness, until the last of
your dead bodies lies in the wilderness. 34 According to the number of
the days in which you spied out the land, forty days, for every day a
year, you shall bear your iniquity, forty years, and you shall know my
displeasure." 35 I the LORD have spoken; surely I will do thus to all this
wicked congregation gathered together against me: in this wilderness
they shall come to a full end, and there they shall die.
36 And the men whom Moses sent to spy out the land, who returned
and made all the congregation complain against him by bringing a bad
report about the land — 37 the men who brought an unfavorable
report about the land died by a plague before the LORD. 38 But Joshua
son of Nun and Caleb son of Jephunneh alone remained alive, of those
men who went to spy out the land.
39 When Moses told these words to all the Israelites, the people
mourned greatly. 40 They rose early in the morning and went up to
the heights of the hill country, saying, "Here we are. We will go up to
the place that the LORD has promised, for we have sinned." 41 But

300

NUMBERS 301

Moses said, "Why do you continue to transgress the command of the
LORD? That will not succeed. 42 Do not go up, for the LORD is not with
you; do not let yourselves be struck down before your enemies. 43 For
the Amalekites and the Canaanites will confront you there, and you
shall fall by the sword; because you have turned back from following
the LORD, the LORD will not be with you." 44 But they presumed to go
up to the heights of the hill country, even though the ark of the
covenant of the LORD, and Moses, had not left the camp. 45 Then the
Amalekites and the Canaanites who lived in that hill country came
down and defeated them, pursuing them as far as Hormah.
[Numbers 15]
Various offerings
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 2 Speak to the Israelites and say to
them: When you come into the land you are to inhabit, which I am
giving you, 3 and you make an offering by fire to the LORD from the
herd or from the flock — whether a burnt offering or a sacrifice, to
fulfill a vow or as a freewill offering or at your appointed festivals — to
make a pleasing odor for the LORD, 4 then whoever presents such an
offering to the LORD shall present also a grain offering, one-tenth of an
ephah of choice flour, mixed with one-fourth of a hin of oil. 5
Moreover, you shall offer one-fourth of a hin of wine as a drink
offering with the burnt offering or the sacrifice, for each lamb. 6 For a
ram, you shall offer a grain offering, two-tenths of an ephah of choice
flour mixed with one-third of a hin of oil; 7 and as a drink offering you
shall offer one-third of a hin of wine, a pleasing odor to the LORD. 8
When you offer a bull as a burnt offering or a sacrifice, to fulfill a vow
or as an offering of well-being to the LORD, 9 then you shall present
with the bull a grain offering, three-tenths of an ephah of choice flour,
mixed with half a hin of oil, 10 and you shall present as a drink offering
half a hin of wine, as an offering by fire, a pleasing odor to the LORD.
11 Thus it shall be done for each ox or ram, or for each of the male
lambs or the kids. 12 According to the number that you offer, so you
shall do with each and every one. 13 Every native Israelite shall do these
things in this way, in presenting an offering by fire, a pleasing odor to
the LORD. 14 An alien who lives with you, or who takes up permanent

301

NUMBERS 302

residence among you, and wishes to offer an offering by fire, a
pleasing odor to the LORD, shall do as you do. 15 As for the assembly,
there shall be for both you and the resident alien a single statute, a
perpetual statute throughout your generations; you and the alien shall
be alike before the LORD. 16 You and the alien who resides with you
shall have the same law and the same ordinance.
17 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 18 Speak to the Israelites and say to
them: After you come into the land to which I am bringing you, 19
whenever you eat of the bread of the land, you shall present a
donation to the LORD. 20 From your first batch of dough you shall
present a loaf as a donation; you shall present it just as you present a
donation from the threshing floor. 21 Throughout your generations
you shall give to the LORD a donation from the first of your batch of
dough.
22 But if you unintentionally fail to observe all these commandments
that the LORD has spoken to Moses — 23 everything that the LORD has
commanded you by Moses, from the day the LORD gave commandment
and thereafter, throughout your generations — 24 then if it was done
unintentionally without the knowledge of the congregation, the
whole congregation shall offer one young bull for a burnt offering, a
pleasing odor to the LORD, together with its grain offering and its drink
offering, according to the ordinance, and one male goat for a sin
offering. 25 The priest shall make atonement for all the congregation
of the Israelites, and they shall be forgiven; it was unintentional, and
they have brought their offering, an offering by fire to the LORD, and
their sin offering before the LORD, for their error. 26 All the
congregation of the Israelites shall be forgiven, as well as the aliens
residing among them, because the whole people was involved in the
error.
27 An individual who sins unintentionally shall present a female goat a
year old for a sin offering. 28 And the priest shall make atonement
before the LORD for the one who commits an error, when it is
unintentional, to make atonement for the person, who then shall be
forgiven. 29 For both the native among the Israelites and the alien
residing among them — you shall have the same law for anyone who

302

NUMBERS 303

acts in error. 30 But whoever acts high-handedly, whether a native or
an alien, affronts the LORD, and shall be cut off from among the
people. 31 Because of having despised the word of the LORD and
broken his commandment, such a person shall be utterly cut off and
bear the guilt.
A sabbath violation
32 When the Israelites were in the wilderness, they found a man
gathering sticks on the sabbath day. 33 Those who found him
gathering sticks brought him to Moses, Aaron, and to the whole
congregation. 34 They put him in custody, because it was not clear
what should be done to him. 35 Then the LORD said to Moses, "The man
shall be put to death; all the congregation shall stone him outside the
camp." 36 The whole congregation brought him outside the camp and
stoned him to death, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.
Wearing fringes
37 The LORD said to Moses: 38 Speak to the Israelites, and tell them to
make fringes on the corners of their garments throughout their
generations and to put a blue cord on the fringe at each corner. 39
You have the fringe so that, when you see it, you will remember all the
commandments of the LORD and do them, and not follow the lust of
your own heart and your own eyes. 40 So you shall remember and do
all my commandments, and you shall be holy to your God. 41 I am the
LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your
God: I am the LORD your God.
[Numbers 16]
The rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram
1 Now Korah son of Izhar son of Kohath son of Levi, along with Dathan
and Abiram sons of Eliab, and On son of Peleth — descendants of
Reuben — took 2 two hundred fifty Israelite men, leaders of the
congregation, chosen from the assembly, well-known men, and they
confronted Moses. 3 They assembled against Moses and against Aaron,
and said to them, "You have gone too far! All the congregation are

303

NUMBERS 304

holy, every one of them, and the LORD is among them. So why then do
you exalt yourselves above the assembly of the LORD?" 4 When Moses
heard it, he fell on his face. 5 Then he said to Korah and all his
company, "In the morning the LORD will make known who is his, and
who is holy, and who will be allowed to approach him; the one whom
he will choose he will allow to approach him. 6 Do this: take censers,
Korah and all your company, 7 and tomorrow put fire in them, and lay
incense on them before the LORD; and the man whom the LORD chooses
shall be the holy one. You Levites have gone too far!" 8 Then Moses
said to Korah, "Hear now, you Levites! 9 Is it too little for you that the
God of Israel has separated you from the congregation of Israel, to
allow you to approach him in order to perform the duties of the LORD's
tabernacle, and to stand before the congregation and serve them? 10
He has allowed you to approach him, and all your brother Levites with
you; yet you seek the priesthood as well! 11 Therefore you and all your
company have gathered together against the LORD. What is Aaron that
you rail against him?"
12 Moses sent for Dathan and Abiram sons of Eliab; but they said, "We
will not come! 13 Is it too little that you have brought us up out of a
land flowing with milk and honey to kill us in the wilderness, that you
must also lord it over us? 14 It is clear you have not brought us into a
land flowing with milk and honey, or given us an inheritance of fields
and vineyards. Would you put out the eyes of these men? We will not
come!"
15 Moses was very angry and said to the LORD, "Pay no attention to
their offering. I have not taken one donkey from them, and I have not
harmed any one of them." 16 And Moses said to Korah, "As for you
and all your company, be present tomorrow before the LORD, you and
they and Aaron; 17 and let each one of you take his censer, and put
incense on it, and each one of you present his censer before the LORD,
two hundred fifty censers; you also, and Aaron, each his censer." 18 So
each man took his censer, and they put fire in the censers and laid
incense on them, and they stood at the entrance of the tent of
meeting with Moses and Aaron. 19 Then Korah assembled the whole
congregation against them at the entrance of the tent of meeting. And
the glory of the LORD appeared to the whole congregation.

304

NUMBERS 305

20 Then the LORD spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying: 21 Separate
yourselves from this congregation, so that I may consume them in a
moment. 22 They fell on their faces, and said, "O God, the God of the
spirits of all flesh, shall one person sin and you become angry with the
whole congregation?"
23 And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 24 Say to the congregation:
Get away from the dwellings of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram. 25 So
Moses got up and went to Dathan and Abiram; the elders of Israel
followed him. 26 He said to the congregation, "Turn away from the
tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, or you will be
swept away for all their sins." 27 So they got away from the dwellings
of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram; and Dathan and Abiram came out and
stood at the entrance of their tents, together with their wives, their
children, and their little ones. 28 And Moses said, "This is how you shall
know that the LORD has sent me to do all these works; it has not been
of my own accord: 29 If these people die a natural death, or if a natural
fate comes on them, then the LORD has not sent me. 30 But if the LORD
creates something new, and the ground opens its mouth and swallows
them up, with all that belongs to them, and they go down alive into
Sheol, then you shall know that these men have despised the LORD."
31 As soon as he finished speaking all these words, the ground under
them was split apart. 32 The earth opened its mouth and swallowed
them up, along with their households — everyone who belonged to
Korah and all their goods. 33 So they with all that belonged to them
went down alive into Sheol; the earth closed over them, and they
perished from the midst of the assembly. 34 All Israel around them fled
at their outcry, for they said, "The earth will swallow us too!" 35 And
fire came out from the LORD and consumed the two hundred fifty men
offering the incense.

305

NUMBERS 306

The aftermath
36 Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 37 Tell Eleazar son of Aaron
the priest to take the censers out of the blaze; then scatter the fire far
and wide. 38 For the censers of these sinners have become holy at the
cost of their lives. Make them into hammered plates as a covering for
the altar, for they presented them before the LORD and they became
holy. Thus they shall be a sign to the Israelites. 39 So Eleazar the priest
took the bronze censers that had been presented by those who were
burned; and they were hammered out as a covering for the altar — 40
a reminder to the Israelites that no outsider, who is not of the
descendants of Aaron, shall approach to offer incense before the LORD,
so as not to become like Korah and his company — just as the LORD had
said to him through Moses.
41 On the next day, however, the whole congregation of the Israelites
rebelled against Moses and against Aaron, saying, "You have killed the
people of the LORD." 42 And when the congregation had assembled
against them, Moses and Aaron turned toward the tent of meeting;
the cloud had covered it and the glory of the LORD appeared. 43 Then
Moses and Aaron came to the front of the tent of meeting, 44 and the
LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 45 "Get away from this congregation, so
that I may consume them in a moment." And they fell on their faces.
46 Moses said to Aaron, "Take your censer, put fire on it from the altar
and lay incense on it, and carry it quickly to the congregation and
make atonement for them. For wrath has gone out from the LORD; the
plague has begun." 47 So Aaron took it as Moses had ordered, and ran
into the middle of the assembly, where the plague had already begun
among the people. He put on the incense, and made atonement for
the people. 48 He stood between the dead and the living; and the
plague was stopped. 49 Those who died by the plague were fourteen
thousand seven hundred, besides those who died in the affair of
Korah. 50 When the plague was stopped, Aaron returned to Moses at
the entrance of the tent of meeting.

306

NUMBERS 307

[Numbers 17]
Aaron's sprouting rod
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 2 Speak to the Israelites, and get
twelve staffs from them, one for each ancestral house, from all the
leaders of their ancestral houses. Write each man's name on his staff, 3
and write Aaron's name on the staff of Levi. For there shall be one
staff for the head of each ancestral house. 4 Place them in the tent of
meeting before the covenant, where I meet with you. 5 And the staff
of the man whom I choose shall sprout; thus I will put a stop to the
complaints of the Israelites that they continually make against you. 6
Moses spoke to the Israelites; and all their leaders gave him staffs, one
for each leader, according to their ancestral houses, twelve staffs; and
the staff of Aaron was among theirs. 7 So Moses placed the staffs
before the LORD in the tent of the covenant.
8 When Moses went into the tent of the covenant on the next day, the
staff of Aaron for the house of Levi had sprouted. It put forth buds,
produced blossoms, and bore ripe almonds. 9 Then Moses brought out
all the staffs from before the LORD to all the Israelites; and they looked,
and each man took his staff. 10 And the LORD said to Moses, "Put back
the staff of Aaron before the covenant, to be kept as a warning to
rebels, so that you may make an end of their complaints against me, or
else they will die." 11 Moses did so; just as the LORD commanded him, so
he did.
12 The Israelites said to Moses, "We are perishing; we are lost, all of us
are lost! 13 Everyone who approaches the tabernacle of the LORD will
die. Are we all to perish?"
[Numbers 18]
Priesthood and Levitical duties and dues
1 The LORD said to Aaron: You and your sons and your ancestral house
with you shall bear responsibility for offenses connected with the
sanctuary, while you and your sons alone shall bear responsibility for
offenses connected with the priesthood. 2 So bring with you also your
brothers of the tribe of Levi, your ancestral tribe, in order that they

307

NUMBERS 308

may be joined to you, and serve you while you and your sons with you
are in front of the tent of the covenant. 3 They shall perform duties for
you and for the whole tent. But they must not approach either the
utensils of the sanctuary or the altar, otherwise both they and you will
die. 4 They are attached to you in order to perform the duties of the
tent of meeting, for all the service of the tent; no outsider shall
approach you. 5 You yourselves shall perform the duties of the
sanctuary and the duties of the altar, so that wrath may never again
come upon the Israelites. 6 It is I who now take your brother Levites
from among the Israelites; they are now yours as a gift, dedicated to
the LORD, to perform the service of the tent of meeting. 7 But you and
your sons with you shall diligently perform your priestly duties in all
that concerns the altar and the area behind the curtain. I give your
priesthood as a gift; any outsider who approaches shall be put to
death.
8 The LORD spoke to Aaron: I have given you charge of the offerings
made to me, all the holy gifts of the Israelites; I have given them to you
and your sons as a priestly portion due you in perpetuity. 9 This shall be
yours from the most holy things, reserved from the fire: every offering
of theirs that they render to me as a most holy thing, whether grain
offering, sin offering, or guilt offering, shall belong to you and your
sons. 10 As a most holy thing you shall eat it; every male may eat it; it
shall be holy to you. 11 This also is yours: I have given to you, together
with your sons and daughters, as a perpetual due, whatever is set aside
from the gifts of all the elevation offerings of the Israelites; everyone
who is clean in your house may eat them. 12 All the best of the oil and
all the best of the wine and of the grain, the choice produce that they
give to the LORD, I have given to you. 13 The first fruits of all that is in
their land, which they bring to the LORD, shall be yours; everyone who
is clean in your house may eat of it. 14 Every devoted thing in Israel
shall be yours. 15 The first issue of the womb of all creatures, human
and animal, which is offered to the LORD, shall be yours; but the
firstborn of human beings you shall redeem, and the firstborn of
unclean animals you shall redeem. 16 Their redemption price, reckoned
from one month of age, you shall fix at five shekels of silver, according
to the shekel of the sanctuary (that is, twenty gerahs). 17 But the
firstborn of a cow, or the firstborn of a sheep, or the firstborn of a

308

NUMBERS 309

goat, you shall not redeem; they are holy. You shall dash their blood
on the altar, and shall turn their fat into smoke as an offering by fire
for a pleasing odor to the LORD; 18 but their flesh shall be yours, just as
the breast that is elevated and as the right thigh are yours. 19 All the
holy offerings that the Israelites present to the LORD I have given to
you, together with your sons and daughters, as a perpetual due; it is a
covenant of salt forever before the LORD for you and your descendants
as well. 20 Then the LORD said to Aaron: You shall have no allotment in
their land, nor shall you have any share among them; I am your share
and your possession among the Israelites.
21 To the Levites I have given every tithe in Israel for a possession in
return for the service that they perform, the service in the tent of
meeting. 22 From now on the Israelites shall no longer approach the
tent of meeting, or else they will incur guilt and die. 23 But the Levites
shall perform the service of the tent of meeting, and they shall bear
responsibility for their own offenses; it shall be a perpetual statute
throughout your generations. But among the Israelites they shall have
no allotment, 24 because I have given to the Levites as their portion
the tithe of the Israelites, which they set apart as an offering to the
LORD. Therefore I have said of them that they shall have no allotment
among the Israelites.
25 Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 26 You shall speak to the
Levites, saying: When you receive from the Israelites the tithe that I
have given you from them for your portion, you shall set apart an
offering from it to the LORD, a tithe of the tithe. 27 It shall be reckoned
to you as your gift, the same as the grain of the threshing floor and the
fullness of the wine press. 28 Thus you also shall set apart an offering
to the LORD from all the tithes that you receive from the Israelites; and
from them you shall give the LORD's offering to the priest Aaron. 29
Out of all the gifts to you, you shall set apart every offering due to the
LORD; the best of all of them is the part to be consecrated. 30 Say also
to them: When you have set apart the best of it, then the rest shall be
reckoned to the Levites as produce of the threshing floor, and as
produce of the wine press. 31 You may eat it in any place, you and your
households; for it is your payment for your service in the tent of
meeting. 32 You shall incur no guilt by reason of it, when you have

309

NUMBERS 310

offered the best of it. But you shall not profane the holy gifts of the
Israelites, on pain of death.
[Numbers 19]
The red cow and corpse contamination
1 The LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying: 2 This is a statute of the
law that the LORD has commanded: Tell the Israelites to bring you a red
heifer without defect, in which there is no blemish and on which no
yoke has been laid. 3 You shall give it to the priest Eleazar, and it shall
be taken outside the camp and slaughtered in his presence. 4 The
priest Eleazar shall take some of its blood with his finger and sprinkle it
seven times towards the front of the tent of meeting. 5 Then the heifer
shall be burned in his sight; its skin, its flesh, and its blood, with its
dung, shall be burned. 6 The priest shall take cedarwood, hyssop, and
crimson material, and throw them into the fire in which the heifer is
burning. 7 Then the priest shall wash his clothes and bathe his body in
water, and afterwards he may come into the camp; but the priest shall
remain unclean until evening. 8 The one who burns the heifer shall
wash his clothes in water and bathe his body in water; he shall remain
unclean until evening. 9 Then someone who is clean shall gather up
the ashes of the heifer, and deposit them outside the camp in a clean
place; and they shall be kept for the congregation of the Israelites for
the water for cleansing. It is a purification offering. 10 The one who
gathers the ashes of the heifer shall wash his clothes and be unclean
until evening.
This shall be a perpetual statute for the Israelites and for the alien
residing among them. 11 Those who touch the dead body of any
human being shall be unclean seven days. 12 They shall purify
themselves with the water on the third day and on the seventh day,
and so be clean; but if they do not purify themselves on the third day
and on the seventh day, they will not become clean. 13 All who touch a
corpse, the body of a human being who has died, and do not purify
themselves, defile the tabernacle of the LORD; such persons shall be cut
off from Israel. Since water for cleansing was not dashed on them, they
remain unclean; their uncleanness is still on them.

310

NUMBERS 311

14 This is the law when someone dies in a tent: everyone who comes
into the tent, and everyone who is in the tent, shall be unclean seven
days. 15 And every open vessel with no cover fastened on it is unclean.
16 Whoever in the open field touches one who has been killed by a
sword, or who has died naturally, or a human bone, or a grave, shall be
unclean seven days. 17 For the unclean they shall take some ashes of
the burnt purification offering, and running water shall be added in a
vessel; 18 then a clean person shall take hyssop, dip it in the water, and
sprinkle it on the tent, on all the furnishings, on the persons who were
there, and on whoever touched the bone, the slain, the corpse, or the
grave. 19 The clean person shall sprinkle the unclean ones on the third
day and on the seventh day, thus purifying them on the seventh day.
Then they shall wash their clothes and bathe themselves in water, and
at evening they shall be clean. 20 Any who are unclean but do not
purify themselves, those persons shall be cut off from the assembly, for
they have defiled the sanctuary of the LORD. Since the water for
cleansing has not been dashed on them, they are unclean.
21 It shall be a perpetual statute for them. The one who sprinkles the
water for cleansing shall wash his clothes, and whoever touches the
water for cleansing shall be unclean until evening. 22 Whatever the
unclean person touches shall be unclean, and anyone who touches it
shall be unclean until evening.
[Numbers 20]
Near the end of the wilderness period
1 The Israelites, the whole congregation, came into the wilderness of
Zin in the first month, and the people stayed in Kadesh. Miriam died
there, and was buried there.
2 Now there was no water for the congregation; so they gathered
together against Moses and against Aaron. 3 The people quarreled
with Moses and said, "Would that we had died when our kindred died
before the LORD! 4 Why have you brought the assembly of the LORD
into this wilderness for us and our livestock to die here? 5 Why have
you brought us up out of Egypt, to bring us to this wretched place? It is
no place for grain, or figs, or vines, or pomegranates; and there is no

311

NUMBERS 312

water to drink." 6 Then Moses and Aaron went away from the
assembly to the entrance of the tent of meeting; they fell on their
faces, and the glory of the LORD appeared to them. 7 The LORD spoke to
Moses, saying: 8 Take the staff, and assemble the congregation, you
and your brother Aaron, and command the rock before their eyes to
yield its water. Thus you shall bring water out of the rock for them;
thus you shall provide drink for the congregation and their livestock.
9 So Moses took the staff from before the LORD, as he had commanded
him. 10 Moses and Aaron gathered the assembly together before the
rock, and he said to them, "Listen, you rebels, shall we bring water for
you out of this rock?" 11 Then Moses lifted up his hand and struck the
rock twice with his staff; water came out abundantly, and the
congregation and their livestock drank. 12 But the LORD said to Moses
and Aaron, "Because you did not trust in me, to show my holiness
before the eyes of the Israelites, therefore you shall not bring this
assembly into the land that I have given them." 13 These are the waters
of Meribah, where the people of Israel quarreled with the LORD, and by
which he showed his holiness.
14 Moses sent messengers from Kadesh to the king of Edom, "Thus says
your brother Israel: You know all the adversity that has befallen us: 15
how our ancestors went down to Egypt, and we lived in Egypt a long
time; and the Egyptians oppressed us and our ancestors; 16 and when
we cried to the LORD, he heard our voice, and sent an angel and
brought us out of Egypt; and here we are in Kadesh, a town on the
edge of your territory. 17 Now let us pass through your land. We will
not pass through field or vineyard, or drink water from any well; we
will go along the King's Highway, not turning aside to the right hand
or to the left until we have passed through your territory."
18 But Edom said to him, "You shall not pass through, or we will come
out with the sword against you." 19 The Israelites said to him, "We will
stay on the highway; and if we drink of your water, we and our
livestock, then we will pay for it. It is only a small matter; just let us
pass through on foot." 20 But he said, "You shall not pass through."
And Edom came out against them with a large force, heavily armed. 21

312

NUMBERS 313

Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through their territory; so
Israel turned away from them.
22 They set out from Kadesh, and the Israelites, the whole
congregation, came to Mount Hor. 23 Then the LORD said to Moses and
Aaron at Mount Hor, on the border of the land of Edom, 24 "Let Aaron
be gathered to his people. For he shall not enter the land that I have
given to the Israelites, because you rebelled against my command at
the waters of Meribah. 25 Take Aaron and his son Eleazar, and bring
them up Mount Hor; 26 strip Aaron of his vestments, and put them on
his son Eleazar. But Aaron shall be gathered to his people, and shall die
there." 27 Moses did as the LORD had commanded; they went up Mount
Hor in the sight of the whole congregation. 28 Moses stripped Aaron
of his vestments, and put them on his son Eleazar; and Aaron died
there on the top of the mountain. Moses and Eleazar came down from
the mountain. 29 When all the congregation saw that Aaron had died,
all the house of Israel mourned for Aaron thirty days.
[Numbers 21]
Conflicts in the Negeb and Transjordan
1 When the Canaanite, the king of Arad, who lived in the Negeb, heard
that Israel was coming by the way of Atharim, he fought against Israel
and took some of them captive. 2 Then Israel made a vow to the LORD
and said, "If you will indeed give this people into our hands, then we
will utterly destroy their towns." 3 The LORD listened to the voice of
Israel, and handed over the Canaanites; and they utterly destroyed
them and their towns; so the place was called Hormah.
4 From Mount Hor they set out by the way to the Red Sea, to go
around the land of Edom; but the people became impatient on the
way. 5 The people spoke against God and against Moses, "Why have
you brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? For there is no
food and no water, and we detest this miserable food." 6 Then the
LORD sent poisonous serpents among the people, and they bit the
people, so that many Israelites died. 7 The people came to Moses and
said, "We have sinned by speaking against the LORD and against you;
pray to the LORD to take away the serpents from us." So Moses prayed

313

NUMBERS 314

for the people. 8 And the LORD said to Moses, "Make a poisonous
serpent, and set it on a pole; and everyone who is bitten shall look at it
and live." 9 So Moses made a serpent of bronze, and put it upon a
pole; and whenever a serpent bit someone, that person would look at
the serpent of bronze and live.
10 The Israelites set out, and camped in Oboth. 11 They set out from
Oboth, and camped at Iye-abarim, in the wilderness bordering Moab
toward the sunrise. 12 From there they set out, and camped in the
Wadi Zered. 13 From there they set out, and camped on the other side
of the Arnon, in the wilderness that extends from the boundary of the
Amorites; for the Arnon is the boundary of Moab, between Moab and
the Amorites. 14 Wherefore it is said in the Book of the Wars of the
LORD,
"Waheb in Suphah and the wadis.
The Arnon 15 and the slopes of the wadis
that extend to the seat of Ar,
and lie along the border of Moab."
16 From there they continued to Beer; that is the well of which the
LORD said to Moses, "Gather the people together, and I will give them
water." 17 Then Israel sang this song:
"Spring up, O well! — Sing to it! —
18
the well that the leaders sank,
that the nobles of the people dug,
with the scepter, with the staff."
From the wilderness to Mattanah, 19 from Mattanah to Nahaliel, from
Nahaliel to Bamoth, 20 and from Bamoth to the valley lying in the
region of Moab by the top of Pisgah that overlooks the wasteland.
21 Then Israel sent messengers to King Sihon of the Amorites, saying, 22
"Let me pass through your land; we will not turn aside into field or
vineyard; we will not drink the water of any well; we will go by the
King's Highway until we have passed through your territory." 23 But
Sihon would not allow Israel to pass through his territory. Sihon
gathered all his people together, and went out against Israel to the
wilderness; he came to Jahaz, and fought against Israel. 24 Israel put
him to the sword, and took possession of his land from the Arnon to

314

NUMBERS 315

the Jabbok, as far as to the Ammonites; for the boundary of the
Ammonites was strong. 25 Israel took all these towns, and Israel settled
in all the towns of the Amorites, in Heshbon, and in all its villages. 26
For Heshbon was the city of King Sihon of the Amorites, who had
fought against the former king of Moab and captured all his land as
far as the Arnon. 27 Therefore the ballad singers say,
"Come to Heshbon, let it be built;
let the city of Sihon be established.
28 For fire came out from Heshbon,
flame from the city of Sihon.
It devoured Ar of Moab,
and swallowed up the heights of the Arnon.
29 Woe to you, O Moab!
You are undone, O people of Chemosh!
He has made his sons fugitives,
and his daughters captives,
to an Amorite king, Sihon.
30 So their posterity perished
from Heshbon to Dibon,
and we laid waste until fire spread to Medeba."
31 Thus Israel settled in the land of the Amorites. 32 Moses sent to spy
out Jazer; and they captured its villages, and dispossessed the Amorites
who were there.
33 Then they turned and went up the road to Bashan; and King Og of
Bashan came out against them, he and all his people, to battle at Edrei.
34 But the LORD said to Moses, "Do not be afraid of him; for I have
given him into your hand, with all his people, and all his land. You shall
do to him as you did to King Sihon of the Amorites, who ruled in
Heshbon." 35 So they killed him, his sons, and all his people, until there
was no survivor left; and they took possession of his land.
[Numbers 22]
The story of Balaam; Balak hires Balaam
1 The Israelites set out, and camped in the plains of Moab across the
Jordan from Jericho. 2 Now Balak son of Zippor saw all that Israel had

315

NUMBERS 316

done to the Amorites. 3 Moab was in great dread of the people,
because they were so numerous; Moab was overcome with fear of the
people of Israel. 4 And Moab said to the elders of Midian, "This horde
will now lick up all that is around us, as an ox licks up the grass of the
field." Now Balak son of Zippor was king of Moab at that time. 5 He
sent messengers to Balaam son of Beor at Pethor, which is on the
Euphrates, in the land of Amaw, to summon him, saying, "A people has
come out of Egypt; they have spread over the face of the earth, and
they have settled next to me. 6 Come now, curse this people for me,
since they are stronger than I; perhaps I shall be able to defeat them
and drive them from the land; for I know that whomever you bless is
blessed, and whomever you curse is cursed."
7 So the elders of Moab and the elders of Midian departed with the
fees for divination in their hand; and they came to Balaam, and gave
him Balak's message. 8 He said to them, "Stay here tonight, and I will
bring back word to you, just as the LORD speaks to me"; so the officials
of Moab stayed with Balaam. 9 God came to Balaam and said, "Who
are these men with you?" 10 Balaam said to God, "King Balak son of
Zippor of Moab, has sent me this message: 11 'A people has come out
of Egypt and has spread over the face of the earth; now come, curse
them for me; perhaps I shall be able to fight against them and drive
them out.'" 12 God said to Balaam, "You shall not go with them; you
shall not curse the people, for they are blessed." 13 So Balaam rose in
the morning, and said to the officials of Balak, "Go to your own land,
for the LORD has refused to let me go with you." 14 So the officials of
Moab rose and went to Balak, and said, "Balaam refuses to come with
us."
15 Once again Balak sent officials, more numerous and more
distinguished than these. 16 They came to Balaam and said to him,
"Thus says Balak son of Zippor: 'Do not let anything hinder you from
coming to me; 17 for I will surely do you great honor, and whatever
you say to me I will do; come, curse this people for me.'" 18 But Balaam
replied to the servants of Balak, "Although Balak were to give me his
house full of silver and gold, I could not go beyond the command of
the LORD my God, to do less or more. 19 You remain here, as the others
did, so that I may learn what more the LORD may say to me." 20 That

316

NUMBERS 317

night God came to Balaam and said to him, "If the men have come to
summon you, get up and go with them; but do only what I tell you to
do." 21 So Balaam got up in the morning, saddled his donkey, and
went with the officials of Moab.
22 God's anger was kindled because he was going, and the angel of the
LORD took his stand in the road as his adversary. Now he was riding on
the donkey, and his two servants were with him. 23 The donkey saw
the angel of the LORD standing in the road, with a drawn sword in his
hand; so the donkey turned off the road, and went into the field; and
Balaam struck the donkey, to turn it back onto the road. 24 Then the
angel of the LORD stood in a narrow path between the vineyards, with
a wall on either side. 25 When the donkey saw the angel of the LORD, it
scraped against the wall, and scraped Balaam's foot against the wall; so
he struck it again. 26 Then the angel of the LORD went ahead, and
stood in a narrow place, where there was no way to turn either to the
right or to the left. 27 When the donkey saw the angel of the LORD, it
lay down under Balaam; and Balaam's anger was kindled, and he
struck the donkey with his staff. 28 Then the LORD opened the mouth
of the donkey, and it said to Balaam, "What have I done to you, that
you have struck me these three times?" 29 Balaam said to the donkey,
"Because you have made a fool of me! I wish I had a sword in my
hand! I would kill you right now!" 30 But the donkey said to Balaam,
"Am I not your donkey, which you have ridden all your life to this day?
Have I been in the habit of treating you this way?" And he said, "No."
31 Then the LORD opened the eyes of Balaam, and he saw the angel of
the LORD standing in the road, with his drawn sword in his hand; and
he bowed down, falling on his face. 32 The angel of the LORD said to
him, "Why have you struck your donkey these three times? I have come
out as an adversary, because your way is perverse before me. 33 The
donkey saw me, and turned away from me these three times. If it had
not turned away from me, surely just now I would have killed you and
let it live." 34 Then Balaam said to the angel of the LORD, "I have
sinned, for I did not know that you were standing in the road to
oppose me. Now therefore, if it is displeasing to you, I will return
home." 35 The angel of the LORD said to Balaam, "Go with the men;

317

NUMBERS 318

but speak only what I tell you to speak." So Balaam went on with the
officials of Balak.
36 When Balak heard that Balaam had come, he went out to meet him
at Ir-moab, on the boundary formed by the Arnon, at the farthest
point of the boundary. 37 Balak said to Balaam, "Did I not send to
summon you? Why did you not come to me? Am I not able to honor
you?" 38 Balaam said to Balak, "I have come to you now, but do I have
power to say just anything? The word God puts in my mouth, that is
what I must say." 39 Then Balaam went with Balak, and they came to
Kiriath-huzoth. 40 Balak sacrificed oxen and sheep, and sent them to
Balaam and to the officials who were with him.
The first oracle
41 On the next day Balak took Balaam and brought him up to Bamothbaal; and from there he could see part of the people of Israel.
[Numbers 23] 1 Then Balaam said to Balak, "Build me seven altars here,
and prepare seven bulls and seven rams for me." 2 Balak did as Balaam
had said; and Balak and Balaam offered a bull and a ram on each altar.
3 Then Balaam said to Balak, "Stay here beside your burnt offerings
while I go aside. Perhaps the LORD will come to meet me. Whatever he
shows me I will tell you." And he went to a bare height.
4 Then God met Balaam; and Balaam said to him, "I have arranged the
seven altars, and have offered a bull and a ram on each altar." 5 The
LORD put a word in Balaam's mouth, and said, "Return to Balak, and
this is what you must say." 6 So he returned to Balak, who was
standing beside his burnt offerings with all the officials of Moab. 7
Then Balaam uttered his oracle, saying:
"Balak has brought me from Aram,
the king of Moab from the eastern mountains:
'Come, curse Jacob for me;
Come, denounce Israel!'
8 How can I curse whom God has not cursed?
How can I denounce those whom the LORD has not denounced?
9 For from the top of the crags I see him,
from the hills I behold him;

318

NUMBERS 319

Here is a people living alone,
and not reckoning itself among the nations!
10 Who can count the dust of Jacob,
or number the dust-cloud of Israel?
Let me die the death of the upright,
and let my end be like his!"
11 Then Balak said to Balaam, "What have you done to me? I brought
you to curse my enemies, but now you have done nothing but bless
them." 12 He answered, "Must I not take care to say what the LORD
puts into my mouth?"
The second oracle
13 So Balak said to him, "Come with me to another place from which
you may see them; you shall see only part of them, and shall not see
them all; then curse them for me from there." 14 So he took him to the
field of Zophim, to the top of Pisgah. He built seven altars, and offered
a bull and a ram on each altar. 15 Balaam said to Balak, "Stand here
beside your burnt offerings, while I meet the LORD over there." 16 The
LORD met Balaam, put a word into his mouth, and said, "Return to
Balak, and this is what you shall say." 17 When he came to him, he was
standing beside his burnt offerings with the officials of Moab. Balak
said to him, "What has the LORD said?" 18 Then Balaam uttered his
oracle, saying:
"Rise, Balak, and hear;
listen to me, O son of Zippor:
19 God is not a human being, that he should lie,
or a mortal, that he should change his mind.
Has he promised, and will he not do it?
Has he spoken, and will he not fulfill it?
20 See, I received a command to bless;
he has blessed, and I cannot revoke it.
21 He has not beheld misfortune in Jacob;
nor has he seen trouble in Israel.
The LORD their God is with them,
acclaimed as a king among them.

319

NUMBERS 320

22 God, who brings them out of Egypt,
is like the horns of a wild ox for them.
23 Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob,
no divination against Israel;
now it shall be said of Jacob and Israel,
'See what God has done!'
24 Look, a people rising up like a lioness,
and rousing itself like a lion!
It does not lie down until it has eaten the prey
and drunk the blood of the slain."
25 Then Balak said to Balaam, "Do not curse them at all, and do not
bless them at all." 26 But Balaam answered Balak, "Did I not tell you,
'Whatever the LORD says, that is what I must do'?"
The third oracle
27 So Balak said to Balaam, "Come now, I will take you to another
place; perhaps it will please God that you may curse them for me from
there." 28 So Balak took Balaam to the top of Peor, which overlooks
the wasteland. 29 Balaam said to Balak, "Build me seven altars here,
and prepare seven bulls and seven rams for me." 30 So Balak did as
Balaam had said, and offered a bull and a ram on each altar.
[Numbers 24]
1 Now Balaam saw that it pleased the LORD to bless Israel, so he did not
go, as at other times, to look for omens, but set his face toward the
wilderness. 2 Balaam looked up and saw Israel camping tribe by tribe.
Then the spirit of God came upon him, 3 and he uttered his oracle,
saying:
"The oracle of Balaam son of Beor,
the oracle of the man whose eye is clear,
4 the oracle of one who hears the words of God,
who sees the vision of the Almighty,
who falls down, but with eyes uncovered:
5 how fair are your tents, O Jacob,
your encampments, O Israel!

320

NUMBERS 321

6 Like palm groves that stretch far away,
like gardens beside a river,
like aloes that the LORD has planted,
like cedar trees beside the waters.
7 Water shall flow from his buckets,
and his seed shall have abundant water,
his king shall be higher than Agag,
and his kingdom shall be exalted.
8 God who brings him out of Egypt,
is like the horns of a wild ox for him;
he shall devour the nations that are his foes
and break their bones.
He shall strike with his arrows.
9 He crouched, he lay down like a lion,
and like a lioness; who will rouse him up?
Blessed is everyone who blesses you,
and cursed is everyone who curses you."
The fourth oracle
10 Then Balak's anger was kindled against Balaam, and he struck his
hands together. Balak said to Balaam, "I summoned you to curse my
enemies, but instead you have blessed them these three times. 11 Now
be off with you! Go home! I said, 'I will reward you richly,' but the LORD
has denied you any reward." 12 And Balaam said to Balak, "Did I not
tell your messengers whom you sent to me, 13 'If Balak should give me
his house full of silver and gold, I would not be able to go beyond the
word of the LORD, to do either good or bad of my own will; what the
LORD says, that is what I will say'? 14 So now, I am going to my people;
let me advise you what this people will do to your people in days to
come."
15 So he uttered his oracle, saying:
"The oracle of Balaam son of Beor,
the oracle of the man whose eye is clear,

321

NUMBERS 322

16 the oracle of one who hears the words of God,
and knows the knowledge of the Most High,
who sees the vision of the Almighty,
who falls down, but with his eyes uncovered:
17 I see him, but not now;
I behold him, but not near —
a star shall come out of Jacob,
and a scepter shall rise out of Israel;
it shall crush the borderlands of Moab,
and the territory of all the Shethites.
18 Edom will become a possession,
Seir a possession of its enemies,
while Israel does valiantly.
19 One out of Jacob shall rule,
and destroy the survivors of Ir."
20 Then he looked on Amalek, and uttered his oracle, saying:
"First among the nations was Amalek,
but its end is to perish forever."
21 Then he looked on the Kenite, and uttered his oracle, saying:
"Enduring is your dwelling place,
and your nest is set in the rock;
22 yet Kain is destined for burning.
How long shall Asshur take you away captive?"
23 Again he uttered his oracle, saying:
"Alas, who shall live when God does this?
24 But ships shall come from Kittim
and shall afflict Asshur and Eber;
and he also shall perish forever."
25 Then Balaam got up and went back to his place, and Balak also
went his way.

322

NUMBERS 323

[Numbers 25]
Moabite and Midianite women
1 While Israel was staying at Shittim, the people began to have sexual
relations with the women of Moab. 2 These invited the people to the
sacrifices of their gods, and the people ate and bowed down to their
gods. 3 Thus Israel yoked itself to the Baal of Peor, and the LORD's
anger was kindled against Israel. 4 The LORD said to Moses, "Take all
the chiefs of the people, and impale them in the sun before the LORD,
in order that the fierce anger of the LORD may turn away from Israel." 5
And Moses said to the judges of Israel, "Each of you shall kill any of
your people who have yoked themselves to the Baal of Peor."
6 Just then one of the Israelites came and brought a Midianite woman
into his family, in the sight of Moses and in the sight of the whole
congregation of the Israelites, while they were weeping at the
entrance of the tent of meeting. 7 When Phinehas son of Eleazar, son
of Aaron the priest, saw it, he got up and left the congregation. Taking
a spear in his hand, 8 he went after the Israelite man into the tent, and
pierced the two of them, the Israelite and the woman, through the
belly. So the plague was stopped among the people of Israel. 9
Nevertheless those that died by the plague were twenty-four
thousand.
10 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 11 "Phinehas son of Eleazar, son of
Aaron the priest, has turned back my wrath from the Israelites by
manifesting such zeal among them on my behalf that in my jealousy I
did not consume the Israelites. 12 Therefore say, 'I hereby grant him my
covenant of peace. 13 It shall be for him and for his descendants after
him a covenant of perpetual priesthood, because he was zealous for his
God, and made atonement for the Israelites.'"
14 The name of the slain Israelite man, who was killed with the
Midianite woman, was Zimri son of Salu, head of an ancestral house
belonging to the Simeonites. 15 The name of the Midianite woman
who was killed was Cozbi daughter of Zur, who was the head of a clan,
an ancestral house in Midian.

323

NUMBERS 324

16 The LORD said to Moses, 17 "Harass the Midianites, and defeat them;
18 for they have harassed you by the trickery with which they deceived
you in the affair of Peor, and in the affair of Cozbi, the daughter of a
leader of Midian, their sister; she was killed on the day of the plague
that resulted from Peor."
[Numbers 26]
The second census
1 After the plague the LORD said to Moses and to Eleazar son of Aaron
the priest, 2 "Take a census of the whole congregation of the Israelites,
from twenty years old and upward, by their ancestral houses, everyone
in Israel able to go to war." 3 Moses and Eleazar the priest spoke with
them in the plains of Moab by the Jordan opposite Jericho, saying, 4
"Take a census of the people, from twenty years old and upward," as
the LORD commanded Moses.
The Israelites, who came out of the land of Egypt, were:
5 Reuben, the firstborn of Israel. The descendants of Reuben: of
Hanoch, the clan of the Hanochites; of Pallu, the clan of the Palluites; 6
of Hezron, the clan of the Hezronites; of Carmi, the clan of the
Carmites. 7 These are the clans of the Reubenites; the number of those
enrolled was forty-three thousand seven hundred thirty. 8 And the
descendants of Pallu: Eliab. 9 The descendants of Eliab: Nemuel,
Dathan, and Abiram. These are the same Dathan and Abiram, chosen
from the congregation, who rebelled against Moses and Aaron in the
company of Korah, when they rebelled against the LORD, 10 and the
earth opened its mouth and swallowed them up along with Korah,
when that company died, when the fire devoured two hundred fifty
men; and they became a warning. 11 Notwithstanding, the sons of
Korah did not die.
12 The descendants of Simeon by their clans: of Nemuel, the clan of the
Nemuelites; of Jamin, the clan of the Jaminites; of Jachin, the clan of
the Jachinites; 13 of Zerah, the clan of the Zerahites; of Shaul, the clan
of the Shaulites. 14 These are the clans of the Simeonites, twenty-two
thousand two hundred.

324

NUMBERS 325

15 The children of Gad by their clans: of Zephon, the clan of the
Zephonites; of Haggi, the clan of the Haggites; of Shuni, the clan of the
Shunites; 16 of Ozni, the clan of the Oznites; of Eri, the clan of the
Erites; 17 of Arod, the clan of the Arodites; of Areli, the clan of the
Arelites. 18 These are the clans of the Gadites: the number of those
enrolled was forty thousand five hundred.
19 The sons of Judah: Er and Onan; Er and Onan died in the land of
Canaan. 20 The descendants of Judah by their clans were: of Shelah,
the clan of the Shelanites; of Perez, the clan of the Perezites; of Zerah,
the clan of the Zerahites. 21 The descendants of Perez were: of Hezron,
the clan of the Hezronites; of Hamul, the clan of the Hamulites. 22
These are the clans of Judah: the number of those enrolled was
seventy-six thousand five hundred.
23 The descendants of Issachar by their clans: of Tola, the clan of the
Tolaites; of Puvah, the clan of the Punites; 24 of Jashub, the clan of the
Jashubites; of Shimron, the clan of the Shimronites. 25 These are the
clans of Issachar: sixty-four thousand three hundred enrolled.
26 The descendants of Zebulun by their clans: of Sered, the clan of the
Seredites; of Elon, the clan of the Elonites; of Jahleel, the clan of the
Jahleelites. 27 These are the clans of the Zebulunites; the number of
those enrolled was sixty thousand five hundred.
28 The sons of Joseph by their clans: Manasseh and Ephraim. 29 The
descendants of Manasseh: of Machir, the clan of the Machirites; and
Machir was the father of Gilead; of Gilead, the clan of the Gileadites.
30 These are the descendants of Gilead: of Iezer, the clan of the
Iezerites; of Helek, the clan of the Helekites; 31 and of Asriel, the clan
of the Asrielites; and of Shechem, the clan of the Shechemites; 32 and
of Shemida, the clan of the Shemidaites; and of Hepher, the clan of the
Hepherites. 33 Now Zelophehad son of Hepher had no sons, but
daughters: and the names of the daughters of Zelophehad were
Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah. 34 These are the clans of
Manasseh; the number of those enrolled was fifty-two thousand seven
hundred.

325

NUMBERS 326

35 These are the descendants of Ephraim according to their clans: of
Shuthelah, the clan of the Shuthelahites; of Becher, the clan of the
Becherites; of Tahan, the clan of the Tahanites. 36 And these are the
descendants of Shuthelah: of Eran, the clan of the Eranites. 37 These
are the clans of the Ephraimites: the number of those enrolled was
thirty-two thousand five hundred. These are the descendants of Joseph
by their clans.
38 The descendants of Benjamin by their clans: of Bela, the clan of the
Belaites; of Ashbel, the clan of the Ashbelites; of Ahiram, the clan of
the Ahiramites; 39 of Shephupham, the clan of the Shuphamites; of
Hupham, the clan of the Huphamites. 40 And the sons of Bela were
Ard and Naaman: of Ard, the clan of the Ardites; of Naaman, the clan
of the Naamites. 41 These are the descendants of Benjamin by their
clans; the number of those enrolled was forty-five thousand six
hundred.
42 These are the descendants of Dan by their clans: of Shuham, the clan
of the Shuhamites. These are the clans of Dan by their clans. 43 All the
clans of the Shuhamites: sixty-four thousand four hundred enrolled.
44 The descendants of Asher by their families: of Imnah, the clan of the
Imnites; of Ishvi, the clan of the Ishvites; of Beriah, the clan of the
Beriites. 45 Of the descendants of Beriah: of Heber, the clan of the
Heberites; of Malchiel, the clan of the Malchielites. 46 And the name of
the daughter of Asher was Serah. 47 These are the clans of the
Asherites: the number of those enrolled was fifty-three thousand four
hundred.
48 The descendants of Naphtali by their clans: of Jahzeel, the clan of
the Jahzeelites; of Guni, the clan of the Gunites; 49 of Jezer, the clan of
the Jezerites; of Shillem, the clan of the Shillemites. 50 These are the
Naphtalites by their clans: the number of those enrolled was forty-five
thousand four hundred.
51 This was the number of the Israelites enrolled: six hundred and one
thousand seven hundred thirty.

326

NUMBERS 327

52 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 53 To these the land shall be
apportioned for inheritance according to the number of names. 54 To
a large tribe you shall give a large inheritance, and to a small tribe you
shall give a small inheritance; every tribe shall be given its inheritance
according to its enrollment. 55 But the land shall be apportioned by
lot; according to the names of their ancestral tribes they shall inherit.
56 Their inheritance shall be apportioned according to lot between the
larger and the smaller.
57 This is the enrollment of the Levites by their clans: of Gershon, the
clan of the Gershonites; of Kohath, the clan of the Kohathites; of
Merari, the clan of the Merarites. 58 These are the clans of Levi: the
clan of the Libnites, the clan of the Hebronites, the clan of the
Mahlites, the clan of the Mushites, the clan of the Korahites. Now
Kohath was the father of Amram. 59 The name of Amram's wife was
Jochebed daughter of Levi, who was born to Levi in Egypt; and she
bore to Amram: Aaron, Moses, and their sister Miriam. 60 To Aaron
were born Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. 61 But Nadab and
Abihu died when they offered unholy fire before the LORD. 62 The
number of those enrolled was twenty-three thousand, every male one
month old and upward; for they were not enrolled among the
Israelites because there was no allotment given to them among the
Israelites.
63 These were those enrolled by Moses and Eleazar the priest, who
enrolled the Israelites in the plains of Moab by the Jordan opposite
Jericho. 64 Among these there was not one of those enrolled by Moses
and Aaron the priest, who had enrolled the Israelites in the wilderness
of Sinai. 65 For the LORD had said of them, "They shall die in the
wilderness." Not one of them was left, except Caleb son of Jephunneh
and Joshua son of Nun.
[Numbers 27]
The daughters of Zelophehad
1 Then the daughters of Zelophehad came forward. Zelophehad was
son of Hepher son of Gilead son of Machir son of Manasseh son of
Joseph, a member of the Manassite clans. The names of his daughters

327

NUMBERS 328

were: Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah. 2 They stood before
Moses, Eleazar the priest, the leaders, and all the congregation, at the
entrance of the tent of meeting, and they said, 3 "Our father died in
the wilderness; he was not among the company of those who gathered
themselves together against the LORD in the company of Korah, but
died for his own sin; and he had no sons. 4 Why should the name of
our father be taken away from his clan because he had no son? Give to
us a possession among our father's brothers."
5 Moses brought their case before the LORD. 6 And the LORD spoke to
Moses, saying: 7 The daughters of Zelophehad are right in what they
are saying; you shall indeed let them possess an inheritance among
their father's brothers and pass the inheritance of their father on to
them. 8 You shall also say to the Israelites, "If a man dies, and has no
son, then you shall pass his inheritance on to his daughter. 9 If he has
no daughter, then you shall give his inheritance to his brothers. 10 If he
has no brothers, then you shall give his inheritance to his father's
brothers. 11 And if his father has no brothers, then you shall give his
inheritance to the nearest kinsman of his clan, and he shall possess it. It
shall be for the Israelites a statute and ordinance, as the LORD
commanded Moses."
National leadership is transferred to Joshua
12 The LORD said to Moses, "Go up this mountain of the Abarim range,
and see the land that I have given to the Israelites. 13 When you have
seen it, you also shall be gathered to your people, as your brother
Aaron was, 14 because you rebelled against my word in the wilderness
of Zin when the congregation quarreled with me. You did not show
my holiness before their eyes at the waters." (These are the waters of
Meribath-kadesh in the wilderness of Zin.) 15 Moses spoke to the LORD,
saying, 16 "Let the LORD, the God of the spirits of all flesh, appoint
someone over the congregation 17 who shall go out before them and
come in before them, who shall lead them out and bring them in, so
that the congregation of the LORD may not be like sheep without a
shepherd." 18 So the LORD said to Moses, "Take Joshua son of Nun, a
man in whom is the spirit, and lay your hand upon him; 19 have him
stand before Eleazar the priest and all the congregation, and

328

NUMBERS 329

commission him in their sight. 20 You shall give him some of your
authority, so that all the congregation of the Israelites may obey. 21
But he shall stand before Eleazar the priest, who shall inquire for him
by the decision of the Urim before the LORD; at his word they shall go
out, and at his word they shall come in, both he and all the Israelites
with him, the whole congregation." 22 So Moses did as the LORD
commanded him. He took Joshua and had him stand before Eleazar
the priest and the whole congregation; 23 he laid his hands on him and
commissioned him — as the LORD had directed through Moses.
[Numbers 28]
The ritual calendar
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 2 Command the Israelites, and say to
them: My offering, the food for my offerings by fire, my pleasing odor,
you shall take care to offer to me at its appointed time. 3 And you shall
say to them, This is the offering by fire that you shall offer to the LORD:
two male lambs a year old without blemish, daily, as a regular offering.
4 One lamb you shall offer in the morning, and the other lamb you
shall offer at twilight; 5 also one-tenth of an ephah of choice flour for
a grain offering, mixed with one-fourth of a hin of beaten oil. 6 It is a
regular burnt offering, ordained at Mount Sinai for a pleasing odor, an
offering by fire to the LORD. 7 Its drink offering shall be one-fourth of a
hin for each lamb; in the sanctuary you shall pour out a drink offering
of strong drink to the LORD. 8 The other lamb you shall offer at twilight
with a grain offering and a drink offering like the one in the morning;
you shall offer it as an offering by fire, a pleasing odor to the LORD.
9 On the sabbath day: two male lambs a year old without blemish, and
two-tenths of an ephah of choice flour for a grain offering, mixed with
oil, and its drink offering — 10 this is the burnt offering for every
sabbath, in addition to the regular burnt offering and its drink
offering.
11 At the beginnings of your months you shall offer a burnt offering to
the LORD: two young bulls, one ram, seven male lambs a year old
without blemish; 12 also three-tenths of an ephah of choice flour for a
grain offering, mixed with oil, for each bull; and two-tenths of choice

329

NUMBERS 330

flour for a grain offering, mixed with oil, for the one ram; 13 and onetenth of choice flour mixed with oil as a grain offering for every lamb
— a burnt offering of pleasing odor, an offering by fire to the LORD. 14
Their drink offerings shall be half a hin of wine for a bull, one-third of
a hin for a ram, and one-fourth of a hin for a lamb. This is the burnt
offering of every month throughout the months of the year. 15 And
there shall be one male goat for a sin offering to the LORD; it shall be
offered in addition to the regular burnt offering and its drink offering.
16 On the fourteenth day of the first month there shall be a passover
offering to the LORD. 17 And on the fifteenth day of this month is a
festival; seven days shall unleavened bread be eaten. 18 On the first
day there shall be a holy convocation. You shall not work at your
occupations. 19 You shall offer an offering by fire, a burnt offering to
the LORD: two young bulls, one ram, and seven male lambs a year old;
see that they are without blemish. 20 Their grain offering shall be of
choice flour mixed with oil: three-tenths of an ephah shall you offer for
a bull, and two-tenths for a ram; 21 one-tenth shall you offer for each
of the seven lambs; 22 also one male goat for a sin offering, to make
atonement for you. 23 You shall offer these in addition to the burnt
offering of the morning, which belongs to the regular burnt offering.
24 In the same way you shall offer daily, for seven days, the food of an
offering by fire, a pleasing odor to the LORD; it shall be offered in
addition to the regular burnt offering and its drink offering. 25 And on
the seventh day you shall have a holy convocation; you shall not work
at your occupations.
26 On the day of the first fruits, when you offer a grain offering of
new grain to the LORD at your festival of weeks, you shall have a holy
convocation; you shall not work at your occupations. 27 You shall offer
a burnt offering, a pleasing odor to the LORD: two young bulls, one
ram, seven male lambs a year old. 28 Their grain offering shall be of
choice flour mixed with oil, three-tenths of an ephah for each bull,
two-tenths for one ram, 29 one-tenth for each of the seven lambs; 30
with one male goat, to make atonement for you. 31 In addition to the
regular burnt offering with its grain offering, you shall offer them and
their drink offering. They shall be without blemish.

330

NUMBERS 331

[Numbers 29]
1 On the first day of the seventh month you shall have a holy
convocation; you shall not work at your occupations. It is a day for you
to blow the trumpets, 2 and you shall offer a burnt offering, a pleasing
odor to the LORD: one young bull, one ram, seven male lambs a year
old without blemish. 3 Their grain offering shall be of choice flour
mixed with oil, three-tenths of one ephah for the bull, two-tenths for
the ram, 4 and one-tenth for each of the seven lambs; 5 with one male
goat for a sin offering, to make atonement for you. 6 These are in
addition to the burnt offering of the new moon and its grain offering,
and the regular burnt offering and its grain offering, and their drink
offerings, according to the ordinance for them, a pleasing odor, an
offering by fire to the LORD.
7 On the tenth day of this seventh month you shall have a holy
convocation, and deny yourselves; you shall do no work. 8 You shall
offer a burnt offering to the LORD, a pleasing odor: one young bull,
one ram, seven male lambs a year old. They shall be without blemish. 9
Their grain offering shall be of choice flour mixed with oil, three-tenths
of an ephah for the bull, two-tenths for the one ram, 10 one-tenth for
each of the seven lambs; 11 with one male goat for a sin offering, in
addition to the sin offering of atonement, and the regular burnt
offering and its grain offering, and their drink offerings.
12 On the fifteenth day of the seventh month you shall have a holy
convocation; you shall not work at your occupations. You shall
celebrate a festival to the LORD seven days. 13 You shall offer a burnt
offering, an offering by fire, a pleasing odor to the LORD: thirteen
young bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs a year old. They shall be
without blemish. 14 Their grain offering shall be of choice flour mixed
with oil, three-tenths of an ephah for each of the thirteen bulls, twotenths for each of the two rams, 15 and one-tenth for each of the
fourteen lambs; 16 also one male goat for a sin offering, in addition to
the regular burnt offering, its grain offering and its drink offering.
17 On the second day: twelve young bulls, two rams, fourteen male
lambs a year old without blemish, 18 with the grain offering and the

331

NUMBERS 332

drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, as
prescribed in accordance with their number; 19 also one male goat for
a sin offering, in addition to the regular burnt offering and its grain
offering, and their drink offerings.
20 On the third day: eleven bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs a year
old without blemish, 21 with the grain offering and the drink offerings
for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, as prescribed in
accordance with their number; 22 also one male goat for a sin offering,
in addition to the regular burnt offering and its grain offering and its
drink offering.
23 On the fourth day: ten bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs a year
old without blemish, 24 with the grain offering and the drink offerings
for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, as prescribed in
accordance with their number; 25 also one male goat for a sin offering,
in addition to the regular burnt offering, its grain offering and its
drink offering.
26 On the fifth day: nine bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs a year
old without blemish, 27 with the grain offering and the drink offerings
for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, as prescribed in
accordance with their number; 28 also one male goat for a sin offering,
in addition to the regular burnt offering and its grain offering and its
drink offering.
29 On the sixth day: eight bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs a year
old without blemish, 30 with the grain offering and the drink offerings
for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, as prescribed in
accordance with their number; 31 also one male goat for a sin offering,
in addition to the regular burnt offering, its grain offering, and its
drink offerings.
32 On the seventh day: seven bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs a
year old without blemish, 33 with the grain offering and the drink
offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, as prescribed in
accordance with their number; 34 also one male goat for a sin offering,
besides the regular burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink
offering.

332

NUMBERS 333

35 On the eighth day you shall have a solemn assembly; you shall not
work at your occupations. 36 You shall offer a burnt offering, an
offering by fire, a pleasing odor to the LORD: one bull, one ram, seven
male lambs a year old without blemish, 37 and the grain offering and
the drink offerings for the bull, for the ram, and for the lambs, as
prescribed in accordance with their number; 38 also one male goat for
a sin offering, in addition to the regular burnt offering and its grain
offering and its drink offering.
39 These you shall offer to the LORD at your appointed festivals, in
addition to your votive offerings and your freewill offerings, as your
burnt offerings, your grain offerings, your drink offerings, and your
offerings of well-being.
40 So Moses told the Israelites everything just as the LORD had
commanded Moses.
[Numbers 30]
Women's vows
1 Then Moses said to the heads of the tribes of the Israelites: This is
what the LORD has commanded. 2 When a man makes a vow to the
LORD, or swears an oath to bind himself by a pledge, he shall not break
his word; he shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth.
3 When a woman makes a vow to the LORD, or binds herself by a
pledge, while within her father's house, in her youth, 4 and her father
hears of her vow or her pledge by which she has bound herself, and
says nothing to her; then all her vows shall stand, and any pledge by
which she has bound herself shall stand. 5 But if her father expresses
disapproval to her at the time that he hears of it, no vow of hers, and
no pledge by which she has bound herself, shall stand; and the LORD
will forgive her, because her father had expressed to her his
disapproval.

333

NUMBERS 334

6 If she marries, while obligated by her vows or any thoughtless
utterance of her lips by which she has bound herself, 7 and her
husband hears of it and says nothing to her at the time that he hears,
then her vows shall stand, and her pledges by which she has bound
herself shall stand. 8 But if, at the time that her husband hears of it, he
expresses disapproval to her, then he shall nullify the vow by which she
was obligated, or the thoughtless utterance of her lips, by which she
bound herself; and the LORD will forgive her. 9 (But every vow of a
widow or of a divorced woman, by which she has bound herself, shall
be binding upon her.) 10 And if she made a vow in her husband's
house, or bound herself by a pledge with an oath, 11 and her husband
heard it and said nothing to her, and did not express disapproval to
her, then all her vows shall stand, and any pledge by which she bound
herself shall stand. 12 But if her husband nullifies them at the time that
he hears them, then whatever proceeds out of her lips concerning her
vows, or concerning her pledge of herself, shall not stand. Her husband
has nullified them, and the LORD will forgive her. 13 Any vow or any
binding oath to deny herself, her husband may allow to stand, or her
husband may nullify. 14 But if her husband says nothing to her from
day to day, then he validates all her vows, or all her pledges, by which
she is obligated; he has validated them, because he said nothing to her
at the time that he heard of them. 15 But if he nullifies them some time
after he has heard of them, then he shall bear her guilt.
16 These are the statutes that the LORD commanded Moses concerning
a husband and his wife, and a father and his daughter while she is still
young and in her father's house.
[Numbers 31]
War against Midian
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2 "Avenge the Israelites on the
Midianites; afterward you shall be gathered to your people." 3 So
Moses said to the people, "Arm some of your number for the war, so
that they may go against Midian, to execute the LORD's vengeance on
Midian. 4 You shall send a thousand from each of the tribes of Israel to
the war." 5 So out of the thousands of Israel, a thousand from each
tribe were conscripted, twelve thousand armed for battle. 6 Moses sent

334

NUMBERS 335

them to the war, a thousand from each tribe, along with Phinehas son
of Eleazar the priest, with the vessels of the sanctuary and the
trumpets for sounding the alarm in his hand. 7 They did battle against
Midian, as the LORD had commanded Moses, and killed every male. 8
They killed the kings of Midian: Evi, Rekem, Zur, Hur, and Reba, the
five kings of Midian, in addition to others who were slain by them; and
they also killed Balaam son of Beor with the sword. 9 The Israelites
took the women of Midian and their little ones captive; and they took
all their cattle, their flocks, and all their goods as booty. 10 All their
towns where they had settled, and all their encampments, they
burned, 11 but they took all the spoil and all the booty, both people
and animals. 12 Then they brought the captives and the booty and the
spoil to Moses, to Eleazar the priest, and to the congregation of the
Israelites, at the camp on the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho.
13 Moses, Eleazar the priest, and all the leaders of the congregation
went to meet them outside the camp. 14 Moses became angry with the
officers of the army, the commanders of thousands and the
commanders of hundreds, who had come from service in the war. 15
Moses said to them, "Have you allowed all the women to live? 16 These
women here, on Balaam's advice, made the Israelites act treacherously
against the LORD in the affair of Peor, so that the plague came among
the congregation of the LORD. 17 Now therefore, kill every male among
the little ones, and kill every woman who has known a man by sleeping
with him. 18 But all the young girls who have not known a man by
sleeping with him, keep alive for yourselves. 19 Camp outside the camp
seven days; whoever of you has killed any person or touched a corpse,
purify yourselves and your captives on the third and on the seventh
day. 20 You shall purify every garment, every article of skin, everything
made of goats' hair, and every article of wood."
21 Eleazar the priest said to the troops who had gone to battle: "This is
the statute of the law that the LORD has commanded Moses: 22 gold,
silver, bronze, iron, tin, and lead — 23 everything that can withstand
fire, shall be passed through fire, and it shall be clean. Nevertheless it
shall also be purified with the water for purification; and whatever
cannot withstand fire, shall be passed through the water. 24 You must

335

NUMBERS 336

wash your clothes on the seventh day, and you shall be clean;
afterward you may come into the camp."
25 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 26 "You and Eleazar the priest and
the heads of the ancestral houses of the congregation make an
inventory of the booty captured, both human and animal. 27 Divide
the booty into two parts, between the warriors who went out to battle
and all the congregation. 28 From the share of the warriors who went
out to battle, set aside as tribute for the LORD, one item out of every
five hundred, whether persons, oxen, donkeys, sheep, or goats. 29 Take
it from their half and give it to Eleazar the priest as an offering to the
LORD. 30 But from the Israelites' half you shall take one out of every
fifty, whether persons, oxen, donkeys, sheep, or goats — all the
animals — and give them to the Levites who have charge of the
tabernacle of the LORD."
31 Then Moses and Eleazar the priest did as the LORD had commanded
Moses:
32 The booty remaining from the spoil that the troops had taken
totaled six hundred seventy-five thousand sheep, 33 seventy-two
thousand oxen, 34 sixty-one thousand donkeys, 35 and thirty-two
thousand persons in all, women who had not known a man by sleeping
with him.
36 The half-share, the portion of those who had gone out to war, was
in number three hundred thirty-seven thousand five hundred sheep
and goats, 37 and the LORD's tribute of sheep and goats was six
hundred seventy-five. 38 The oxen were thirty-six thousand, of which
the LORD's tribute was seventy-two. 39 The donkeys were thirty
thousand five hundred, of which the LORD's tribute was sixty-one. 40
The persons were sixteen thousand, of which the LORD's tribute was
thirty-two persons. 41 Moses gave the tribute, the offering for the
LORD, to Eleazar the priest, as the LORD had commanded Moses.
42 As for the Israelites' half, which Moses separated from that of the
troops, 43 the congregation's half was three hundred thirty-seven
thousand five hundred sheep and goats, 44 thirty-six thousand oxen,

336

NUMBERS 337

45 thirty thousand five hundred donkeys, 46 and sixteen thousand
persons. 47 From the Israelites' half Moses took one of every fifty, both
of persons and of animals, and gave them to the Levites who had
charge of the tabernacle of the LORD; as the LORD had commanded
Moses.
48 Then the officers who were over the thousands of the army, the
commanders of thousands and the commanders of hundreds,
approached Moses, 49 and said to Moses, "Your servants have counted
the warriors who are under our command, and not one of us is missing.
50 And we have brought the LORD's offering, what each of us found,
articles of gold, armlets and bracelets, signet rings, earrings, and
pendants, to make atonement for ourselves before the LORD." 51 Moses
and Eleazar the priest received the gold from them, all in the form of
crafted articles. 52 And all the gold of the offering that they offered to
the LORD, from the commanders of thousands and the commanders of
hundreds, was sixteen thousand seven hundred fifty shekels. 53 (The
troops had all taken plunder for themselves.) 54 So Moses and Eleazar
the priest received the gold from the commanders of thousands and of
hundreds, and brought it into the tent of meeting as a memorial for
the Israelites before the LORD.
[Numbers 32]
Distribution of land in Transjordan
1 Now the Reubenites and the Gadites owned a very great number of
cattle. When they saw that the land of Jazer and the land of Gilead
was a good place for cattle, 2 the Gadites and the Reubenites came and
spoke to Moses, to Eleazar the priest, and to the leaders of the
congregation, saying, 3 "Ataroth, Dibon, Jazer, Nimrah, Heshbon,
Elealeh, Sebam, Nebo, and Beon — 4 the land that the LORD subdued
before the congregation of Israel — is a land for cattle; and your
servants have cattle." 5 They continued, "If we have found favor in
your sight, let this land be given to your servants for a possession; do
not make us cross the Jordan."

337

NUMBERS 338

6 But Moses said to the Gadites and to the Reubenites, "Shall your
brothers go to war while you sit here? 7 Why will you discourage the
hearts of the Israelites from going over into the land that the LORD has
given them? 8 Your fathers did this, when I sent them from Kadeshbarnea to see the land. 9 When they went up to the Wadi Eshcol and
saw the land, they discouraged the hearts of the Israelites from going
into the land that the LORD had given them. 10 The LORD's anger was
kindled on that day and he swore, saying, 11 'Surely none of the people
who came up out of Egypt, from twenty years old and upward, shall
see the land that I swore to give to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob,
because they have not unreservedly followed me — 12 none except
Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite and Joshua son of Nun, for they
have unreservedly followed the LORD.' 13 And the LORD's anger was
kindled against Israel, and he made them wander in the wilderness for
forty years, until all the generation that had done evil in the sight of
the LORD had disappeared. 14 And now you, a brood of sinners, have
risen in place of your fathers, to increase the LORD's fierce anger
against Israel! 15 If you turn away from following him, he will again
abandon them in the wilderness; and you will destroy all this people."
16 Then they came up to him and said, "We will build sheepfolds here
for our flocks, and towns for our little ones, 17 but we will take up arms
as a vanguard before the Israelites, until we have brought them to
their place. Meanwhile our little ones will stay in the fortified towns
because of the inhabitants of the land. 18 We will not return to our
homes until all the Israelites have obtained their inheritance. 19 We will
not inherit with them on the other side of the Jordan and beyond,
because our inheritance has come to us on this side of the Jordan to
the east."
20 So Moses said to them, "If you do this — if you take up arms to go
before the LORD for the war, 21 and all those of you who bear arms
cross the Jordan before the LORD, until he has driven out his enemies
from before him 22 and the land is subdued before the LORD — then
after that you may return and be free of obligation to the LORD and to
Israel, and this land shall be your possession before the LORD. 23 But if
you do not do this, you have sinned against the LORD; and be sure your

338

NUMBERS 339

sin will find you out. 24 Build towns for your little ones, and folds for
your flocks; but do what you have promised."
25 Then the Gadites and the Reubenites said to Moses, "Your servants
will do as my lord commands. 26 Our little ones, our wives, our flocks,
and all our livestock shall remain there in the towns of Gilead; 27 but
your servants will cross over, everyone armed for war, to do battle for
the LORD, just as my lord orders."
28 So Moses gave command concerning them to Eleazar the priest, to
Joshua son of Nun, and to the heads of the ancestral houses of the
Israelite tribes. 29 And Moses said to them, "If the Gadites and the
Reubenites, everyone armed for battle before the LORD, will cross over
the Jordan with you and the land shall be subdued before you, then
you shall give them the land of Gilead for a possession; 30 but if they
will not cross over with you armed, they shall have possessions among
you in the land of Canaan." 31 The Gadites and the Reubenites
answered, "As the LORD has spoken to your servants, so we will do. 32
We will cross over armed before the LORD into the land of Canaan, but
the possession of our inheritance shall remain with us on this side of
the Jordan."
33 Moses gave to them — to the Gadites and to the Reubenites and to
the half-tribe of Manasseh son of Joseph — the kingdom of King Sihon
of the Amorites and the kingdom of King Og of Bashan, the land and
its towns, with the territories of the surrounding towns. 34 And the
Gadites rebuilt Dibon, Ataroth, Aroer, 35 Atroth-shophan, Jazer,
Jogbehah, 36 Beth-nimrah, and Beth-haran, fortified cities, and folds
for sheep. 37 And the Reubenites rebuilt Heshbon, Elealeh, Kiriathaim,
38 Nebo, and Baal-meon (some names being changed), and Sibmah;
and they gave names to the towns that they rebuilt. 39 The
descendants of Machir son of Manasseh went to Gilead, captured it,
and dispossessed the Amorites who were there; 40 so Moses gave
Gilead to Machir son of Manasseh, and he settled there. 41 Jair son of
Manasseh went and captured their villages, and renamed them
Havvoth-jair. 42 And Nobah went and captured Kenath and its villages,
and renamed it Nobah after himself.

339

NUMBERS 340

[Numbers 33]
The wilderness travels
1 These are the stages by which the Israelites went out of the land of
Egypt in military formation under the leadership of Moses and Aaron. 2
Moses wrote down their starting points, stage by stage, by command
of the LORD; and these are their stages according to their starting
places. 3 They set out from Rameses in the first month, on the fifteenth
day of the first month; on the day after the passover the Israelites went
out boldly in the sight of all the Egyptians, 4 while the Egyptians were
burying all their firstborn, whom the LORD had struck down among
them. The LORD executed judgments even against their gods.
5 So the Israelites set out from Rameses, and camped at Succoth. 6 They
set out from Succoth, and camped at Etham, which is on the edge of
the wilderness. 7 They set out from Etham, and turned back to Pihahiroth, which faces Baal-zephon; and they camped before Migdol. 8
They set out from Pi-hahiroth, passed through the sea into the
wilderness, went a three days' journey in the wilderness of Etham, and
camped at Marah. 9 They set out from Marah and came to Elim; at Elim
there were twelve springs of water and seventy palm trees, and they
camped there. 10 They set out from Elim and camped by the Red Sea. 11
They set out from the Red Sea and camped in the wilderness of Sin. 12
They set out from the wilderness of Sin and camped at Dophkah. 13
They set out from Dophkah and camped at Alush. 14 They set out from
Alush and camped at Rephidim, where there was no water for the
people to drink. 15 They set out from Rephidim and camped in the
wilderness of Sinai. 16 They set out from the wilderness of Sinai and
camped at Kibroth-hattaavah. 17 They set out from Kibroth-hattaavah
and camped at Hazeroth. 18 They set out from Hazeroth and camped
at Rithmah. 19 They set out from Rithmah and camped at Rimmonperez. 20 They set out from Rimmon-perez and camped at Libnah. 21
They set out from Libnah and camped at Rissah. 22 They set out from
Rissah and camped at Kehelathah. 23 They set out from Kehelathah
and camped at Mount Shepher. 24 They set out from Mount Shepher
and camped at Haradah. 25 They set out from Haradah and camped at
Makheloth. 26 They set out from Makheloth and camped at Tahath. 27
They set out from Tahath and camped at Terah. 28 They set out from

340

NUMBERS 341

Terah and camped at Mithkah. 29 They set out from Mithkah and
camped at Hashmonah. 30 They set out from Hashmonah and camped
at Moseroth. 31 They set out from Moseroth and camped at Benejaakan. 32 They set out from Bene-jaakan and camped at Horhaggidgad. 33 They set out from Hor-haggidgad and camped at
Jotbathah. 34 They set out from Jotbathah and camped at Abronah. 35
They set out from Abronah and camped at Ezion-geber. 36 They set out
from Ezion-geber and camped in the wilderness of Zin (that is, Kadesh).
37 They set out from Kadesh and camped at Mount Hor, on the edge of
the land of Edom.
38 Aaron the priest went up Mount Hor at the command of the LORD
and died there in the fortieth year after the Israelites had come out of
the land of Egypt, on the first day of the fifth month. 39 Aaron was
one hundred twenty-three years old when he died on Mount Hor.
40 The Canaanite, the king of Arad, who lived in the Negeb in the land
of Canaan, heard of the coming of the Israelites.
41 They set out from Mount Hor and camped at Zalmonah. 42 They set
out from Zalmonah and camped at Punon. 43 They set out from Punon
and camped at Oboth. 44 They set out from Oboth and camped at Iyeabarim, in the territory of Moab. 45 They set out from Iyim and
camped at Dibon-gad. 46 They set out from Dibon-gad and camped at
Almon-diblathaim. 47 They set out from Almon-diblathaim and
camped in the mountains of Abarim, before Nebo. 48 They set out
from the mountains of Abarim and camped in the plains of Moab by
the Jordan at Jericho; 49 they camped by the Jordan from Bethjeshimoth as far as Abel-shittim in the plains of Moab.
50 In the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, the LORD spoke to
Moses, saying: 51 Speak to the Israelites, and say to them: When you
cross over the Jordan into the land of Canaan, 52 you shall drive out all
the inhabitants of the land from before you, destroy all their figured
stones, destroy all their cast images, and demolish all their high places.
53 You shall take possession of the land and settle in it, for I have given
you the land to possess. 54 You shall apportion the land by lot
according to your clans; to a large one you shall give a large

341

NUMBERS 342

inheritance, and to a small one you shall give a small inheritance; the
inheritance shall belong to the person on whom the lot falls; according
to your ancestral tribes you shall inherit. 55 But if you do not drive out
the inhabitants of the land from before you, then those whom you let
remain shall be as barbs in your eyes and thorns in your sides; they shall
trouble you in the land where you are settling. 56 And I will do to you
as I thought to do to them.
[Numbers 34]
The boundaries of the land of Canaan
1 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 2 Command the Israelites, and say to
them: When you enter the land of Canaan (this is the land that shall
fall to you for an inheritance, the land of Canaan, defined by its
boundaries), 3 your south sector shall extend from the wilderness of Zin
along the side of Edom. Your southern boundary shall begin from the
end of the Dead Sea on the east; 4 your boundary shall turn south of
the ascent of Akrabbim, and cross to Zin, and its outer limit shall be
south of Kadesh-barnea; then it shall go on to Hazar-addar, and cross
to Azmon; 5 the boundary shall turn from Azmon to the Wadi of
Egypt, and its termination shall be at the Sea.
6 For the western boundary, you shall have the Great Sea and its coast;
this shall be your western boundary.
7 This shall be your northern boundary: from the Great Sea you shall
mark out your line to Mount Hor; 8 from Mount Hor you shall mark it
out to Lebo-hamath, and the outer limit of the boundary shall be at
Zedad; 9 then the boundary shall extend to Ziphron, and its end shall
be at Hazar-enan; this shall be your northern boundary.
10 You shall mark out your eastern boundary from Hazar-enan to
Shepham; 11 and the boundary shall continue down from Shepham to
Riblah on the east side of Ain; and the boundary shall go down, and
reach the eastern slope of the sea of Chinnereth; 12 and the boundary
shall go down to the Jordan, and its end shall be at the Dead Sea. This
shall be your land with its boundaries all around.

342

NUMBERS 343

13 Moses commanded the Israelites, saying: This is the land that you
shall inherit by lot, which the LORD has commanded to give to the nine
tribes and to the half-tribe; 14 for the tribe of the Reubenites by their
ancestral houses and the tribe of the Gadites by their ancestral houses
have taken their inheritance, and also the half-tribe of Manasseh; 15
the two tribes and the half-tribe have taken their inheritance beyond
the Jordan at Jericho eastward, toward the sunrise.
16 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 17 These are the names of the men
who shall apportion the land to you for inheritance: the priest Eleazar
and Joshua son of Nun. 18 You shall take one leader of every tribe to
apportion the land for inheritance. 19 These are the names of the men:
Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb son of Jephunneh. 20 Of the tribe of the
Simeonites, Shemuel son of Ammihud. 21 Of the tribe of Benjamin,
Elidad son of Chislon. 22 Of the tribe of the Danites a leader, Bukki son
of Jogli. 23 Of the Josephites: of the tribe of the Manassites a leader,
Hanniel son of Ephod, 24 and of the tribe of the Ephraimites a leader,
Kemuel son of Shiphtan. 25 Of the tribe of the Zebulunites a leader,
Eli-zaphan son of Parnach. 26 Of the tribe of the Issacharites a leader,
Paltiel son of Azzan. 27 And of the tribe of the Asherites a leader,
Ahihud son of Shelomi. 28 Of the tribe of the Naphtalites a leader,
Pedahel son of Ammihud. 29 These were the ones whom the LORD
commanded to apportion the inheritance for the Israelites in the land
of Canaan.
[Numbers 35]
Levitical cities and cities of refuge
1 In the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, the LORD spoke to
Moses, saying: 2 Command the Israelites to give, from the inheritance
that they possess, towns for the Levites to live in; you shall also give to
the Levites pasture lands surrounding the towns. 3 The towns shall be
theirs to live in, and their pasture lands shall be for their cattle, for
their livestock, and for all their animals. 4 The pasture lands of the
towns, which you shall give to the Levites, shall reach from the wall of
the town outward a thousand cubits all around. 5 You shall measure,
outside the town, for the east side two thousand cubits, for the south
side two thousand cubits, for the west side two thousand cubits, and

343

NUMBERS 344

for the north side two thousand cubits, with the town in the middle;
this shall belong to them as pasture land for their towns.
6 The towns that you give to the Levites shall include the six cities of
refuge, where you shall permit a slayer to flee, and in addition to them
you shall give forty-two towns. 7 The towns that you give to the Levites
shall total forty-eight, with their pasture lands. 8 And as for the towns
that you shall give from the possession of the Israelites, from the larger
tribes you shall take many, and from the smaller tribes you shall take
few; each, in proportion to the inheritance that it obtains, shall give of
its towns to the Levites.
9 The LORD spoke to Moses, saying: 10 Speak to the Israelites, and say to
them: When you cross the Jordan into the land of Canaan, 11 then you
shall select cities to be cities of refuge for you, so that a slayer who kills
a person without intent may flee there. 12 The cities shall be for you a
refuge from the avenger, so that the slayer may not die until there is a
trial before the congregation.
13 The cities that you designate shall be six cities of refuge for you: 14
you shall designate three cities beyond the Jordan, and three cities in
the land of Canaan, to be cities of refuge. 15 These six cities shall serve
as refuge for the Israelites, for the resident or transient alien among
them, so that anyone who kills a person without intent may flee there.
16 But anyone who strikes another with an iron object, and death
ensues, is a murderer; the murderer shall be put to death. 17 Or anyone
who strikes another with a stone in hand that could cause death, and
death ensues, is a murderer; the murderer shall be put to death. 18 Or
anyone who strikes another with a weapon of wood in hand that could
cause death, and death ensues, is a murderer; the murderer shall be
put to death. 19 The avenger of blood is the one who shall put the
murderer to death; when they meet, the avenger of blood shall
execute the sentence. 20 Likewise, if someone pushes another from
hatred, or hurls something at another, lying in wait, and death ensues,
21 or in enmity strikes another with the hand, and death ensues, then
the one who struck the blow shall be put to death; that person is a

344

NUMBERS 345

murderer; the avenger of blood shall put the murderer to death, when
they meet.
22 But if someone pushes another suddenly without enmity, or hurls
any object without lying in wait, 23 or, while handling any stone that
could cause death, unintentionally drops it on another and death
ensues, though they were not enemies, and no harm was intended, 24
then the congregation shall judge between the slayer and the avenger
of blood, in accordance with these ordinances; 25 and the
congregation shall rescue the slayer from the avenger of blood. Then
the congregation shall send the slayer back to the original city of
refuge. The slayer shall live in it until the death of the high priest who
was anointed with the holy oil. 26 But if the slayer shall at any time go
outside the bounds of the original city of refuge, 27 and is found by
the avenger of blood outside the bounds of the city of refuge, and is
killed by the avenger, no bloodguilt shall be incurred. 28 For the slayer
must remain in the city of refuge until the death of the high priest; but
after the death of the high priest the slayer may return home.
29 These things shall be a statute and ordinance for you throughout
your generations wherever you live.
30 If anyone kills another, the murderer shall be put to death on the
evidence of witnesses; but no one shall be put to death on the
testimony of a single witness. 31 Moreover you shall accept no ransom
for the life of a murderer who is subject to the death penalty; a
murderer must be put to death. 32 Nor shall you accept ransom for one
who has fled to a city of refuge, enabling the fugitive to return to live
in the land before the death of the high priest. 33 You shall not pollute
the land in which you live; for blood pollutes the land, and no
expiation can be made for the land, for the blood that is shed in it,
except by the blood of the one who shed it. 34 You shall not defile the
land in which you live, in which I also dwell; for I the LORD dwell among
the Israelites.

345

NUMBERS 346

[Numbers 36]
Marriage of Zelophehad's daughters
1 The heads of the ancestral houses of the clans of the descendants of
Gilead son of Machir son of Manasseh, of the Josephite clans, came
forward and spoke in the presence of Moses and the leaders, the heads
of the ancestral houses of the Israelites; 2 they said, "The LORD
commanded my lord to give the land for inheritance by lot to the
Israelites; and my lord was commanded by the LORD to give the
inheritance of our brother Zelophehad to his daughters. 3 But if they
are married into another Israelite tribe, then their inheritance will be
taken from the inheritance of our ancestors and added to the
inheritance of the tribe into which they marry; so it will be taken away
from the allotted portion of our inheritance. 4 And when the jubilee of
the Israelites comes, then their inheritance will be added to the
inheritance of the tribe into which they have married; and their
inheritance will be taken from the inheritance of our ancestral tribe."
5 Then Moses commanded the Israelites according to the word of the
LORD, saying, "The descendants of the tribe of Joseph are right in what
they are saying. 6 This is what the LORD commands concerning the
daughters of Zelophehad, 'Let them marry whom they think best; only
it must be into a clan of their father's tribe that they are married, 7 so
that no inheritance of the Israelites shall be transferred from one tribe
to another; for all Israelites shall retain the inheritance of their
ancestral tribes. 8 Every daughter who possesses an inheritance in any
tribe of the Israelites shall marry one from the clan of her father's tribe,
so that all Israelites may continue to possess their ancestral inheritance.
9 No inheritance shall be transferred from one tribe to another; for
each of the tribes of the Israelites shall retain its own inheritance.'"
10 The daughters of Zelophehad did as the LORD had commanded
Moses. 11 Mahlah, Tirzah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Noah, the daughters of
Zelophehad, married sons of their father's brothers. 12 They were
married into the clans of the descendants of Manasseh son of Joseph,
and their inheritance remained in the tribe of their father's clan.

346

NUMBERS 347

13 These are the commandments and the ordinances that the LORD
commanded through Moses to the Israelites in the plains of Moab by
the Jordan at Jericho.

347

DEUTERONOMY 348

DEUTERONOMY
Introduction
Deuteronomy directly addresses the problem of historical distance
between past and present, between tradition and the needs of the
contemporary generation, between revelation and interpretation. In
that way, it is a remarkably modern text that instructs its audience how
to become more thoughtful readers of scripture. In narrative terms,
Deuteronomy comes just as the Israelites, encamped on the plains of
Moab, finally stand poised to enter the promised land. This entry into
Canaan would provide the long-awaited climax of the story that had
begun with the promises to the ancestors in Genesis, and whose
fulfillment had been delayed by the enslavement in Egypt and the
wandering in the wilderness. Now, on the eve both of his death and of
the nation's entry into the land without him, Moses, as Deuteronomy's
speaker, arrests the narrative action in order to deliver a series of three
speeches, grouped together as a long valedictory address. He reviews
the nation's history, expounds upon their laws, and instructs them
about the importance of loyalty to God. He also requires that the
nation swear upon oath to uphold this combination of law and
theological instruction as a covenant upon the plains of Moab, one
that supplements the prior covenant of Horeb (Deuteronomy's name
for Sinai; 28.69). Only after the conclusion of these discourses and a
following appendix (chs 31-34) does the overall narrative line resume
with the account of the nation's entry into Canaan in Joshua and
Judges.
The English name of the book, based on the Septuagint, means
"second law." The Septuagint reads "this repetition of law" (Gk "to
deuteronomion touto"). Like later traditional views, it sees
Deuteronomy as a reprise (of Ex, Lev, Num), ignoring the extent to
which it revises and challenges earlier law. That title reflects the early
Jewish perspective that Deuteronomy is Moses' rehearsal of the earlier
348

DEUTERONOMY 349

legal sections of the Torah. Despite this perspective and the text's own
self-presentation, Deuteronomy is likely not Mosaic but originates in
the seventh century BCE. It has long been recognized that there are
striking similarities between the distinctive religious reform carried out
by King Josiah in 622 BCE (2 Kings 22-23). That reform had been
inspired by the discovery in the Temple of a "scroll of the Torah" (2
Kings 22.8). Josiah's reform restricted all sacrificial worship of God to
Jerusalem and removed foreign elements from the system of worship;
it culminated in the celebration of the first nationally centralized
Passover at the Temple in Jerusalem (2 Kings 23.21-23). So strong do
these royal initiatives correspond to the distinctive requirements of
Deuteronomy that scholars, both traditional and critical, have long
identified the "scroll of the Torah" discovered in Josiah's Temple as
Deuteronomy.
Josiah's reform, with Deuteronomy as its catalyst, was much more a
revolution than a simple return to older forms of worship. Previously, it
was entirely legitimate to sacrifice to God throughout the land, as did
Abraham at Shechem and near Bethel (Gen 12.7-8); Jacob at Bethel
(Gen 35.1-7); Samuel at Mizpah, Ramah, Gilgal, and Bethlehem (1 Sam
7.9, 17; 9.11-14; 10.8; 16.1-5); and Elijah upon Mount Carmel (1 Kings
18.20-46). Indeed, earlier biblical law stipulated that God would grant
blessing "in every place where I cause my name to be remembered" (Ex
20.24). Deuteronomy challenged that older norm, prohibiting sacrifice
"at any place" (lit. "in every place") and restricting it to a single site,
implicitly Jerusalem (Deut 12.13-14). In this way, Deuteronomy's selfpresentation as a rehearsal or explication of prior law (1.1-5) or as a
simple supplement to the prior covenant (29.1) does not address the
extent to which Deuteronomy actually challenges and revises earlier
law in support of its new religious vision.
The historical background of Josiah's reforms was the increasing threat
of imperial domination. The Northern Kingdom of Israel had fallen
under Assyrian invasion a scant century before (722 BCE; 2 Kings 17).
Continuing Assyrian incursions down the coastal littoral had all but
reduced Judah to a rump-state (2 Kings 18.13). In a desperate bid to
preserve the nation's autonomy, Hezekiah had already made a pact
with Assyria (2 Kings 18.13-18). Subsequently, Judah's political and

349

DEUTERONOMY 350

religious independence seemed to hang uncertainly between the
threats presented by Assyria and resurgent Babylon (2 Kings 20.12-15).
The resulting military allegiances led to religious syncretism, as forms
of worship related to the Assyrian state religion (2 Kings 16.10-20) or
other foreign forms of worship (2 Kings 21.1-6) were introduced into
the Temple by Hezekiah.
In this context, Josiah's religious reforms represented an important bid
for Judean cultural, political, and religious autonomy. The monarch
extended his reforms into the area of the former Northern Kingdom of
Israel (2 Kings 23.15-20), territory under Assyrian control. Deuteronomy,
apparently written sometime during this historical crisis, likewise
reflects the desire to preserve Judean cultural and religious integrity.
Its authors had the conviction that older conventions of worship and
social organization were no longer viable. If the religion of the Lord
was to survive the crisis, renewal and adaptation were necessary.
Deuteronomy's legal corpus (chs 12-26) provides a remarkably
comprehensive program for cultural renewal. It addresses worship; the
festival calendar; the major institutions of public life (justice, kingship,
priesthood, prophecy); criminal, family, and civil law; and ethics. The
law is presented as a covenant between God and nation, which the
people take an oath to uphold, upon penalty of sanctions, while
maintaining unconditional loyalty to their God. That covenant
structure closely corresponds to Neo-Assyrian state treaties that have
been recovered from this period, the most famous of which is the
Vassal Treaty of Esarhaddon (672 BCE). At a number of points, the
authors of Deuteronomy seem consciously to have patterned their
covenant after this treaty tradition, whether known directly or in
Aramaic translation. From this perspective, Deuteronomy is a countertreaty: Its authors turned the weapon of imperialism into a bid for
freedom, shifting its oath of loyalty from the Assyrian overlord to their
divine sovereign.
The authors of Deuteronomy were thus tutored in international treaty
conventions, and elsewhere reveal their knowledge of the literary
traditions of ancient Near Eastern law (15.1-18; 17.8-12, 14-20; 22.13-30)
and wisdom literature (1.13; 4.2). The authors of Deuteronomy made
use of another common Near Eastern convention as well. They did not

350

DEUTERONOMY 351

directly attach their name to their composition or write in their own
voice; instead, they attributed their composition to a prestigious figure
from the past. By employing "Moses" as their spokesperson, they
established a link with tradition at precisely the time when tradition,
for the sake of survival, had to be transformed. This convention of
ascribing a text to an ancient personage, technically called
"pseudepigraphy," is particularly well known in the later literature of
the intertestamental or Second Temple period; examples include
Jubilees, 4 Ezra, the Testament of Abraham, and (among the Dead Sea
Scrolls) the Temple Scroll.
Deuteronomy preserves several layers of tradition within itself: The
structure of three different discourses with an appendix already
suggests a process of literary growth. That growth is closely connected
to the gradual formation of the Hebrew Bible. To appreciate what is
involved, it helps imaginatively to turn back the clock to the time
before the Bible achieved its present form.
When Deuteronomy was first promulgated, it would not have been
part of any larger whole. Instead, it would have been complete by
itself as a "scroll of the Torah" (i.e., the "book of the law" in 2 Kings
22.8). It would have consisted of most of the laws of chs 12-26, framed
by a relatively simple introduction and conclusion. This form of
Deuteronomy presented itself as a treaty conclude between the nation
and its God in a formal ceremony whereby each citizen took an oath of
loyalty under penalty of strict sanctions (28.1-46). This was very likely
the preexilic form of Deuteronomy.
At a later stage, presumably sometime during the exile in the mid-sixth
century BCE, Deuteronomy would have been incorporated into the
Deuteronomistic History (Joshua through 2 Kings) to serve as its
introduction. At this point, the "Deuteronomistic" editors would have
given the books its present literary frame (1.1-4.40; chs 31-34), while also
adding to the legal corpus, selectively tying its promises or expectations
to the later historical material (see 12.8). Expansions in Deuteronomy
that reflect the Babylonian exile may derive from this stage (i.e., 4.2531; 28.47-56; 30.1-10).

351

DEUTERONOMY 352

At a still later point, in the exilic or postexilic period, Priestly editors
appended Deuteronomy to the newly formed Pentateuch, to serve as
its conclusion. Ironically, the decision to conclude the Pentateuch with
Deuteronomy separated the overall narrative plan of Genesis through
Numbers from its logical fulfillment in an account of the conquest of
the land. This narrative climax was delayed to Joshua and Judges.
In the final chapters of Deuteronomy, these three viewpoints operate
simultaneously, creating a complex interplay of perspectives. The legal
corpus is brought to its conclusion with a formal ratification ceremony
involving the swearing of an oath to assume the penalties for
transgressing the covenant (chs 29-31). At the same time, other editors
wok to embed Deuteronomy in the Deuteronomistic History. Still other
editors tie the book to Genesis-Numbers and thus make the creation of
Torah — no longer the occupation of the land — the climax of the new
created Pentateuch. The three perspectives operate concurrently,
spinning like Ezekiel's vision of "a wheel within a wheel" (1.16).
Part of the continuing relevance of Deuteronomy is that it does not
permit itself to be read literally or passively. It challenges its readers
actively to confront the problem of the relation between revelation
and interpretation and breaks down conventional boundaries between
scripture and tradition. It makes paradox central to its structure: The
book distinctively narrates the process of its own formation (31.1-12)
while also anticipating its existence and completion (17.18; 28.58; 30.10).
Interpretation is directly and indirectly a theme of Deuteronomy (see
1.5). At many points, the authors of Deuteronomy reinterpret earlier
narratives (see 6.1) and laws (particularly from the Covenant Collection
in Ex 20-23). Moreover, the process of the book's editing intentionally
preserves conflicting perspectives on a full range of key issues central
to Israelite religion: on whether the revelation of the Decalogue at
Sinai/Horeb was direct or required the mediation of Moses (5.5); on the
stature of Moses relative to other prophets (34.10); on the nature of
divine punishment for sin (5.9-10; 7.10); and even on Deuteronomy's
own setting in time and place (1.1; 2.12; 3.11). These mutually exclusive
positions preserve an ongoing ancient debate about fundamental
religious assumptions. The editors of Deuteronomy opted against
closure: They preserved these different schools of thought in their full

352

DEUTERONOMY 353

integrity. Accordingly, there is for Deuteronomy no access to God in
the covenant without entering into this debate. The modern reader of
Deuteronomy must become, like the authors of Deuteronomy, an
interpreter.

[Deuteronomy 1]
The first discourse of Moses
1 These are the words that Moses spoke to all Israel beyond the Jordan
— in the wilderness, on the plain opposite Suph, between Paran and
Tophel, Laban, Hazeroth, and Di-zahab. 2 (By the way of Mount Seir it
takes eleven days to reach Kadesh-barnea from Horeb.) 3 In the
fortieth year, on the first day of the eleventh month, Moses spoke to
the Israelites just as the LORD had commanded him to speak to them. 4
This was after he had defeated King Sihon of the Amorites, who
reigned in Heshbon, and King Og of Bashan, who reigned in Ashtaroth
and in Edrei. 5 Beyond the Jordan in the land of Moab, Moses
undertook to expound this law as follows:
Historical review
6 The LORD our God spoke to us at Horeb, saying, "You have stayed
long enough at this mountain. 7 Resume your journey, and go into the
hill country of the Amorites as well as into the neighboring regions —
the Arabah, the hill country, the Shephelah, the Negeb, and the
seacoast — the land of the Canaanites and the Lebanon, as far as the
great river, the river Euphrates. 8 See, I have set the land before you;
go in and take possession of the land that I swore to your ancestors, to
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give to them and to their
descendants after them."
9 At that time I said to you, "I am unable by myself to bear you. 10 The
LORD your God has multiplied you, so that today you are as numerous
as the stars of heaven. 11 May the LORD, the God of your ancestors,
increase you a thousand times more and bless you, as he has promised

353

DEUTERONOMY 354

you! 12 But how can I bear the heavy burden of your disputes all by
myself? 13 Choose for each of your tribes individuals who are wise,
discerning, and reputable to be your leaders." 14 You answered me,
"The plan you have proposed is a good one." 15 So I took the leaders
of your tribes, wise and reputable individuals, and installed them as
leaders over you, commanders of thousands, commanders of hundreds,
commanders of fifties, commanders of tens, and officials, throughout
your tribes. 16 I charged your judges at that time: "Give the members
of your community a fair hearing, and judge rightly between one
person and another, whether citizen or resident alien. 17 You must not
be partial in judging: hear out the small and the great alike; you shall
not be intimidated by anyone, for the judgment is God's. Any case that
is too hard for you, bring to me, and I will hear it." 18 So I charged you
at that time with all the things that you should do.
From Horeb to Kadesh
19 Then, just as the LORD our God had ordered us, we set out from
Horeb and went through all that great and terrible wilderness that you
saw, on the way to the hill country of the Amorites, until we reached
Kadesh-barnea. 20 I said to you, "You have reached the hill country of
the Amorites, which the LORD our God is giving us. 21 See, the LORD
your God has given the land to you; go up, take possession, as the
LORD, the God of your ancestors, has promised you; do not fear or be
dismayed."
22 All of you came to me and said, "Let us send men ahead of us to
explore the land for us and bring back a report to us regarding the
route by which we should go up and the cities we will come to." 23 The
plan seemed good to me, and I selected twelve of you, one from each
tribe. 24 They set out and went up into the hill country, and when they
reached the Valley of Eshcol they spied it out 25 and gathered some of
the land's produce, which they brought down to us. They brought back
a report to us, and said, "It is a good land that the LORD our God is
giving us."
26 But you were unwilling to go up. You rebelled against the
command of the LORD your God; 27 you grumbled in your tents and

354

DEUTERONOMY 355

said, "It is because the LORD hates us that he has brought us out of the
land of Egypt, to hand us over to the Amorites to destroy us. 28 Where
are we headed? Our kindred have made our hearts melt by reporting,
'The people are stronger and taller than we; the cities are large and
fortified up to heaven! We actually saw there the offspring of the
Anakim!'" 29 I said to you, "Have no dread or fear of them. 30 The
LORD your God, who goes before you, is the one who will fight for you,
just as he did for you in Egypt before your very eyes, 31 and in the
wilderness, where you saw how the LORD your God carried you, just as
one carries a child, all the way that you traveled until you reached this
place. 32 But in spite of this, you have no trust in the LORD your God, 33
who goes before you on the way to seek out a place for you to camp,
in fire by night, and in the cloud by day, to show you the route you
should take."
34 When the LORD heard your words, he was wrathful and swore: 35
"Not one of these — not one of this evil generation — shall see the
good land that I swore to give to your ancestors, 36 except Caleb son of
Jephunneh. He shall see it, and to him and to his descendants I will give
the land on which he set foot, because of his complete fidelity to the
LORD." 37 Even with me the LORD was angry on your account, saying,
"You also shall not enter there. 38 Joshua son of Nun, your assistant,
shall enter there; encourage him, for he is the one who will secure
Israel's possession of it. 39 And as for your little ones, who you thought
would become booty, your children, who today do not yet know right
from wrong, they shall enter there; to them I will give it, and they shall
take possession of it. 40 But as for you, journey back into the
wilderness, in the direction of the Red Sea."
41 You answered me, "We have sinned against the LORD! We are ready
to go up and fight, just as the LORD our God commanded us." So all of
you strapped on your battle gear, and thought it easy to go up into the
hill country. 42 The LORD said to me, "Say to them, 'Do not go up and
do not fight, for I am not in the midst of you; otherwise you will be
defeated by your enemies.'" 43 Although I told you, you would not
listen. You rebelled against the command of the LORD and
presumptuously went up into the hill country. 44 The Amorites who
lived in that hill country then came out against you and chased you as

355

DEUTERONOMY 356

bees do. They beat you down in Seir as far as Hormah. 45 When you
returned and wept before the LORD, the LORD would neither heed your
voice nor pay you any attention.
The circuit via Transjordan
46 After you had stayed at Kadesh as many days as you did,
[Deuteronomy 2] 1 we journeyed back into the wilderness, in the
direction of the Red Sea, as the LORD had told me and skirted Mount
Seir for many days. 2 Then the LORD said to me: 3 "You have been
skirting this hill country long enough. Head north, 4 and charge the
people as follows: You are about to pass through the territory of your
kindred, the descendants of Esau, who live in Seir. They will be afraid
of you, so, be very careful 5 not to engage in battle with them, for I
will not give you even so much as a foot's length of their land, since I
have given Mount Seir to Esau as a possession. 6 You shall purchase
food from them for money, so that you may eat; and you shall also buy
water from them for money, so that you may drink. 7 Surely the LORD
your God has blessed you in all your undertakings; he knows your
going through this great wilderness. These forty years the LORD your
God has been with you; you have lacked nothing." 8 So we passed by
our kin, the descendants of Esau who live in Seir, leaving behind the
route of the Arabah, and leaving behind Elath and Ezion-geber.
When we had headed out along the route of the wilderness of Moab,
9 the LORD said to me: "Do not harass Moab or engage them in battle,
for I will not give you any of its land as a possession, since I have given
Ar as a possession to the descendants of Lot." 10 (The Emim — a large
and numerous people, as tall as the Anakim — had formerly inhabited
it. 11 Like the Anakim, they are usually reckoned as Rephaim, though
the Moabites call them Emim. 12 Moreover, the Horim had formerly
inhabited Seir, but the descendants of Esau dispossessed them,
destroying them and settling in their place, as Israel has done in the
land that the LORD gave them as a possession.) 13 "Now then, proceed
to cross over the Wadi Zered."
So we crossed over the Wadi Zered. 14 And the length of time we had
traveled from Kadesh-barnea until we crossed the Wadi Zered was

356

DEUTERONOMY 357

thirty-eight years, until the entire generation of warriors had perished
from the camp, as the LORD had sworn concerning them. 15 Indeed, the
LORD's own hand was against them, to root them out from the camp,
until all had perished.
16 Just as soon as all the warriors had died off from among the people,
17 the LORD spoke to me, saying, 18 "Today you are going to cross the
boundary of Moab at Ar. 19 When you approach the frontier of the
Ammonites, do not harass them or engage them in battle, for I will not
give the land of the Ammonites to you as a possession, because I have
given it to the descendants of Lot." 20 (It also is usually reckoned as a
land of Rephaim. Rephaim formerly inhabited it, though the
Ammonites call them Zamzummim, 21 a strong and numerous people,
as tall as the Anakim. But the LORD destroyed them from before the
Ammonites so that they could dispossess them and settle in their place.
22 He did the same for the descendants of Esau, who live in Seir, by
destroying the Horim before them so that they could dispossess them
and settle in their place even to this day. 23 As for the Avvim, who had
lived in settlements in the vicinity of Gaza, the Caphtorim, who came
from Caphtor, destroyed them and settled in their place.) 24 "Proceed
on your journey and cross the Wadi Arnon. See, I have handed over to
you King Sihon the Amorite of Heshbon, and his land. Begin to take
possession by engaging him in battle. 25 This day I will begin to put the
dread and fear of you upon the peoples everywhere under heaven;
when they hear report of you, they will tremble and be in anguish
because of you."
26 So I sent messengers from the wilderness of Kedemoth to King
Sihon of Heshbon with the following terms of peace: 27 "If you let me
pass through your land, I will travel only along the road; I will turn
aside neither to the right nor to the left. 28 You shall sell me food for
money, so that I may eat, and supply me water for money, so that I
may drink. Only allow me to pass through on foot — 29 just as the
descendants of Esau who live in Seir have done for me and likewise the
Moabites who live in Ar — until I cross the Jordan into the land that
the LORD our God is giving us." 30 But King Sihon of Heshbon was not
willing to let us pass through, for the LORD your God had hardened his

357

DEUTERONOMY 358

spirit and made his heart defiant in order to hand him over to you, as
he has now done.
31 The LORD said to me, "See, I have begun to give Sihon and his land
over to you. Begin now to take possession of his land." 32 So when
Sihon came out against us, he and all his people for battle at Jahaz, 33
the LORD our God gave him over to us; and we struck him down, along
with his offspring and all his people. 34 At that time we captured all his
towns, and in each town we utterly destroyed men, women, and
children. We left not a single survivor. 35 Only the livestock we kept as
spoil for ourselves, as well as the plunder of the towns that we had
captured. 36 From Aroer on the edge of the Wadi Arnon (including the
town that is in the wadi itself) as far as Gilead, there was no citadel too
high for us. The LORD our God gave everything to us. 37 You did not
encroach, however, on the land of the Ammonites, avoiding the whole
upper region of the Wadi Jabbok as well as the towns of the hill
country, just as the LORD our God had charged.
[Deuteronomy 3]
1 When we headed up the road to Bashan, King Og of Bashan came
out against us, he and all his people, for battle at Edrei. 2 The LORD said
to me, "Do not fear him, for I have handed him over to you, along with
his people and his land. Do to him as you did to King Sihon of the
Amorites, who reigned in Heshbon." 3 So the LORD our God also
handed over to us King Og of Bashan and all his people. We struck him
down until not a single survivor was left. 4 At that time we captured all
his towns; there was no citadel that we did not take from them — sixty
towns, the whole region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan. 5 All
these were fortress towns with high walls, double gates, and bars,
besides a great many villages. 6 And we utterly destroyed them, as we
had done to King Sihon of Heshbon, in each city utterly destroying
men, women, and children. 7 But all the livestock and the plunder of
the towns we kept as spoil for ourselves.
8 So at that time we took from the two kings of the Amorites the land
beyond the Jordan, from the Wadi Arnon to Mount Hermon 9 (the
Sidonians call Hermon Sirion, while the Amorites call it Senir), 10 all the

358

DEUTERONOMY 359

towns of the tableland, the whole of Gilead, and all of Bashan, as far
as Salecah and Edrei, towns of Og's kingdom in Bashan. 11 (Now only
King Og of Bashan was left of the remnant of the Rephaim. In fact his
bed, an iron bed, can still be seen in Rabbah of the Ammonites. By the
common cubit it is nine cubits long and four cubits wide.) 12 As for the
land that we took possession of at that time, I gave to the Reubenites
and Gadites the territory north of Aroer, that is on the edge of the
Wadi Arnon, as well as half the hill country of Gilead with its towns, 13
and I gave to the half-tribe of Manasseh the rest of Gilead and all of
Bashan, Og's kingdom. (The whole region of Argob: all that portion of
Bashan used to be called a land of Rephaim; 14 Jair the Manassite
acquired the whole region of Argob as far as the border of the
Geshurites and the Maacathites, and he named them — that is, Bashan
— after himself, Havvoth-jair, as it is to this day.) 15 To Machir I gave
Gilead. 16 And to the Reubenites and the Gadites I gave the territory
from Gilead as far as the Wadi Arnon, with the middle of the wadi as a
boundary, and up to the Jabbok, the wadi being boundary of the
Ammonites; 17 the Arabah also, with the Jordan and its banks, from
Chinnereth down to the sea of the Arabah, the Dead Sea, with the
lower slopes of Pisgah on the east.
18 At that time, I charged you as follows: "Although the LORD your God
has given you this land to occupy, all your troops shall cross over armed
as the vanguard of your Israelite kin. 19 Only your wives, your children,
and your livestock — I know that you have much livestock — shall stay
behind in the towns that I have given to you. 20 When the LORD gives
rest to your kindred, as to you, and they too have occupied the land
that the LORD your God is giving them beyond the Jordan, then each of
you may return to the property that I have given to you." 21 And I
charged Joshua as well at that time, saying: "Your own eyes have seen
everything that the LORD your God has done to these two kings; so the
LORD will do to all the kingdoms into which you are about to cross. 22
Do not fear them, for it is the LORD your God who fights for you."
23 At that time, too, I entreated the LORD, saying: 24 "O Lord GOD, you
have only begun to show your servant your greatness and your might;
what god in heaven or on earth can perform deeds and mighty acts
like yours! 25 Let me cross over to see the good land beyond the

359

DEUTERONOMY 360

Jordan, that good hill country and the Lebanon." 26 But the LORD was
angry with me on your account and would not heed me. The LORD said
to me, "Enough from you! Never speak to me of this matter again! 27
Go up to the top of Pisgah and look around you to the west, to the
north, to the south, and to the east. Look well, for you shall not cross
over this Jordan. 28 But charge Joshua, and encourage and strengthen
him, because it is he who shall cross over at the head of this people and
who shall secure their possession of the land that you will see." 29 So
we remained in the valley opposite Beth-peor.
[Deuteronomy 4]
Exhortation to obey the Torah
1 So now, Israel, give heed to the statutes and ordinances that I am
teaching you to observe, so that you may live to enter and occupy the
land that the LORD, the God of your ancestors, is giving you. 2 You must
neither add anything to what I command you nor take away anything
from it, but keep the commandments of the LORD your God with which
I am charging you. 3 You have seen for yourselves what the LORD did
with regard to the Baal of Peor — how the LORD your God destroyed
from among you everyone who followed the Baal of Peor, 4 while
those of you who held fast to the LORD your God are all alive today.
5 See, just as the LORD my God has charged me, I now teach you
statutes and ordinances for you to observe in the land that you are
about to enter and occupy. 6 You must observe them diligently, for this
will show your wisdom and discernment to the peoples, who, when
they hear all these statutes, will say, "Surely this great nation is a wise
and discerning people!" 7 For what other great nation has a god so
near to it as the LORD our God is whenever we call to him? 8 And what
other great nation has statutes and ordinances as just as this entire law
that I am setting before you today?
9 But take care and watch yourselves closely, so as neither to forget the
things that your eyes have seen nor to let them slip from your mind all
the days of your life; make them known to your children and your
children's children — 10 how you once stood before the LORD your God
at Horeb, when the LORD said to me, "Assemble the people for me, and

360

DEUTERONOMY 361

I will let them hear my words, so that they may learn to fear me as long
as they live on the earth, and may teach their children so"; 11 you
approached and stood at the foot of the mountain while the mountain
was blazing up to the very heavens, shrouded in dark clouds. 12 Then
the LORD spoke to you out of the fire. You heard the sound of words
but saw no form; there was only a voice. 13 He declared to you his
covenant, which he charged you to observe, that is, the ten
commandments; and he wrote them on two stone tablets. 14 And the
LORD charged me at that time to teach you statutes and ordinances for
you to observe in the land that you are about to cross into and occupy.
15 Since you saw no form when the LORD spoke to you at Horeb out of
the fire, take care and watch yourselves closely, 16 so that you do not
act corruptly by making an idol for yourselves, in the form of any
figure — the likeness of male or female, 17 the likeness of any animal
that is on the earth, the likeness of any winged bird that flies in the air,
18 the likeness of anything that creeps on the ground, the likeness of
any fish that is in the water under the earth. 19 And when you look up
to the heavens and see the sun, the moon, and the stars, all the host of
heaven, do not be led astray and bow down to them and serve them,
things that the LORD your God has allotted to all the peoples
everywhere under heaven. 20 But the LORD has taken you and brought
you out of the iron-smelter, out of Egypt, to become a people of his
very own possession, as you are now.
21 The LORD was angry with me because of you, and he vowed that I
should not cross the Jordan and that I should not enter the good land
that the LORD your God is giving for your possession. 22 For I am going
to die in this land without crossing over the Jordan, but you are going
to cross over to take possession of that good land. 23 So be careful not
to forget the covenant that the LORD your God made with you, and not
to make for yourselves an idol in the form of anything that the LORD
your God has forbidden you. 24 For the LORD your God is a devouring
fire, a jealous God.

361

DEUTERONOMY 362

25 When you have had children and children's children, and become
complacent in the land, if you act corruptly by making an idol in the
form of anything, thus doing what is evil in the sight of the LORD your
God, and provoking him to anger, 26 I call heaven and earth to witness
against you today that you will soon utterly perish from the land that
you are crossing the Jordan to occupy; you will not live long on it, but
will be utterly destroyed. 27 The LORD will scatter you among the
peoples; only a few of you will be left among the nations where the
LORD will lead you. 28 There you will serve other gods made by human
hands, objects of wood and stone that neither see, nor hear, nor eat,
nor smell. 29 From there you will seek the LORD your God, and you will
find him if you search after him with all your heart and soul. 30 In your
distress, when all these things have happened to you in time to come,
you will return to the LORD your God and heed him. 31 Because the
LORD your God is a merciful God, he will neither abandon you nor
destroy you; he will not forget the covenant with your ancestors that
he swore to them.
32 For ask now about former ages, long before your own, ever since
the day that God created human beings on the earth; ask from one
end of heaven to the other: has anything so great as this ever
happened or has its like ever been heard of? 33 Has any people ever
heard the voice of a god speaking out of a fire, as you have heard, and
lived? 34 Or has any god ever attempted to go and take a nation for
himself from the midst of another nation, by trials, by signs and
wonders, by war, by a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, and by
terrifying displays of power, as the LORD your God did for you in Egypt
before your very eyes? 35 To you it was shown so that you would
acknowledge that the LORD is God; there is no other besides him. 36
From heaven he made you hear his voice to discipline you. On earth he
showed you his great fire, while you heard his words coming out of the
fire. 37 And because he loved your ancestors, he chose their
descendants after them. He brought you out of Egypt with his own
presence, by his great power, 38 driving out before you nations greater
and mightier than yourselves, to bring you in, giving you their land for
a possession, as it is still today. 39 So acknowledge today and take to
heart that the LORD is God in heaven above and on the earth beneath;
there is no other. 40 Keep his statutes and his commandments, which I

362

DEUTERONOMY 363

am commanding you today for your own well-being and that of your
descendants after you, so that you may long remain in the land that
the LORD your God is giving you for all time.
An appendix
41 Then Moses set apart on the east side of the Jordan three cities 42 to
which a homicide could flee, someone who unintentionally kills
another person, the two not having been at enmity before; the
homicide could flee to one of these cities and live: 43 Bezer in the
wilderness on the tableland belonging to the Reubenites, Ramoth in
Gilead belonging to the Gadites, and Golan in Bashan belonging to the
Manassites.
The second discourse of Moses
44 This is the law that Moses set before the Israelites. 45 These are the
decrees and the statutes and ordinances that Moses spoke to the
Israelites when they had come out of Egypt, 46 beyond the Jordan in
the valley opposite Beth-peor, in the land of King Sihon of the
Amorites, who reigned at Heshbon, whom Moses and the Israelites
defeated when they came out of Egypt. 47 They occupied his land and
the land of King Og of Bashan, the two kings of the Amorites on the
eastern side of the Jordan: 48 from Aroer, which is on the edge of the
Wadi Arnon, as far as Mount Sirion (that is, Hermon), 49 together with
all the Arabah on the east side of the Jordan as far as the Sea of the
Arabah, under the slopes of Pisgah.
[Deuteronomy 5]
The revelation at Sinai/Horeb; Making the past present
1 Moses convened all Israel, and said to them:
Hear, O Israel, the statutes and ordinances that I am addressing to you
today; you shall learn them and observe them diligently. 2 The LORD
our God made a covenant with us at Horeb. 3 Not with our ancestors
did the LORD make this covenant, but with us, who are all of us here
alive today. 4 The LORD spoke with you face to face at the mountain,

363

DEUTERONOMY 364

out of the fire. 5 (At that time I was standing between the LORD and
you to declare to you the words of the LORD; for you were afraid
because of the fire and did not go up the mountain.) And he said:
The Decalogue
6 I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt,
out of the house of slavery; 7 you shall have no other gods before me.
8 You shall not make for yourself an idol, whether in the form of
anything that is in heaven above, or that is on the earth beneath, or
that is in the water under the earth. 9 You shall not bow down to them
or worship them; for I the LORD your God am a jealous God, punishing
children for the iniquity of parents, to the third and fourth generation
of those who reject me, 10 but showing steadfast love to the
thousandth generation of those who love me and keep my
commandments.
11 You shall not make wrongful use of the name of the LORD your God,
for the LORD will not acquit anyone who misuses his name.
12 Observe the sabbath day and keep it holy, as the LORD your God
commanded you. 13 Six days you shall labor and do all your work. 14
But the seventh day is a sabbath to the LORD your God; you shall not do
any work — you, or your son or your daughter, or your male or female
slave, or your ox or your donkey, or any of your livestock, or the
resident alien in your towns, so that your male and female slave may
rest as well as you. 15 Remember that you were a slave in the land of
Egypt, and the LORD your God brought you out from there with a
mighty hand and an outstretched arm; therefore the LORD your God
commanded you to keep the sabbath day.
16 Honor your father and your mother, as the LORD your God
commanded you, so that your days may be long and that it may go
well with you in the land that the LORD your God is giving you.
17 You shall not murder.

364

DEUTERONOMY 365

18 Neither shall you commit adultery.
19 Neither shall you steal.
20 Neither shall you bear false witness against your neighbor.
21 Neither shall you covet your neighbor's wife.
Neither shall you desire your neighbor's house, or field, or male or
female slave, or ox, or donkey, or anything that belongs to your
neighbor.
Moses as mediator
22 These words the LORD spoke with a loud voice to your whole
assembly at the mountain, out of the fire, the cloud, and the thick
darkness, and he added no more. He wrote them on two stone tablets,
and gave them to me. 23 When you heard the voice out of the
darkness, while the mountain was burning with fire, you approached
me, all the heads of your tribes and your elders; 24 and you said,
"Look, the LORD our God has shown us his glory and greatness, and we
have heard his voice out of the fire. Today we have seen that God may
speak to someone and the person may still live. 25 So now why should
we die? For this great fire will consume us; if we hear the voice of the
LORD our God any longer, we shall die. 26 For who is there of all flesh
that has heard the voice of the living God speaking out of fire, as we
have, and remained alive? 27 Go near, you yourself, and hear all that
the LORD our God will say. Then tell us everything that the LORD our
God tells you, and we will listen and do it."
28 The LORD heard your words when you spoke to me, and the LORD
said to me: "I have heard the words of this people, which they have
spoken to you; they are right in all that they have spoken. 29 If only
they had such a mind as this, to fear me and to keep all my
commandments always, so that it might go well with them and with
their children forever! 30 Go say to them, 'Return to your tents.' 31 But
you, stand here by me, and I will tell you all the commandments, the
statutes and the ordinances, that you shall teach them, so that they

365

DEUTERONOMY 366

may do them in the land that I am giving them to possess." 32 You
must therefore be careful to do as the LORD your God has commanded
you; you shall not turn to the right or to the left. 33 You must follow
exactly the path that the LORD your God has commanded you, so that
you may live, and that it may go well with you, and that you may live
long in the land that you are to possess.
[Deuteronomy 6]
The requirement of loyalty to God
1 Now this is the commandment — the statutes and the ordinances —
that the LORD your God charged me to teach you to observe in the land
that you are about to cross into and occupy, 2 so that you and your
children and your children's children may fear the LORD your God all
the days of your life, and keep all his decrees and his commandments
that I am commanding you, so that your days may be long. 3 Hear
therefore, O Israel, and observe them diligently, so that it may go well
with you, and so that you may multiply greatly in a land flowing with
milk and honey, as the LORD, the God of your ancestors, has promised
you.
4 Hear, O Israel: The LORD is our God, the LORD alone. 5 You shall love
the LORD your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with
all your might. 6 Keep these words that I am commanding you today in
your heart. 7 Recite them to your children and talk about them when
you are at home and when you are away, when you lie down and
when you rise. 8 Bind them as a sign on your hand, fix them as an
emblem on your forehead, 9 and write them on the doorposts of your
house and on your gates.
10 When the LORD your God has brought you into the land that he
swore to your ancestors, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give
you — a land with fine, large cities that you did not build, 11 houses
filled with all sorts of goods that you did not fill, hewn cisterns that
you did not hew, vineyards and olive groves that you did not plant —
and when you have eaten your fill, 12 take care that you do not forget
the LORD, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house
of slavery. 13 The LORD your God you shall fear; him you shall serve, and

366

DEUTERONOMY 367

by his name alone you shall swear. 14 Do not follow other gods, any of
the gods of the peoples who are all around you, 15 because the LORD
your God, who is present with you, is a jealous God. The anger of the
LORD your God would be kindled against you and he would destroy you
from the face of the earth.
16 Do not put the LORD your God to the test, as you tested him at
Massah. 17 You must diligently keep the commandments of the LORD
your God, and his decrees, and his statutes that he has commanded
you. 18 Do what is right and good in the sight of the LORD, so that it
may go well with you, and so that you may go in and occupy the good
land that the LORD swore to your ancestors to give you, 19 thrusting out
all your enemies from before you, as the LORD has promised.
20 When your children ask you in time to come, "What is the meaning
of the decrees and the statutes and the ordinances that the LORD our
God has commanded you?" 21 then you shall say to your children, "We
were Pharaoh's slaves in Egypt, but the LORD brought us out of Egypt
with a mighty hand. 22 The LORD displayed before our eyes great and
awesome signs and wonders against Egypt, against Pharaoh and all his
household. 23 He brought us out from there in order to bring us in, to
give us the land that he promised on oath to our ancestors. 24 Then
the LORD commanded us to observe all these statutes, to fear the LORD
our God, for our lasting good, so as to keep us alive, as is now the case.
25 If we diligently observe this entire commandment before the LORD
our God, as he has commanded us, we will be in the right."
[Deuteronomy 7]
Risks to covenantal faith upon entry to the land; the war of conquest
1 When the LORD your God brings you into the land that you are about
to enter and occupy, and he clears away many nations before you —
the Hittites, the Girgashites, the Amorites, the Canaanites, the
Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites, seven nations mightier and
more numerous than you — 2 and when the LORD your God gives them
over to you and you defeat them, then you must utterly destroy them.
Make no covenant with them and show them no mercy. 3 Do not
intermarry with them, giving your daughters to their sons or taking

367

DEUTERONOMY 368

their daughters for your sons, 4 for that would turn away your children
from following me, to serve other gods. Then the anger of the LORD
would be kindled against you, and he would destroy you quickly. 5 But
this is how you must deal with them: break down their altars, smash
their pillars, hew down their sacred poles, and burn their idols with
fire. 6 For you are a people holy to the LORD your God; the LORD your
God has chosen you out of all the peoples on earth to be his people,
his treasured possession.
7 It was not because you were more numerous than any other people
that the LORD set his heart on you and chose you — for you were the
fewest of all peoples. 8 It was because the LORD loved you and kept the
oath that he swore to your ancestors, that the LORD has brought you
out with a mighty hand, and redeemed you from the house of slavery,
from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt. 9 Know therefore that the
LORD your God is God, the faithful God who maintains covenant loyalty
with those who love him and keep his commandments, to a thousand
generations, 10 and who repays in their own person those who reject
him. He does not delay but repays in their own person those who reject
him. 11 Therefore, observe diligently the commandment — the statutes
and the ordinances — that I am commanding you today.
12 If you heed these ordinances, by diligently observing them, the LORD
your God will maintain with you the covenant loyalty that he swore to
your ancestors; 13 he will love you, bless you, and multiply you; he will
bless the fruit of your womb and the fruit of your ground, your grain
and your wine and your oil, the increase of your cattle and the issue of
your flock, in the land that he swore to your ancestors to give you. 14
You shall be the most blessed of peoples, with neither sterility nor
barrenness among you or your livestock. 15 The LORD will turn away
from you every illness; all the dread diseases of Egypt that you
experienced, he will not inflict on you, but he will lay them on all who
hate you. 16 You shall devour all the peoples that the LORD your God is
giving over to you, showing them no pity; you shall not serve their
gods, for that would be a snare to you.

368

DEUTERONOMY 369

17 If you say to yourself, "These nations are more numerous than I; how
can I dispossess them?" 18 do not be afraid of them. Just remember
what the LORD your God did to Pharaoh and to all Egypt, 19 the great
trials that your eyes saw, the signs and wonders, the mighty hand and
the outstretched arm by which the LORD your God brought you out.
The LORD your God will do the same to all the peoples of whom you are
afraid. 20 Moreover, the LORD your God will send the pestilence against
them, until even the survivors and the fugitives are destroyed. 21 Have
no dread of them, for the LORD your God, who is present with you, is a
great and awesome God. 22 The LORD your God will clear away these
nations before you little by little; you will not be able to make a quick
end of them, otherwise the wild animals would become too numerous
for you. 23 But the LORD your God will give them over to you, and
throw them into great panic, until they are destroyed. 24 He will hand
their kings over to you and you shall blot out their name from under
heaven; no one will be able to stand against you, until you have
destroyed them. 25 The images of their gods you shall burn with fire.
Do not covet the silver or the gold that is on them and take it for
yourself, because you could be ensnared by it; for it is abhorrent to the
LORD your God. 26 Do not bring an abhorrent thing into your house, or
you will be set apart for destruction like it. You must utterly detest and
abhor it, for it is set apart for destruction.
[Deuteronomy 8]
The temptation to pride and self-sufficiency in the land
1 This entire commandment that I command you today you must
diligently observe, so that you may live and increase, and go in and
occupy the land that the LORD promised on oath to your ancestors. 2
Remember the long way that the LORD your God has led you these
forty years in the wilderness, in order to humble you, testing you to
know what was in your heart, whether or not you would keep his
commandments. 3 He humbled you by letting you hunger, then by
feeding you with manna, with which neither you nor your ancestors
were acquainted, in order to make you understand that one does not
live by bread alone, but by every word that comes from the mouth of
the LORD. 4 The clothes on your back did not wear out and your feet
did not swell these forty years. 5 Know then in your heart that as a

369

DEUTERONOMY 370

parent disciplines a child so the LORD your God disciplines you. 6
Therefore keep the commandments of the LORD your God, by walking
in his ways and by fearing him. 7 For the LORD your God is bringing you
into a good land, a land with flowing streams, with springs and
underground waters welling up in valleys and hills, 8 a land of wheat
and barley, of vines and fig trees and pomegranates, a land of olive
trees and honey, 9 a land where you may eat bread without scarcity,
where you will lack nothing, a land whose stones are iron and from
whose hills you may mine copper. 10 You shall eat your fill and bless
the LORD your God for the good land that he has given you.
The peril of prosperity
11 Take care that you do not forget the LORD your God, by failing to
keep his commandments, his ordinances, and his statutes, which I am
commanding you today. 12 When you have eaten your fill and have
built fine houses and live in them, 13 and when your herds and flocks
have multiplied, and your silver and gold is multiplied, and all that you
have is multiplied, 14 then do not exalt yourself, forgetting the LORD
your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house
of slavery, 15 who led you through the great and terrible wilderness, an
arid wasteland with poisonous snakes and scorpions. He made water
flow for you from flint rock, 16 and fed you in the wilderness with
manna that your ancestors did not know, to humble you and to test
you, and in the end to do you good. 17 Do not say to yourself, "My
power and the might of my own hand have gotten me this wealth." 18
But remember the LORD your God, for it is he who gives you power to
get wealth, so that he may confirm his covenant that he swore to your
ancestors, as he is doing today. 19 If you do forget the LORD your God
and follow other gods to serve and worship them, I solemnly warn you
today that you shall surely perish. 20 Like the nations that the LORD is
destroying before you, so shall you perish, because you would not obey
the voice of the LORD your God.

370

DEUTERONOMY 371

[Deuteronomy 9]
The already broken and renewed covenant
1 Hear, O Israel! You are about to cross the Jordan today, to go in and
dispossess nations larger and mightier than you, great cities, fortified
to the heavens, 2 a strong and tall people, the offspring of the Anakim,
whom you know. You have heard it said of them, "Who can stand up
to the Anakim?" 3 Know then today that the LORD your God is the one
who crosses over before you as a devouring fire; he will defeat them
and subdue them before you, so that you may dispossess and destroy
them quickly, as the LORD has promised you.
4 When the LORD your God thrusts them out before you, do not say to
yourself, "It is because of my righteousness that the LORD has brought
me in to occupy this land"; it is rather because of the wickedness of
these nations that the LORD is dispossessing them before you. 5 It is not
because of your righteousness or the uprightness of your heart that
you are going in to occupy their land; but because of the wickedness of
these nations the LORD your God is dispossessing them before you, in
order to fulfill the promise that the LORD made on oath to your
ancestors, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.
6 Know, then, that the LORD your God is not giving you this good land
to occupy because of your righteousness; for you are a stubborn
people. 7 Remember and do not forget how you provoked the LORD
your God to wrath in the wilderness; you have been rebellious against
the LORD from the day you came out of the land of Egypt until you
came to this place.
8 Even at Horeb you provoked the LORD to wrath, and the LORD was so
angry with you that he was ready to destroy you. 9 When I went up the
mountain to receive the stone tablets, the tablets of the covenant that
the LORD made with you, I remained on the mountain forty days and
forty nights; I neither ate bread nor drank water. 10 And the LORD gave
me the two stone tablets written with the finger of God; on them were
all the words that the LORD had spoken to you at the mountain out of
the fire on the day of the assembly. 11 At the end of forty days and
forty nights the LORD gave me the two stone tablets, the tablets of the

371

DEUTERONOMY 372

covenant. 12 Then the LORD said to me, "Get up, go down quickly from
here, for your people whom you have brought from Egypt have acted
corruptly. They have been quick to turn from the way that I
commanded them; they have cast an image for themselves." 13
Furthermore the LORD said to me, "I have seen that this people is
indeed a stubborn people. 14 Let me alone that I may destroy them and
blot out their name from under heaven; and I will make of you a
nation mightier and more numerous than they."
15 So I turned and went down from the mountain, while the mountain
was ablaze; the two tablets of the covenant were in my two hands. 16
Then I saw that you had indeed sinned against the LORD your God, by
casting for yourselves an image of a calf; you had been quick to turn
from the way that the LORD had commanded you. 17 So I took hold of
the two tablets and flung them from my two hands, smashing them
before your eyes. 18 Then I lay prostrate before the LORD as before,
forty days and forty nights; I neither ate bread nor drank water,
because of all the sin you had committed, provoking the LORD by doing
what was evil in his sight. 19 For I was afraid that the anger that the
LORD bore against you was so fierce that he would destroy you. But the
LORD listened to me that time also. 20 The LORD was so angry with
Aaron that he was ready to destroy him, but I interceded also on
behalf of Aaron at that same time. 21 Then I took the sinful thing you
had made, the calf, and burned it with fire and crushed it, grinding it
thoroughly, until it was reduced to dust; and I threw the dust of it into
the stream that runs down the mountain.
22 At Taberah also, and at Massah, and at Kibroth-hattaavah, you
provoked the LORD to wrath. 23 And when the LORD sent you from
Kadesh-barnea, saying, "Go up and occupy the land that I have given
you," you rebelled against the command of the LORD your God, neither
trusting him nor obeying him. 24 You have been rebellious against the
LORD as long as he has known you.
25 Throughout the forty days and forty nights that I lay prostrate
before the LORD when the LORD intended to destroy you, 26 I prayed to
the LORD and said, "Lord GOD, do not destroy the people who are your
very own possession, whom you redeemed in your greatness, whom

372

DEUTERONOMY 373

you brought out of Egypt with a mighty hand. 27 Remember your
servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; pay no attention to the
stubbornness of this people, their wickedness and their sin, 28
otherwise the land from which you have brought us might say,
'Because the LORD was not able to bring them into the land that he
promised them, and because he hated them, he has brought them out
to let them die in the wilderness.' 29 For they are the people of your
very own possession, whom you brought out by your great power and
by your outstretched arm."
[Deuteronomy 10]
The second ascent to the mountain
1 At that time the LORD said to me, "Carve out two tablets of stone like
the former ones, and come up to me on the mountain, and make an
ark of wood. 2 I will write on the tablets the words that were on the
former tablets, which you smashed, and you shall put them in the ark."
3 So I made an ark of acacia wood, cut two tablets of stone like the
former ones, and went up the mountain with the two tablets in my
hand. 4 Then he wrote on the tablets the same words as before, the
ten commandments that the LORD had spoken to you on the mountain
out of the fire on the day of the assembly; and the LORD gave them to
me. 5 So I turned and came down from the mountain, and put the
tablets in the ark that I had made; and there they are, as the LORD
commanded me.
6 (The Israelites journeyed from Beeroth-bene-jaakan to Moserah.
There Aaron died, and there he was buried; his son Eleazar succeeded
him as priest. 7 From there they journeyed to Gudgodah, and from
Gudgodah to Jotbathah, a land with flowing streams. 8 At that time
the LORD set apart the tribe of Levi to carry the ark of the covenant of
the LORD, to stand before the LORD to minister to him, and to bless in
his name, to this day. 9 Therefore Levi has no allotment or inheritance
with his kindred; the LORD is his inheritance, as the LORD your God
promised him.)

373

DEUTERONOMY 374

10 I stayed on the mountain forty days and forty nights, as I had done
the first time. And once again the LORD listened to me. The LORD was
unwilling to destroy you. 11 The LORD said to me, "Get up, go on your
journey at the head of the people, that they may go in and occupy the
land that I swore to their ancestors to give them."
Obedience as a condition for prosperity in the land
12 So now, O Israel, what does the LORD your God require of you? Only
to fear the LORD your God, to walk in all his ways, to love him, to serve
the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul, 13 and to
keep the commandments of the LORD your God and his decrees that I
am commanding you today, for your own well-being. 14 Although
heaven and the heaven of heavens belong to the LORD your God, the
earth with all that is in it, 15 yet the LORD set his heart in love on your
ancestors alone and chose you, their descendants after them, out of all
the peoples, as it is today. 16 Circumcise, then, the foreskin of your
heart, and do not be stubborn any longer. 17 For the LORD your God is
God of gods and Lord of lords, the great God, mighty and awesome,
who is not partial and takes no bribe, 18 who executes justice for the
orphan and the widow, and who loves the strangers, providing them
food and clothing. 19 You shall also love the stranger, for you were
strangers in the land of Egypt. 20 You shall fear the LORD your God; him
alone you shall worship; to him you shall hold fast, and by his name
you shall swear. 21 He is your praise; he is your God, who has done for
you these great and awesome things that your own eyes have seen. 22
Your ancestors went down to Egypt seventy persons; and now the LORD
your God has made you as numerous as the stars in heaven.
[Deuteronomy 11]
Loyalty to the covenant provides the condition for life in Canaan
1 You shall love the LORD your God, therefore, and keep his charge, his
decrees, his ordinances, and his commandments always. 2 Remember
today that it was not your children (who have not known or seen the
discipline of the LORD your God), but it is you who must acknowledge
his greatness, his mighty hand and his outstretched arm, 3 his signs and
his deeds that he did in Egypt to Pharaoh, the king of Egypt, and to all

374

DEUTERONOMY 375

his land; 4 what he did to the Egyptian army, to their horses and
chariots, how he made the water of the Red Sea flow over them as
they pursued you, so that the LORD has destroyed them to this day; 5
what he did to you in the wilderness, until you came to this place; 6
and what he did to Dathan and Abiram, sons of Eliab son of Reuben,
how in the midst of all Israel the earth opened its mouth and
swallowed them up, along with their households, their tents, and every
living being in their company; 7 for it is your own eyes that have seen
every great deed that the LORD did.
8 Keep, then, this entire commandment that I am commanding you
today, so that you may have strength to go in and occupy the land that
you are crossing over to occupy, 9 and so that you may live long in the
land that the LORD swore to your ancestors to give them and to their
descendants, a land flowing with milk and honey. 10 For the land that
you are about to enter to occupy is not like the land of Egypt, from
which you have come, where you sow your seed and irrigate by foot
like a vegetable garden. 11 But the land that you are crossing over to
occupy is a land of hills and valleys, watered by rain from the sky, 12 a
land that the LORD your God looks after. The eyes of the LORD your God
are always on it, from the beginning of the year to the end of the year.
13 If you will only heed his every commandment that I am commanding
you today — loving the LORD your God, and serving him with all your
heart and with all your soul — 14 then he will give the rain for your
land in its season, the early rain and the later rain, and you will gather
in your grain, your wine, and your oil; 15 and he will give grass in your
fields for your livestock, and you will eat your fill. 16 Take care, or you
will be seduced into turning away, serving other gods and worshiping
them, 17 for then the anger of the LORD will be kindled against you and
he will shut up the heavens, so that there will be no rain and the land
will yield no fruit; then you will perish quickly off the good land that
the LORD is giving you.
18 You shall put these words of mine in your heart and soul, and you
shall bind them as a sign on your hand, and fix them as an emblem on
your forehead. 19 Teach them to your children, talking about them
when you are at home and when you are away, when you lie down

375

DEUTERONOMY 376

and when you rise. 20 Write them on the doorposts of your house and
on your gates, 21 so that your days and the days of your children may
be multiplied in the land that the LORD swore to your ancestors to give
them, as long as the heavens are above the earth.
22 If you will diligently observe this entire commandment that I am
commanding you, loving the LORD your God, walking in all his ways,
and holding fast to him, 23 then the LORD will drive out all these
nations before you, and you will dispossess nations larger and mightier
than yourselves. 24 Every place on which you set foot shall be yours;
your territory shall extend from the wilderness to the Lebanon and
from the River, the river Euphrates, to the Western Sea. 25 No one will
be able to stand against you; the LORD your God will put the fear and
dread of you on all the land on which you set foot, as he promised you.
26 See, I am setting before you today a blessing and a curse: 27 the
blessing, if you obey the commandments of the LORD your God that I
am commanding you today; 28 and the curse, if you do not obey the
commandments of the LORD your God, but turn from the way that I am
commanding you today, to follow other gods that you have not
known.
29 When the LORD your God has brought you into the land that you are
entering to occupy, you shall set the blessing on Mount Gerizim and
the curse on Mount Ebal. 30 As you know, they are beyond the Jordan,
some distance to the west, in the land of the Canaanites who live in
the Arabah, opposite Gilgal, beside the oak of Moreh.
31 When you cross the Jordan to go in to occupy the land that the LORD
your God is giving you, and when you occupy it and live in it, 32 you
must diligently observe all the statutes and ordinances that I am setting
before you today.

376

DEUTERONOMY 377

[Deuteronomy 12]
The legal corpus, Deuteronomy's transformation of Israelite religion;
centralization of worship
1 These are the statutes and ordinances that you must diligently
observe in the land that the LORD, the God of your ancestors, has given
you to occupy all the days that you live on the earth.
2 You must demolish completely all the places where the nations
whom you are about to dispossess served their gods, on the mountain
heights, on the hills, and under every leafy tree. 3 Break down their
altars, smash their pillars, burn their sacred poles with fire, and hew
down the idols of their gods, and thus blot out their name from their
places. 4 You shall not worship the LORD your God in such ways. 5 But
you shall seek the place that the LORD your God will choose out of all
your tribes as his habitation to put his name there. You shall go there,
6 bringing there your burnt offerings and your sacrifices, your tithes
and your donations, your votive gifts, your freewill offerings, and the
firstlings of your herds and flocks. 7 And you shall eat there in the
presence of the LORD your God, you and your households together,
rejoicing in all the undertakings in which the LORD your God has
blessed you.
8 You shall not act as we are acting here today, all of us according to
our own desires, 9 for you have not yet come into the rest and the
possession that the LORD your God is giving you. 10 When you cross
over the Jordan and live in the land that the LORD your God is allotting
to you, and when he gives you rest from your enemies all around so
that you live in safety, 11 then you shall bring everything that I
command you to the place that the LORD your God will choose as a
dwelling for his name: your burnt offerings and your sacrifices, your
tithes and your donations, and all your choice votive gifts that you vow
to the LORD. 12 And you shall rejoice before the LORD your God, you
together with your sons and your daughters, your male and female
slaves, and the Levites who reside in your towns (since they have no
allotment or inheritance with you).

377

DEUTERONOMY 378

13 Take care that you do not offer your burnt offerings at any place
you happen to see. 14 But only at the place that the LORD will choose in
one of your tribes — there you shall offer your burnt offerings and
there you shall do everything I command you.
15 Yet whenever you desire you may slaughter and eat meat within any
of your towns, according to the blessing that the LORD your God has
given you; the unclean and the clean may eat of it, as they would of
gazelle or deer. 16 The blood, however, you must not eat; you shall
pour it out on the ground like water. 17 Nor may you eat within your
towns the tithe of your grain, your wine, and your oil, the firstlings of
your herds and your flocks, any of your votive gifts that you vow, your
freewill offerings, or your donations; 18 these you shall eat in the
presence of the LORD your God at the place that the LORD your God will
choose, you together with your son and your daughter, your male and
female slaves, and the Levites resident in your towns, rejoicing in the
presence of the LORD your God in all your undertakings. 19 Take care
that you do not neglect the Levite as long as you live in your land.
20 When the LORD your God enlarges your territory, as he has promised
you, and you say, "I am going to eat some meat," because you wish to
eat meat, you may eat meat whenever you have the desire. 21 If the
place where the LORD your God will choose to put his name is too far
from you, and you slaughter as I have commanded you any of your
herd or flock that the LORD has given you, then you may eat within
your towns whenever you desire. 22 Indeed, just as gazelle or deer is
eaten, so you may eat it; the unclean and the clean alike may eat it. 23
Only be sure that you do not eat the blood; for the blood is the life,
and you shall not eat the life with the meat. 24 Do not eat it; you shall
pour it out on the ground like water. 25 Do not eat it, so that all may
go well with you and your children after you, because you do what is
right in the sight of the LORD. 26 But the sacred donations that are due
from you, and your votive gifts, you shall bring to the place that the
LORD will choose. 27 You shall present your burnt offerings, both the
meat and the blood, on the altar of the LORD your God; the blood of
your other sacrifices shall be poured out beside the altar of the LORD
your God, but the meat you may eat.

378

DEUTERONOMY 379

28 Be careful to obey all these words that I command you today, so
that it may go well with you and with your children after you forever,
because you will be doing what is good and right in the sight of the
LORD your God.
29 When the LORD your God has cut off before you the nations whom
you are about to enter to dispossess them, when you have dispossessed
them and live in their land, 30 take care that you are not snared into
imitating them, after they have been destroyed before you: do not
inquire concerning their gods, saying, "How did these nations worship
their gods? I also want to do the same." 31 You must not do the same
for the LORD your God, because every abhorrent thing that the LORD
hates they have done for their gods. They would even burn their sons
and their daughters in the fire to their gods. 32 You must diligently
observe everything that I command you; do not add to it or take
anything from it.
[Deuteronomy 13]
Unconditional loyalty to God
1 If prophets or those who divine by dreams appear among you and
promise you omens or portents, 2 and the omens or the portents
declared by them take place, and they say, "Let us follow other gods"
(whom you have not known) "and let us serve them," 3 you must not
heed the words of those prophets or those who divine by dreams; for
the LORD your God is testing you, to know whether you indeed love the
LORD your God with all your heart and soul. 4 The LORD your God you
shall follow, him alone you shall fear, his commandments you shall
keep, his voice you shall obey, him you shall serve, and to him you shall
hold fast. 5 But those prophets or those who divine by dreams shall be
put to death for having spoken treason against the LORD your God —
who brought you out of the land of Egypt and redeemed you from the
house of slavery — to turn you from the way in which the LORD your
God commanded you to walk. So you shall purge the evil from your
midst.

379

DEUTERONOMY 380

6 If anyone secretly entices you — even if it is your brother, your
father's son or your mother's son, or your own son or daughter, or the
wife you embrace, or your most intimate friend — saying, "Let us go
worship other gods," whom neither you nor your ancestors have
known, 7 any of the gods of the peoples that are around you, whether
near you or far away from you, from one end of the earth to the other,
8 you must not yield to or heed any such persons. Show them no pity
or compassion and do not shield them. 9 But you shall surely kill them;
your own hand shall be first against them to execute them, and
afterwards the hand of all the people. 10 Stone them to death for
trying to turn you away from the LORD your God, who brought you out
of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery. 11 Then all Israel shall
hear and be afraid, and never again do any such wickedness.
12 If you hear it said about one of the towns that the LORD your God is
giving you to live in, 13 that scoundrels from among you have gone out
and led the inhabitants of the town astray, saying, "Let us go and
worship other gods," whom you have not known, 14 then you shall
inquire and make a thorough investigation. If the charge is established
that such an abhorrent thing has been done among you, 15 you shall
put the inhabitants of that town to the sword, utterly destroying it and
everything in it — even putting its livestock to the sword. 16 All of its
spoil you shall gather into its public square; then burn the town and all
its spoil with fire, as a whole burnt offering to the LORD your God. It
shall remain a perpetual ruin, never to be rebuilt. 17 Do not let
anything devoted to destruction stick to your hand, so that the LORD
may turn from his fierce anger and show you compassion, and in his
compassion multiply you, as he swore to your ancestors, 18 if you obey
the voice of the LORD your God by keeping all his commandments that I
am commanding you today, doing what is right in the sight of the LORD
your God.

380

DEUTERONOMY 381

[Deuteronomy 14]
The obligations of holiness
1 You are children of the LORD your God. You must not lacerate
yourselves or shave your forelocks for the dead. 2 For you are a people
holy to the LORD your God; it is you the LORD has chosen out of all the
peoples on earth to be his people, his treasured possession.
3 You shall not eat any abhorrent thing. 4 These are the animals you
may eat: the ox, the sheep, the goat, 5 the deer, the gazelle, the
roebuck, the wild goat, the ibex, the antelope, and the mountainsheep. 6 Any animal that divides the hoof and has the hoof cleft in
two, and chews the cud, among the animals, you may eat. 7 Yet of
those that chew the cud or have the hoof cleft you shall not eat these:
the camel, the hare, and the rock badger, because they chew the cud
but do not divide the hoof; they are unclean for you. 8 And the pig,
because it divides the hoof but does not chew the cud, is unclean for
you. You shall not eat their meat, and you shall not touch their
carcasses.
9 Of all that live in water you may eat these: whatever has fins and
scales you may eat. 10 And whatever does not have fins and scales you
shall not eat; it is unclean for you.
11 You may eat any clean birds. 12 But these are the ones that you shall
not eat: the eagle, the vulture, the osprey, 13 the buzzard, the kite of
any kind; 14 every raven of any kind; 15 the ostrich, the nighthawk, the
sea gull, the hawk of any kind; 16 the little owl and the great owl, the
water hen 17 and the desert owl, the carrion vulture and the
cormorant, 18 the stork, the heron of any kind; the hoopoe and the
bat. 19 And all winged insects are unclean for you; they shall not be
eaten. 20 You may eat any clean winged creature.
21 You shall not eat anything that dies of itself; you may give it to
aliens residing in your towns for them to eat, or you may sell it to a
foreigner. For you are a people holy to the LORD your God.
You shall not boil a kid in its mother's milk.

381

DEUTERONOMY 382

22 Set apart a tithe of all the yield of your seed that is brought in yearly
from the field. 23 In the presence of the LORD your God, in the place
that he will choose as a dwelling for his name, you shall eat the tithe of
your grain, your wine, and your oil, as well as the firstlings of your herd
and flock, so that you may learn to fear the LORD your God always. 24
But if, when the LORD your God has blessed you, the distance is so great
that you are unable to transport it, because the place where the LORD
your God will choose to set his name is too far away from you, 25 then
you may turn it into money. With the money secure in hand, go to the
place that the LORD your God will choose; 26 spend the money for
whatever you wish — oxen, sheep, wine, strong drink, or whatever you
desire. And you shall eat there in the presence of the LORD your God,
you and your household rejoicing together. 27 As for the Levites
resident in your towns, do not neglect them, because they have no
allotment or inheritance with you.
28 Every third year you shall bring out the full tithe of your produce for
that year, and store it within your towns; 29 the Levites, because they
have no allotment or inheritance with you, as well as the resident
aliens, the orphans, and the widows in your towns, may come and eat
their fill so that the LORD your God may bless you in all the work that
you undertake.
[Deuteronomy 15]
Remission of debts and manumission of slaves
1 Every seventh year you shall grant a remission of debts. 2 And this is
the manner of the remission: every creditor shall remit the claim that is
held against a neighbor, not exacting it of a neighbor who is a member
of the community, because the LORD's remission has been proclaimed. 3
Of a foreigner you may exact it, but you must remit your claim on
whatever any member of your community owes you. 4 There will,
however, be no one in need among you, because the LORD is sure to
bless you in the land that the LORD your God is giving you as a
possession to occupy, 5 if only you will obey the LORD your God by
diligently observing this entire commandment that I command you
today. 6 When the LORD your God has blessed you, as he promised you,

382

DEUTERONOMY 383

you will lend to many nations, but you will not borrow; you will rule
over many nations, but they will not rule over you.
An appeal to conscience
7 If there is among you anyone in need, a member of your community
in any of your towns within the land that the LORD your God is giving
you, do not be hard-hearted or tight-fisted toward your needy
neighbor. 8 You should rather open your hand, willingly lending
enough to meet the need, whatever it may be. 9 Be careful that you do
not entertain a mean thought, thinking, "The seventh year, the year of
remission, is near," and therefore view your needy neighbor with
hostility and give nothing; your neighbor might cry to the LORD against
you, and you would incur guilt. 10 Give liberally and be ungrudging
when you do so, for on this account the LORD your God will bless you in
all your work and in all that you undertake. 11 Since there will never
cease to be some in need on the earth, I therefore command you,
"Open your hand to the poor and needy neighbor in your land."
Manumission
12 If a member of your community, whether a Hebrew man or a
Hebrew woman, is sold to you and works for you six years, in the
seventh year you shall set that person free. 13 And when you send a
male slave out from you a free person, you shall not send him out
empty-handed. 14 Provide liberally out of your flock, your threshing
floor, and your wine press, thus giving to him some of the bounty with
which the LORD your God has blessed you. 15 Remember that you were
a slave in the land of Egypt, and the LORD your God redeemed you; for
this reason I lay this command upon you today. 16 But if he says to you,
"I will not go out from you," because he loves you and your household,
since he is well off with you, 17 then you shall take an awl and thrust it
through his earlobe into the door, and he shall be your slave forever.
You shall do the same with regard to your female slave.

383

DEUTERONOMY 384

18 Do not consider it a hardship when you send them out from you
free persons, because for six years they have given you services worth
the wages of hired laborers; and the LORD your God will bless you in all
that you do.
19 Every firstling male born of your herd and flock you shall consecrate
to the LORD your God; you shall not do work with your firstling ox nor
shear the firstling of your flock. 20 You shall eat it, you together with
your household, in the presence of the LORD your God year by year at
the place that the LORD will choose. 21 But if it has any defect — any
serious defect, such as lameness or blindness — you shall not sacrifice it
to the LORD your God; 22 within your towns you may eat it, the unclean
and the clean alike, as you would a gazelle or deer. 23 Its blood,
however, you must not eat; you shall pour it out on the ground like
water.
[Deuteronomy 16]
The festival calendar
1 Observe the month of Abib by keeping the passover to the LORD your
God, for in the month of Abib the LORD your God brought you out of
Egypt by night. 2 You shall offer the passover sacrifice to the LORD your
God, from the flock and the herd, at the place that the LORD will
choose as a dwelling for his name. 3 You must not eat with it anything
leavened. For seven days you shall eat unleavened bread with it — the
bread of affliction — because you came out of the land of Egypt in
great haste, so that all the days of your life you may remember the day
of your departure from the land of Egypt. 4 No leaven shall be seen
with you in all your territory for seven days; and none of the meat of
what you slaughter on the evening of the first day shall remain until
morning. 5 You are not permitted to offer the passover sacrifice within
any of your towns that the LORD your God is giving you. 6 But at the
place that the LORD your God will choose as a dwelling for his name,
only there shall you offer the passover sacrifice, in the evening at
sunset, the time of day when you departed from Egypt. 7 You shall
cook it and eat it at the place that the LORD your God will choose; the
next morning you may go back to your tents. 8 For six days you shall
continue to eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day there shall

384

DEUTERONOMY 385

be a solemn assembly for the LORD your God, when you shall do no
work.
9 You shall count seven weeks; begin to count the seven weeks from
the time the sickle is first put to the standing grain. 10 Then you shall
keep the festival of weeks to the LORD your God, contributing a freewill
offering in proportion to the blessing that you have received from the
LORD your God. 11 Rejoice before the LORD your God — you and your
sons and your daughters, your male and female slaves, the Levites
resident in your towns, as well as the strangers, the orphans, and the
widows who are among you — at the place that the LORD your God will
choose as a dwelling for his name. 12 Remember that you were a slave
in Egypt, and diligently observe these statutes.
13 You shall keep the festival of booths for seven days, when you have
gathered in the produce from your threshing floor and your wine
press. 14 Rejoice during your festival, you and your sons and your
daughters, your male and female slaves, as well as the Levites, the
strangers, the orphans, and the widows resident in your towns. 15
Seven days you shall keep the festival to the LORD your God at the place
that the LORD will choose; for the LORD your God will bless you in all
your produce and in all your undertakings, and you shall surely
celebrate.
16 Three times a year all your males shall appear before the LORD your
God at the place that he will choose: at the festival of unleavened
bread, at the festival of weeks, and at the festival of booths. They shall
not appear before the LORD empty-handed; 17 all shall give as they are
able, according to the blessing of the LORD your God that he has given
you.
Laws of public officials; the organization of justice
18 You shall appoint judges and officials throughout your tribes, in all
your towns that the LORD your God is giving you, and they shall render
just decisions for the people. 19 You must not distort justice; you must
not show partiality; and you must not accept bribes, for a bribe blinds
the eyes of the wise and subverts the cause of those who are in the

385

DEUTERONOMY 386

right. 20 Justice, and only justice, you shall pursue, so that you may live
and occupy the land that the LORD your God is giving you.
Prohibitions against Canaanite cultic objects
21 You shall not plant any tree as a sacred pole beside the altar that
you make for the LORD your God; 22 nor shall you set up a stone pillar
— things that the LORD your God hates.
[Deuteronomy 17]
1 You must not sacrifice to the LORD your God an ox or a sheep that has
a defect, anything seriously wrong; for that is abhorrent to the LORD
your God.
Local justice
2 If there is found among you, in one of your towns that the LORD your
God is giving you, a man or woman who does what is evil in the sight
of the LORD your God, and transgresses his covenant 3 by going to serve
other gods and worshiping them — whether the sun or the moon or
any of the host of heaven, which I have forbidden — 4 and if it is
reported to you or you hear of it, and you make a thorough inquiry,
and the charge is proved true that such an abhorrent thing has
occurred in Israel, 5 then you shall bring out to your gates that man or
that woman who has committed this crime and you shall stone the
man or woman to death. 6 On the evidence of two or three witnesses
the death sentence shall be executed; a person must not be put to
death on the evidence of only one witness. 7 The hands of the
witnesses shall be the first raised against the person to execute the
death penalty, and afterward the hands of all the people. So you shall
purge the evil from your midst.
Justice at the central sanctuary
8 If a judicial decision is too difficult for you to make between one kind
of bloodshed and another, one kind of legal right and another, or one
kind of assault and another — any such matters of dispute in your

386

DEUTERONOMY 387

towns — then you shall immediately go up to the place that the LORD
your God will choose, 9 where you shall consult with the levitical
priests and the judge who is in office in those days; they shall
announce to you the decision in the case. 10 Carry out exactly the
decision that they announce to you from the place that the LORD will
choose, diligently observing everything they instruct you. 11 You must
carry out fully the law that they interpret for you or the ruling that
they announce to you; do not turn aside from the decision that they
announce to you, either to the right or to the left. 12 As for anyone
who presumes to disobey the priest appointed to minister there to the
LORD your God, or the judge, that person shall die. So you shall purge
the evil from Israel. 13 All the people will hear and be afraid, and will
not act presumptuously again.
The law of the king
14 When you have come into the land that the LORD your God is giving
you, and have taken possession of it and settled in it, and you say, "I
will set a king over me, like all the nations that are around me," 15 you
may indeed set over you a king whom the LORD your God will choose.
One of your own community you may set as king over you; you are not
permitted to put a foreigner over you, who is not of your own
community. 16 Even so, he must not acquire many horses for himself, or
return the people to Egypt in order to acquire more horses, since the
LORD has said to you, "You must never return that way again." 17 And
he must not acquire many wives for himself, or else his heart will turn
away; also silver and gold he must not acquire in great quantity for
himself. 18 When he has taken the throne of his kingdom, he shall have
a copy of this law written for him in the presence of the levitical
priests. 19 It shall remain with him and he shall read in it all the days of
his life, so that he may learn to fear the LORD his God, diligently
observing all the words of this law and these statutes, 20 neither
exalting himself above other members of the community nor turning
aside from the commandment, either to the right or to the left, so that
he and his descendants may reign long over his kingdom in Israel.

387

DEUTERONOMY 388

[Deuteronomy 18]
The Levitical priesthood
1 The levitical priests, the whole tribe of Levi, shall have no allotment
or inheritance within Israel. They may eat the sacrifices that are the
LORD's portion 2 but they shall have no inheritance among the other
members of the community; the LORD is their inheritance, as he
promised them.
3 This shall be the priests' due from the people, from those offering a
sacrifice, whether an ox or a sheep: they shall give to the priest the
shoulder, the two jowls, and the stomach. 4 The first fruits of your
grain, your wine, and your oil, as well as the first of the fleece of your
sheep, you shall give him. 5 For the LORD your God has chosen Levi out
of all your tribes, to stand and minister in the name of the LORD, him
and his sons for all time.
6 If a Levite leaves any of your towns, from wherever he has been
residing in Israel, and comes to the place that the LORD will choose (and
he may come whenever he wishes), 7 then he may minister in the name
of the LORD his God, like all his fellow-Levites who stand to minister
there before the LORD. 8 They shall have equal portions to eat, even
though they have income from the sale of family possessions.
The Mosaic prophet
9 When you come into the land that the LORD your God is giving you,
you must not learn to imitate the abhorrent practices of those nations.
10 No one shall be found among you who makes a son or daughter
pass through fire, or who practices divination, or is a soothsayer, or an
augur, or a sorcerer, 11 or one who casts spells, or who consults ghosts
or spirits, or who seeks oracles from the dead. 12 For whoever does
these things is abhorrent to the LORD; it is because of such abhorrent
practices that the LORD your God is driving them out before you. 13 You
must remain completely loyal to the LORD your God. 14 Although these
nations that you are about to dispossess do give heed to soothsayers
and diviners, as for you, the LORD your God does not permit you to do
so.

388

DEUTERONOMY 389

15 The LORD your God will raise up for you a prophet like me from
among your own people; you shall heed such a prophet. 16 This is what
you requested of the LORD your God at Horeb on the day of the
assembly when you said: "If I hear the voice of the LORD my God any
more, or ever again see this great fire, I will die." 17 Then the LORD
replied to me: "They are right in what they have said. 18 I will raise up
for them a prophet like you from among their own people; I will put
my words in the mouth of the prophet, who shall speak to them
everything that I command. 19 Anyone who does not heed the words
that the prophet shall speak in my name, I myself will hold
accountable. 20 But any prophet who speaks in the name of other
gods, or who presumes to speak in my name a word that I have not
commanded the prophet to speak — that prophet shall die." 21 You
may say to yourself, "How can we recognize a word that the LORD has
not spoken?" 22 If a prophet speaks in the name of the LORD but the
thing does not take place or prove true, it is a word that the LORD has
not spoken. The prophet has spoken it presumptuously; do not be
frightened by it.
[Deuteronomy 19]
Cities of refuge
1 When the LORD your God has cut off the nations whose land the LORD
your God is giving you, and you have dispossessed them and settled in
their towns and in their houses, 2 you shall set apart three cities in the
land that the LORD your God is giving you to possess. 3 You shall
calculate the distances and divide into three regions the land that the
LORD your God gives you as a possession, so that any homicide can flee
to one of them.
4 Now this is the case of a homicide who might flee there and live, that
is, someone who has killed another person unintentionally when the
two had not been at enmity before: 5 Suppose someone goes into the
forest with another to cut wood, and when one of them swings the ax
to cut down a tree, the head slips from the handle and strikes the
other person who then dies; the killer may flee to one of these cities
and live. 6 But if the distance is too great, the avenger of blood in hot
anger might pursue and overtake and put the killer to death, although

389

DEUTERONOMY 390

a death sentence was not deserved, since the two had not been at
enmity before. 7 Therefore I command you: You shall set apart three
cities.
8 If the LORD your God enlarges your territory, as he swore to your
ancestors — and he will give you all the land that he promised your
ancestors to give you, 9 provided you diligently observe this entire
commandment that I command you today, by loving the LORD your God
and walking always in his ways — then you shall add three more cities
to these three, 10 so that the blood of an innocent person may not be
shed in the land that the LORD your God is giving you as an inheritance,
thereby bringing bloodguilt upon you.
11 But if someone at enmity with another lies in wait and attacks and
takes the life of that person, and flees into one of these cities, 12 then
the elders of the killer's city shall send to have the culprit taken from
there and handed over to the avenger of blood to be put to death. 13
Show no pity; you shall purge the guilt of innocent blood from Israel,
so that it may go well with you.
14 You must not move your neighbor's boundary marker, set up by
former generations, on the property that will be allotted to you in the
land that the LORD your God is giving you to possess.
The integrity of the judicial system
15 A single witness shall not suffice to convict a person of any crime or
wrongdoing in connection with any offense that may be committed.
Only on the evidence of two or three witnesses shall a charge be
sustained. 16 If a malicious witness comes forward to accuse someone
of wrongdoing, 17 then both parties to the dispute shall appear before
the LORD, before the priests and the judges who are in office in those
days, 18 and the judges shall make a thorough inquiry. If the witness is
a false witness, having testified falsely against another, 19 then you
shall do to the false witness just as the false witness had meant to do
to the other. So you shall purge the evil from your midst. 20 The rest
shall hear and be afraid, and a crime such as this shall never again be

390

DEUTERONOMY 391

committed among you. 21 Show no pity: life for life, eye for eye, tooth
for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.
[Deuteronomy 20]
Rules for waging holy war
1 When you go out to war against your enemies, and see horses and
chariots, an army larger than your own, you shall not be afraid of
them; for the LORD your God is with you, who brought you up from the
land of Egypt. 2 Before you engage in battle, the priest shall come
forward and speak to the troops, 3 and shall say to them: "Hear, O
Israel! Today you are drawing near to do battle against your enemies.
Do not lose heart, or be afraid, or panic, or be in dread of them; 4 for it
is the LORD your God who goes with you, to fight for you against your
enemies, to give you victory." 5 Then the officials shall address the
troops, saying, "Has anyone built a new house but not dedicated it? He
should go back to his house, or he might die in the battle and another
dedicate it. 6 Has anyone planted a vineyard but not yet enjoyed its
fruit? He should go back to his house, or he might die in the battle and
another be first to enjoy its fruit. 7 Has anyone become engaged to a
woman but not yet married her? He should go back to his house, or he
might die in the battle and another marry her." 8 The officials shall
continue to address the troops, saying, "Is anyone afraid or
disheartened? He should go back to his house, or he might cause the
heart of his comrades to melt like his own." 9 When the officials have
finished addressing the troops, then the commanders shall take charge
of them.
10 When you draw near to a town to fight against it, offer it terms of
peace. 11 If it accepts your terms of peace and surrenders to you, then
all the people in it shall serve you at forced labor. 12 If it does not
submit to you peacefully, but makes war against you, then you shall
besiege it; 13 and when the LORD your God gives it into your hand, you
shall put all its males to the sword. 14 You may, however, take as your
booty the women, the children, livestock, and everything else in the
town, all its spoil. You may enjoy the spoil of your enemies, which the
LORD your God has given you. 15 Thus you shall treat all the towns that
are very far from you, which are not towns of the nations here. 16 But

391

DEUTERONOMY 392

as for the towns of these peoples that the LORD your God is giving you
as an inheritance, you must not let anything that breathes remain
alive. 17 You shall annihilate them — the Hittites and the Amorites, the
Canaanites and the Perizzites, the Hivites and the Jebusites — just as
the LORD your God has commanded, 18 so that they may not teach you
to do all the abhorrent things that they do for their gods, and you thus
sin against the LORD your God.
19 If you besiege a town for a long time, making war against it in order
to take it, you must not destroy its trees by wielding an ax against
them. Although you may take food from them, you must not cut them
down. Are trees in the field human beings that they should come
under siege from you? 20 You may destroy only the trees that you
know do not produce food; you may cut them down for use in building
siegeworks against the town that makes war with you, until it falls.
[Deuteronomy 21]
Atonement for an unsolved murder
1 If, in the land that the LORD your God is giving you to possess, a body
is found lying in open country, and it is not known who struck the
person down, 2 then your elders and your judges shall come out to
measure the distances to the towns that are near the body. 3 The
elders of the town nearest the body shall take a heifer that has never
been worked, one that has not pulled in the yoke; 4 the elders of that
town shall bring the heifer down to a wadi with running water, which
is neither plowed nor sown, and shall break the heifer's neck there in
the wadi. 5 Then the priests, the sons of Levi, shall come forward, for
the LORD your God has chosen them to minister to him and to
pronounce blessings in the name of the LORD, and by their decision all
cases of dispute and assault shall be settled. 6 All the elders of that
town nearest the body shall wash their hands over the heifer whose
neck was broken in the wadi, 7 and they shall declare: "Our hands did
not shed this blood, nor were we witnesses to it. 8 Absolve, O LORD,
your people Israel, whom you redeemed; do not let the guilt of
innocent blood remain in the midst of your people Israel." Then they
will be absolved of bloodguilt. 9 So you shall purge the guilt of

392

DEUTERONOMY 393

innocent blood from your midst, because you must do what is right in
the sight of the LORD.
Miscellaneous civil and family laws; legal obligations toward female
captives
10 When you go out to war against your enemies, and the LORD your
God hands them over to you and you take them captive, 11 suppose
you see among the captives a beautiful woman whom you desire and
want to marry, 12 and so you bring her home to your house: she shall
shave her head, pare her nails, 13 discard her captive's garb, and shall
remain in your house a full month, mourning for her father and
mother; after that you may go in to her and be her husband, and she
shall be your wife. 14 But if you are not satisfied with her, you shall let
her go free and not sell her for money. You must not treat her as a
slave, since you have dishonored her.
Legal protection of the less-favored wife
15 If a man has two wives, one of them loved and the other disliked,
and if both the loved and the disliked have borne him sons, the
firstborn being the son of the one who is disliked, 16 then on the day
when he wills his possessions to his sons, he is not permitted to treat
the son of the loved as the firstborn in preference to the son of the
disliked, who is the firstborn. 17 He must acknowledge as firstborn the
son of the one who is disliked, giving him a double portion of all that
he has; since he is the first issue of his virility, the right of the firstborn
is his.
The rebellious son
18 If someone has a stubborn and rebellious son who will not obey his
father and mother, who does not heed them when they discipline him,
19 then his father and his mother shall take hold of him and bring him
out to the elders of his town at the gate of that place. 20 They shall say
to the elders of his town, "This son of ours is stubborn and rebellious.
He will not obey us. He is a glutton and a drunkard." 21 Then all the

393

DEUTERONOMY 394

men of the town shall stone him to death. So you shall purge the evil
from your midst; and all Israel will hear, and be afraid.
Treatment of the executed
22 When someone is convicted of a crime punishable by death and is
executed, and you hang him on a tree, 23 his corpse must not remain
all night upon the tree; you shall bury him that same day, for anyone
hung on a tree is under God's curse. You must not defile the land that
the LORD your God is giving you for possession.
[Deuteronomy 22]
Various moral and religious responsibilities of citizenship; moral duties
toward the neighbor
1 You shall not watch your neighbor's ox or sheep straying away and
ignore them; you shall take them back to their owner. 2 If the owner
does not reside near you or you do not know who the owner is, you
shall bring it to your own house, and it shall remain with you until the
owner claims it; then you shall return it. 3 You shall do the same with a
neighbor's donkey; you shall do the same with a neighbor's garment;
and you shall do the same with anything else that your neighbor loses
and you find. You may not withhold your help.
4 You shall not see your neighbor's donkey or ox fallen on the road
and ignore it; you shall help to lift it up.
Miscellaneous laws
5 A woman shall not wear a man's apparel, nor shall a man put on a
woman's garment; for whoever does such things is abhorrent to the
LORD your God.
6 If you come on a bird's nest, in any tree or on the ground, with
fledglings or eggs, with the mother sitting on the fledglings or on the
eggs, you shall not take the mother with the young. 7 Let the mother
go, taking only the young for yourself, in order that it may go well
with you and you may live long.

394

DEUTERONOMY 395

8 When you build a new house, you shall make a parapet for your roof;
otherwise you might have bloodguilt on your house, if anyone should
fall from it.
9 You shall not sow your vineyard with a second kind of seed, or the
whole yield will have to be forfeited, both the crop that you have sown
and the yield of the vineyard itself.
10 You shall not plow with an ox and a donkey yoked together.
11 You shall not wear clothes made of wool and linen woven together.
12 You shall make tassels on the four corners of the cloak with which
you cover yourself.
Violations of marriage law; false accusation of breach of marital
contract
13 Suppose a man marries a woman, but after going in to her, he
dislikes her 14 and makes up charges against her, slandering her by
saying, "I married this woman; but when I lay with her, I did not find
evidence of her virginity." 15 The father of the young woman and her
mother shall then submit the evidence of the young woman's virginity
to the elders of the city at the gate. 16 The father of the young woman
shall say to the elders: "I gave my daughter in marriage to this man but
he dislikes her; 17 now he has made up charges against her, saying, 'I
did not find evidence of your daughter's virginity.' But here is the
evidence of my daughter's virginity." Then they shall spread out the
cloth before the elders of the town. 18 The elders of that town shall
take the man and punish him; 19 they shall fine him one hundred
shekels of silver (which they shall give to the young woman's father)
because he has slandered a virgin of Israel. She shall remain his wife; he
shall not be permitted to divorce her as long as he lives.
20 If, however, this charge is true, that evidence of the young woman's
virginity was not found, 21 then they shall bring the young woman out
to the entrance of her father's house and the men of her town shall
stone her to death, because she committed a disgraceful act in Israel by

395

DEUTERONOMY 396

prostituting herself in her father's house. So you shall purge the evil
from your midst.
Adultery and rape
22 If a man is caught lying with the wife of another man, both of them
shall die, the man who lay with the woman as well as the woman. So
you shall purge the evil from Israel.
23 If there is a young woman, a virgin already engaged to be married,
and a man meets her in the town and lies with her, 24 you shall bring
both of them to the gate of that town and stone them to death, the
young woman because she did not cry for help in the town and the
man because he violated his neighbor's wife. So you shall purge the
evil from your midst.
25 But if the man meets the engaged woman in the open country, and
the man seizes her and lies with her, then only the man who lay with
her shall die. 26 You shall do nothing to the young woman; the young
woman has not committed an offense punishable by death, because
this case is like that of someone who attacks and murders a neighbor.
27 Since he found her in the open country, the engaged woman may
have cried for help, but there was no one to rescue her.
28 If a man meets a virgin who is not engaged, and seizes her and lies
with her, and they are caught in the act, 29 the man who lay with her
shall give fifty shekels of silver to the young woman's father, and she
shall become his wife. Because he violated her he shall not be
permitted to divorce her as long as he lives.
30 A man shall not marry his father's wife, thereby violating his father's
rights.
[Deuteronomy 23]
Restrictions on access to Israel's assembly
1 No one whose testicles are crushed or whose penis is cut off shall be
admitted to the assembly of the LORD.

396

DEUTERONOMY 397

2 Those born of an illicit union shall not be admitted to the assembly of
the LORD. Even to the tenth generation, none of their descendants shall
be admitted to the assembly of the LORD.
3 No Ammonite or Moabite shall be admitted to the assembly of the
LORD. Even to the tenth generation, none of their descendants shall be
admitted to the assembly of the LORD, 4 because they did not meet you
with food and water on your journey out of Egypt, and because they
hired against you Balaam son of Beor, from Pethor of Mesopotamia, to
curse you. 5 (Yet the LORD your God refused to heed Balaam; the LORD
your God turned the curse into a blessing for you, because the LORD
your God loved you.) 6 You shall never promote their welfare or their
prosperity as long as you live.
7 You shall not abhor any of the Edomites, for they are your kin. You
shall not abhor any of the Egyptians, because you were an alien
residing in their land. 8 The children of the third generation that are
born to them may be admitted to the assembly of the LORD.
Special rules for the military camp
9 When you are encamped against your enemies you shall guard
against any impropriety.
10 If one of you becomes unclean because of a nocturnal emission, then
he shall go outside the camp; he must not come within the camp. 11
When evening comes, he shall wash himself with water, and when the
sun has set, he may come back into the camp.
12 You shall have a designated area outside the camp to which you
shall go. 13 With your utensils you shall have a trowel; when you relieve
yourself outside, you shall dig a hole with it and then cover up your
excrement. 14 Because the LORD your God travels along with your camp,
to save you and to hand over your enemies to you, therefore your
camp must be holy, so that he may not see anything indecent among
you and turn away from you.

397

DEUTERONOMY 398

The heightened moral responsibilities of the covenant community;
prohibition of the return of escaped slaves
15 Slaves who have escaped to you from their owners shall not be given
back to them. 16 They shall reside with you, in your midst, in any place
they choose in any one of your towns, wherever they please; you shall
not oppress them.
Restrictions on prostitution
17 None of the daughters of Israel shall be a temple prostitute; none of
the sons of Israel shall be a temple prostitute. 18 You shall not bring
the fee of a prostitute or the wages of a male prostitute into the house
of the LORD your God in payment for any vow, for both of these are
abhorrent to the LORD your God.
Financial ethics, vows, gathering by the needy
19 You shall not charge interest on loans to another Israelite, interest
on money, interest on provisions, interest on anything that is lent. 20
On loans to a foreigner you may charge interest, but on loans to
another Israelite you may not charge interest, so that the LORD your
God may bless you in all your undertakings in the land that you are
about to enter and possess.
21 If you make a vow to the LORD your God, do not postpone fulfilling
it; for the LORD your God will surely require it of you, and you would
incur guilt. 22 But if you refrain from vowing, you will not incur guilt.
23 Whatever your lips utter you must diligently perform, just as you
have freely vowed to the LORD your God with your own mouth.
24 If you go into your neighbor's vineyard, you may eat your fill of
grapes, as many as you wish, but you shall not put any in a container.
25 If you go into your neighbor's standing grain, you may pluck the
ears with your hand, but you shall not put a sickle to your neighbor's
standing grain.

398

DEUTERONOMY 399

[Deuteronomy 24]
Laws promoting social harmony
1 Suppose a man enters into marriage with a woman, but she does not
please him because he finds something objectionable about her, and so
he writes her a certificate of divorce, puts it in her hand, and sends her
out of his house; she then leaves his house 2 and goes off to become
another man's wife. 3 Then suppose the second man dislikes her, writes
her a bill of divorce, puts it in her hand, and sends her out of his house
(or the second man who married her dies); 4 her first husband, who
sent her away, is not permitted to take her again to be his wife after
she has been defiled; for that would be abhorrent to the LORD, and you
shall not bring guilt on the land that the LORD your God is giving you as
a possession.
5 When a man is newly married, he shall not go out with the army or
be charged with any related duty. He shall be free at home one year,
to be happy with the wife whom he has married.
6 No one shall take a mill or an upper millstone in pledge, for that
would be taking a life in pledge.
7 If someone is caught kidnapping another Israelite, enslaving or
selling the Israelite, then that kidnaper shall die. So you shall purge the
evil from your midst.
8 Guard against an outbreak of a leprous skin disease by being very
careful; you shall carefully observe whatever the levitical priests
instruct you, just as I have commanded them. 9 Remember what the
LORD your God did to Miriam on your journey out of Egypt.
10 When you make your neighbor a loan of any kind, you shall not go
into the house to take the pledge. 11 You shall wait outside, while the
person to whom you are making the loan brings the pledge out to you.
12 If the person is poor, you shall not sleep in the garment given you as
the pledge. 13 You shall give the pledge back by sunset, so that your
neighbor may sleep in the cloak and bless you; and it will be to your
credit before the LORD your God.

399

DEUTERONOMY 400

14 You shall not withhold the wages of poor and needy laborers,
whether other Israelites or aliens who reside in your land in one of
your towns. 15 You shall pay them their wages daily before sunset,
because they are poor and their livelihood depends on them; otherwise
they might cry to the LORD against you, and you would incur guilt.
16 Parents shall not be put to death for their children, nor shall children
be put to death for their parents; only for their own crimes may
persons be put to death.
17 You shall not deprive a resident alien or an orphan of justice; you
shall not take a widow's garment in pledge. 18 Remember that you
were a slave in Egypt and the LORD your God redeemed you from there;
therefore I command you to do this.
19 When you reap your harvest in your field and forget a sheaf in the
field, you shall not go back to get it; it shall be left for the alien, the
orphan, and the widow, so that the LORD your God may bless you in all
your undertakings. 20 When you beat your olive trees, do not strip
what is left; it shall be for the alien, the orphan, and the widow.
21 When you gather the grapes of your vineyard, do not glean what is
left; it shall be for the alien, the orphan, and the widow. 22 Remember
that you were a slave in the land of Egypt; therefore I am commanding
you to do this.
[Deuteronomy 25]
Laws promoting social harmony
1 Suppose two persons have a dispute and enter into litigation, and the
judges decide between them, declaring one to be in the right and the
other to be in the wrong. 2 If the one in the wrong deserves to be
flogged, the judge shall make that person lie down and be beaten in
his presence with the number of lashes proportionate to the offense. 3
Forty lashes may be given but not more; if more lashes than these are
given, your neighbor will be degraded in your sight.
4 You shall not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain.

400

DEUTERONOMY 401

5 When brothers reside together, and one of them dies and has no son,
the wife of the deceased shall not be married outside the family to a
stranger. Her husband's brother shall go in to her, taking her in
marriage, and performing the duty of a husband's brother to her, 6
and the firstborn whom she bears shall succeed to the name of the
deceased brother, so that his name may not be blotted out of Israel. 7
But if the man has no desire to marry his brother's widow, then his
brother's widow shall go up to the elders at the gate and say, "My
husband's brother refuses to perpetuate his brother's name in Israel; he
will not perform the duty of a husband's brother to me." 8 Then the
elders of his town shall summon him and speak to him. If he persists,
saying, "I have no desire to marry her," 9 then his brother's wife shall
go up to him in the presence of the elders, pull his sandal off his foot,
spit in his face, and declare, "This is what is done to the man who does
not build up his brother's house." 10 Throughout Israel his family shall
be known as "the house of him whose sandal was pulled off."
11 If men get into a fight with one another, and the wife of one
intervenes to rescue her husband from the grip of his opponent by
reaching out and seizing his genitals, 12 you shall cut off her hand;
show no pity.
13 You shall not have in your bag two kinds of weights, large and
small. 14 You shall not have in your house two kinds of measures, large
and small. 15 You shall have only a full and honest weight; you shall
have only a full and honest measure, so that your days may be long in
the land that the LORD your God is giving you. 16 For all who do such
things, all who act dishonestly, are abhorrent to the LORD your God.
17 Remember what Amalek did to you on your journey out of Egypt, 18
how he attacked you on the way, when you were faint and weary, and
struck down all who lagged behind you; he did not fear God. 19
Therefore when the LORD your God has given you rest from all your
enemies on every hand, in the land that the LORD your God is giving
you as an inheritance to possess, you shall blot out the remembrance of
Amalek from under heaven; do not forget.

401

DEUTERONOMY 402

[Deuteronomy 26]
Concluding liturgies
1 When you have come into the land that the LORD your God is giving
you as an inheritance to possess, and you possess it, and settle in it, 2
you shall take some of the first of all the fruit of the ground, which you
harvest from the land that the LORD your God is giving you, and you
shall put it in a basket and go to the place that the LORD your God will
choose as a dwelling for his name. 3 You shall go to the priest who is in
office at that time, and say to him, "Today I declare to the LORD your
God that I have come into the land that the LORD swore to our
ancestors to give us." 4 When the priest takes the basket from your
hand and sets it down before the altar of the LORD your God, 5 you
shall make this response before the LORD your God: "A wandering
Aramean was my ancestor; he went down into Egypt and lived there as
an alien, few in number, and there he became a great nation, mighty
and populous. 6 When the Egyptians treated us harshly and afflicted
us, by imposing hard labor on us, 7 we cried to the LORD, the God of
our ancestors; the LORD heard our voice and saw our affliction, our toil,
and our oppression. 8 The LORD brought us out of Egypt with a mighty
hand and an outstretched arm, with a terrifying display of power, and
with signs and wonders; 9 and he brought us into this place and gave
us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey. 10 So now I bring the
first of the fruit of the ground that you, O LORD, have given me." You
shall set it down before the LORD your God and bow down before the
LORD your God. 11 Then you, together with the Levites and the aliens
who reside among you, shall celebrate with all the bounty that the
LORD your God has given to you and to your house.
12 When you have finished paying all the tithe of your produce in the
third year (which is the year of the tithe), giving it to the Levites, the
aliens, the orphans, and the widows, so that they may eat their fill
within your towns, 13 then you shall say before the LORD your God: "I
have removed the sacred portion from the house, and I have given it to
the Levites, the resident aliens, the orphans, and the widows, in
accordance with your entire commandment that you commanded me; I
have neither transgressed nor forgotten any of your commandments:
14 I have not eaten of it while in mourning; I have not removed any of

402

DEUTERONOMY 403

it while I was unclean; and I have not offered any of it to the dead. I
have obeyed the LORD my God, doing just as you commanded me. 15
Look down from your holy habitation, from heaven, and bless your
people Israel and the ground that you have given us, as you swore to
our ancestors — a land flowing with milk and honey."
16 This very day the LORD your God is commanding you to observe these
statutes and ordinances; so observe them diligently with all your heart
and with all your soul. 17 Today you have obtained the LORD's
agreement: to be your God; and for you to walk in his ways, to keep
his statutes, his commandments, and his ordinances, and to obey him.
18 Today the LORD has obtained your agreement: to be his treasured
people, as he promised you, and to keep his commandments; 19 for
him to set you high above all nations that he has made, in praise and in
fame and in honor; and for you to be a people holy to the LORD your
God, as he promised.
[Deuteronomy 27]
The ceremonies at Shechem
1 Then Moses and the elders of Israel charged all the people as follows:
Keep the entire commandment that I am commanding you today. 2 On
the day that you cross over the Jordan into the land that the LORD your
God is giving you, you shall set up large stones and cover them with
plaster. 3 You shall write on them all the words of this law when you
have crossed over, to enter the land that the LORD your God is giving
you, a land flowing with milk and honey, as the LORD, the God of your
ancestors, promised you. 4 So when you have crossed over the Jordan,
you shall set up these stones, about which I am commanding you
today, on Mount Ebal, and you shall cover them with plaster. 5 And
you shall build an altar there to the LORD your God, an altar of stones
on which you have not used an iron tool. 6 You must build the altar of
the LORD your God of unhewn stones. Then offer up burnt offerings on
it to the LORD your God, 7 make sacrifices of well-being, and eat them
there, rejoicing before the LORD your God. 8 You shall write on the
stones all the words of this law very clearly.

403

DEUTERONOMY 404

9 Then Moses and the levitical priests spoke to all Israel, saying: Keep
silence and hear, O Israel! This very day you have become the people of
the LORD your God. 10 Therefore obey the LORD your God, observing his
commandments and his statutes that I am commanding you today.
11 The same day Moses charged the people as follows: 12 When you
have crossed over the Jordan, these shall stand on Mount Gerizim for
the blessing of the people: Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Joseph, and
Benjamin. 13 And these shall stand on Mount Ebal for the curse:
Reuben, Gad, Asher, Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali. 14 Then the Levites
shall declare in a loud voice to all the Israelites:
15 "Cursed be anyone who makes an idol or casts an image, anything
abhorrent to the LORD, the work of an artisan, and sets it up in secret."
All the people shall respond, saying, "Amen!"
16 "Cursed be anyone who dishonors father or mother." All the people
shall say, "Amen!"
17 "Cursed be anyone who moves a neighbor's boundary marker." All
the people shall say, "Amen!"
18 "Cursed be anyone who misleads a blind person on the road." All
the people shall say, "Amen!"
19 "Cursed be anyone who deprives the alien, the orphan, and the
widow of justice." All the people shall say, "Amen!"
20 "Cursed be anyone who lies with his father's wife, because he has
violated his father's rights." All the people shall say, "Amen!"
21 "Cursed be anyone who lies with any animal." All the people shall
say, "Amen!"
22 "Cursed be anyone who lies with his sister, whether the daughter of
his father or the daughter of his mother." All the people shall say,
"Amen!"

404

DEUTERONOMY 405

23 "Cursed be anyone who lies with his mother-in-law." All the people
shall say, "Amen!"
24 "Cursed be anyone who strikes down a neighbor in secret." All the
people shall say, "Amen!"
25 "Cursed be anyone who takes a bribe to shed innocent blood." All
the people shall say, "Amen!"
26 "Cursed be anyone who does not uphold the words of this law by
observing them." All the people shall say, "Amen!"
[Deuteronomy 28]
The consequences of obedience or disobedience: blessing or curse
1 If you will only obey the LORD your God, by diligently observing all his
commandments that I am commanding you today, the LORD your God
will set you high above all the nations of the earth; 2 all these blessings
shall come upon you and overtake you, if you obey the LORD your God:
3 Blessed shall you be in the city, and blessed shall you be in the field.
4 Blessed shall be the fruit of your womb, the fruit of your ground, and
the fruit of your livestock, both the increase of your cattle and the
issue of your flock.
5 Blessed shall be your basket and your kneading bowl.
6 Blessed shall you be when you come in, and blessed shall you be
when you go out.
7 The LORD will cause your enemies who rise against you to be defeated
before you; they shall come out against you one way, and flee before
you seven ways. 8 The LORD will command the blessing upon you in
your barns, and in all that you undertake; he will bless you in the land
that the LORD your God is giving you. 9 The LORD will establish you as
his holy people, as he has sworn to you, if you keep the
commandments of the LORD your God and walk in his ways. 10 All the

405

DEUTERONOMY 406

peoples of the earth shall see that you are called by the name of the
LORD, and they shall be afraid of you. 11 The LORD will make you
abound in prosperity, in the fruit of your womb, in the fruit of your
livestock, and in the fruit of your ground in the land that the LORD
swore to your ancestors to give you. 12 The LORD will open for you his
rich storehouse, the heavens, to give the rain of your land in its season
and to bless all your undertakings. You will lend to many nations, but
you will not borrow. 13 The LORD will make you the head, and not the
tail; you shall be only at the top, and not at the bottom — if you obey
the commandments of the LORD your God, which I am commanding
you today, by diligently observing them, 14 and if you do not turn aside
from any of the words that I am commanding you today, either to the
right or to the left, following other gods to serve them.
Consequences of disobedience
15 But if you will not obey the LORD your God by diligently observing all
his commandments and decrees, which I am commanding you today,
then all these curses shall come upon you and overtake you:
16 Cursed shall you be in the city, and cursed shall you be in the field.
17 Cursed shall be your basket and your kneading bowl.
18 Cursed shall be the fruit of your womb, the fruit of your ground, the
increase of your cattle and the issue of your flock.
19 Cursed shall you be when you come in, and cursed shall you be when
you go out.
20 The LORD will send upon you disaster, panic, and frustration in
everything you attempt to do, until you are destroyed and perish
quickly, on account of the evil of your deeds, because you have
forsaken me. 21 The LORD will make the pestilence cling to you until it
has consumed you off the land that you are entering to possess. 22 The
LORD will afflict you with consumption, fever, inflammation, with fiery
heat and drought, and with blight and mildew; they shall pursue you
until you perish. 23 The sky over your head shall be bronze, and the

406

DEUTERONOMY 407

earth under you iron. 24 The LORD will change the rain of your land
into powder, and only dust shall come down upon you from the sky
until you are destroyed.
25 The LORD will cause you to be defeated before your enemies; you
shall go out against them one way and flee before them seven ways.
You shall become an object of horror to all the kingdoms of the earth.
26 Your corpses shall be food for every bird of the air and animal of
the earth, and there shall be no one to frighten them away. 27 The
LORD will afflict you with the boils of Egypt, with ulcers, scurvy, and
itch, of which you cannot be healed. 28 The LORD will afflict you with
madness, blindness, and confusion of mind; 29 you shall grope about at
noon as blind people grope in darkness, but you shall be unable to find
your way; and you shall be continually abused and robbed, without
anyone to help. 30 You shall become engaged to a woman, but
another man shall lie with her. You shall build a house, but not live in
it. You shall plant a vineyard, but not enjoy its fruit. 31 Your ox shall be
butchered before your eyes, but you shall not eat of it. Your donkey
shall be stolen in front of you, and shall not be restored to you. Your
sheep shall be given to your enemies, without anyone to help you. 32
Your sons and daughters shall be given to another people, while you
look on; you will strain your eyes looking for them all day but be
powerless to do anything. 33 A people whom you do not know shall
eat up the fruit of your ground and of all your labors; you shall be
continually abused and crushed, 34 and driven mad by the sight that
your eyes shall see. 35 The LORD will strike you on the knees and on the
legs with grievous boils of which you cannot be healed, from the sole
of your foot to the crown of your head. 36 The LORD will bring you, and
the king whom you set over you, to a nation that neither you nor your
ancestors have known, where you shall serve other gods, of wood and
stone. 37 You shall become an object of horror, a proverb, and a
byword among all the peoples where the LORD will lead you.
38 You shall carry much seed into the field but shall gather little in, for
the locust shall consume it. 39 You shall plant vineyards and dress
them, but you shall neither drink the wine nor gather the grapes, for
the worm shall eat them. 40 You shall have olive trees throughout all
your territory, but you shall not anoint yourself with the oil, for your

407

DEUTERONOMY 408

olives shall drop off. 41 You shall have sons and daughters, but they
shall not remain yours, for they shall go into captivity. 42 All your trees
and the fruit of your ground the cicada shall take over. 43 Aliens
residing among you shall ascend above you higher and higher, while
you shall descend lower and lower. 44 They shall lend to you but you
shall not lend to them; they shall be the head and you shall be the tail.
45 All these curses shall come upon you, pursuing and overtaking you
until you are destroyed, because you did not obey the LORD your God,
by observing the commandments and the decrees that he commanded
you. 46 They shall be among you and your descendants as a sign and a
portent forever.
47 Because you did not serve the LORD your God joyfully and with
gladness of heart for the abundance of everything, 48 therefore you
shall serve your enemies whom the LORD will send against you, in
hunger and thirst, in nakedness and lack of everything. He will put an
iron yoke on your neck until he has destroyed you. 49 The LORD will
bring a nation from far away, from the end of the earth, to swoop
down on you like an eagle, a nation whose language you do not
understand, 50 a grim-faced nation showing no respect to the old or
favor to the young. 51 It shall consume the fruit of your livestock and
the fruit of your ground until you are destroyed, leaving you neither
grain, wine, and oil, nor the increase of your cattle and the issue of
your flock, until it has made you perish. 52 It shall besiege you in all
your towns until your high and fortified walls, in which you trusted,
come down throughout your land; it shall besiege you in all your towns
throughout the land that the LORD your God has given you. 53 In the
desperate straits to which the enemy siege reduces you, you will eat
the fruit of your womb, the flesh of your own sons and daughters
whom the LORD your God has given you. 54 Even the most refined and
gentle of men among you will begrudge food to his own brother, to
the wife whom he embraces, and to the last of his remaining children,
55 giving to none of them any of the flesh of his children whom he is
eating, because nothing else remains to him, in the desperate straits to
which the enemy siege will reduce you in all your towns. 56 She who is
the most refined and gentle among you, so gentle and refined that she
does not venture to set the sole of her foot on the ground, will

408

DEUTERONOMY 409

begrudge food to the husband whom she embraces, to her own son,
and to her own daughter, 57 begrudging even the afterbirth that
comes out from between her thighs, and the children that she bears,
because she is eating them in secret for lack of anything else, in the
desperate straits to which the enemy siege will reduce you in your
towns.
Undoing the Exodus
58 If you do not diligently observe all the words of this law that are
written in this book, fearing this glorious and awesome name, the LORD
your God, 59 then the LORD will overwhelm both you and your
offspring with severe and lasting afflictions and grievous and lasting
maladies. 60 He will bring back upon you all the diseases of Egypt, of
which you were in dread, and they shall cling to you. 61 Every other
malady and affliction, even though not recorded in the book of this
law, the LORD will inflict on you until you are destroyed. 62 Although
once you were as numerous as the stars in heaven, you shall be left few
in number, because you did not obey the LORD your God. 63 And just as
the LORD took delight in making you prosperous and numerous, so the
LORD will take delight in bringing you to ruin and destruction; you shall
be plucked off the land that you are entering to possess. 64 The LORD
will scatter you among all peoples, from one end of the earth to the
other; and there you shall serve other gods, of wood and stone, which
neither you nor your ancestors have known. 65 Among those nations
you shall find no ease, no resting place for the sole of your foot. There
the LORD will give you a trembling heart, failing eyes, and a languishing
spirit. 66 Your life shall hang in doubt before you; night and day you
shall be in dread, with no assurance of your life. 67 In the morning you
shall say, "If only it were evening!" and at evening you shall say, "If
only it were morning!" — because of the dread that your heart shall
feel and the sights that your eyes shall see. 68 The LORD will bring you
back in ships to Egypt, by a route that I promised you would never see
again; and there you shall offer yourselves for sale to your enemies as
male and female slaves, but there will be no buyer.

409

DEUTERONOMY 410

[Deuteronomy 29]
Third discourse of Moses; the ratification ceremony for the covenant
of the Plains of Moab
1 These are the words of the covenant that the LORD commanded
Moses to make with the Israelites in the land of Moab, in addition to
the covenant that he had made with them at Horeb.
2 Moses summoned all Israel and said to them: You have seen all that
the LORD did before your eyes in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh and to
all his servants and to all his land, 3 the great trials that your eyes saw,
the signs, and those great wonders. 4 But to this day the LORD has not
given you a mind to understand, or eyes to see, or ears to hear. 5 I have
led you forty years in the wilderness. The clothes on your back have not
worn out, and the sandals on your feet have not worn out; 6 you have
not eaten bread, and you have not drunk wine or strong drink — so
that you may know that I am the LORD your God. 7 When you came to
this place, King Sihon of Heshbon and King Og of Bashan came out
against us for battle, but we defeated them. 8 We took their land and
gave it as an inheritance to the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the halftribe of Manasseh. 9 Therefore diligently observe the words of this
covenant, in order that you may succeed in everything that you do.
10 You stand assembled today, all of you, before the LORD your God —
the leaders of your tribes, your elders, and your officials, all the men of
Israel, 11 your children, your women, and the aliens who are in your
camp, both those who cut your wood and those who draw your water
— 12 to enter into the covenant of the LORD your God, sworn by an
oath, which the LORD your God is making with you today; 13 in order
that he may establish you today as his people, and that he may be your
God, as he promised you and as he swore to your ancestors, to
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob. 14 I am making this covenant, sworn
by an oath, not only with you who stand here with us today before the
LORD our God, 15 but also with those who are not here with us today.
16 You know how we lived in the land of Egypt, and how we came
through the midst of the nations through which you passed. 17 You
have seen their detestable things, the filthy idols of wood and stone, of
silver and gold, that were among them. 18 It may be that there is

410

DEUTERONOMY 411

among you a man or woman, or a family or tribe, whose heart is
already turning away from the LORD our God to serve the gods of those
nations. It may be that there is among you a root sprouting poisonous
and bitter growth. 19 All who hear the words of this oath and bless
themselves, thinking in their hearts, "We are safe even though we go
our own stubborn ways" (thus bringing disaster on moist and dry alike)
— 20 the LORD will be unwilling to pardon them, for the LORD's anger
and passion will smoke against them. All the curses written in this book
will descend on them, and the LORD will blot out their names from
under heaven. 21 The LORD will single them out from all the tribes of
Israel for calamity, in accordance with all the curses of the covenant
written in this book of the law. 22 The next generation, your children
who rise up after you, as well as the foreigner who comes from a
distant country, will see the devastation of that land and the afflictions
with which the LORD has afflicted it — 23 all its soil burned out by sulfur
and salt, nothing planted, nothing sprouting, unable to support any
vegetation, like the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and
Zeboiim, which the LORD destroyed in his fierce anger — 24 they and
indeed all the nations will wonder, "Why has the LORD done thus to
this land? What caused this great display of anger?" 25 They will
conclude, "It is because they abandoned the covenant of the LORD, the
God of their ancestors, which he made with them when he brought
them out of the land of Egypt. 26 They turned and served other gods,
worshiping them, gods whom they had not known and whom he had
not allotted to them; 27 so the anger of the LORD was kindled against
that land, bringing on it every curse written in this book. 28 The LORD
uprooted them from their land in anger, fury, and great wrath, and
cast them into another land, as is now the case." 29 The secret things
belong to the LORD our God, but the revealed things belong to us and
to our children forever, to observe all the words of this law.
[Deuteronomy 30]
Reassurance of restoration
1 When all these things have happened to you, the blessings and the
curses that I have set before you, if you call them to mind among all
the nations where the LORD your God has driven you, 2 and return to
the LORD your God, and you and your children obey him with all your

411

DEUTERONOMY 412

heart and with all your soul, just as I am commanding you today, 3
then the LORD your God will restore your fortunes and have compassion
on you, gathering you again from all the peoples among whom the
LORD your God has scattered you. 4 Even if you are exiled to the ends of
the world, from there the LORD your God will gather you, and from
there he will bring you back. 5 The LORD your God will bring you into
the land that your ancestors possessed, and you will possess it; he will
make you more prosperous and numerous than your ancestors.
6 Moreover, the LORD your God will circumcise your heart and the heart
of your descendants, so that you will love the LORD your God with all
your heart and with all your soul, in order that you may live. 7 The LORD
your God will put all these curses on your enemies and on the
adversaries who took advantage of you. 8 Then you shall again obey
the LORD, observing all his commandments that I am commanding you
today, 9 and the LORD your God will make you abundantly prosperous
in all your undertakings, in the fruit of your body, in the fruit of your
livestock, and in the fruit of your soil. For the LORD will again take
delight in prospering you, just as he delighted in prospering your
ancestors, 10 when you obey the LORD your God by observing his
commandments and decrees that are written in this book of the law,
because you turn to the LORD your God with all your heart and with all
your soul.
The original continuation of chapter 29
11 Surely, this commandment that I am commanding you today is not
too hard for you, nor is it too far away. 12 It is not in heaven, that you
should say, "Who will go up to heaven for us, and get it for us so that
we may hear it and observe it?" 13 Neither is it beyond the sea, that
you should say, "Who will cross to the other side of the sea for us, and
get it for us so that we may hear it and observe it?" 14 No, the word is
very near to you; it is in your mouth and in your heart for you to
observe.

412

DEUTERONOMY 413

15 See, I have set before you today life and prosperity, death and
adversity. 16 If you obey the commandments of the LORD your God that
I am commanding you today, by loving the LORD your God, walking in
his ways, and observing his commandments, decrees, and ordinances,
then you shall live and become numerous, and the LORD your God will
bless you in the land that you are entering to possess. 17 But if your
heart turns away and you do not hear, but are led astray to bow down
to other gods and serve them, 18 I declare to you today that you shall
perish; you shall not live long in the land that you are crossing the
Jordan to enter and possess. 19 I call heaven and earth to witness
against you today that I have set before you life and death, blessings
and curses. Choose life so that you and your descendants may live, 20
loving the LORD your God, obeying him, and holding fast to him; for
that means life to you and length of days, so that you may live in the
land that the LORD swore to give to your ancestors, to Abraham, to
Isaac, and to Jacob.
[Deuteronomy 31]
The death of Moses and the formation of the Torah; Moses makes
arrangements for his death
1 When Moses had finished speaking all these words to all Israel, 2 he
said to them: "I am now one hundred twenty years old. I am no longer
able to get about, and the LORD has told me, 'You shall not cross over
this Jordan.' 3 The LORD your God himself will cross over before you. He
will destroy these nations before you, and you shall dispossess them.
Joshua also will cross over before you, as the LORD promised. 4 The LORD
will do to them as he did to Sihon and Og, the kings of the Amorites,
and to their land, when he destroyed them. 5 The LORD will give them
over to you and you shall deal with them in full accord with the
command that I have given to you. 6 Be strong and bold; have no fear
or dread of them, because it is the LORD your God who goes with you;
he will not fail you or forsake you."
7 Then Moses summoned Joshua and said to him in the sight of all
Israel: "Be strong and bold, for you are the one who will go with this
people into the land that the LORD has sworn to their ancestors to give
them; and you will put them in possession of it. 8 It is the LORD who

413

DEUTERONOMY 414

goes before you. He will be with you; he will not fail you or forsake
you. Do not fear or be dismayed."
9 Then Moses wrote down this law, and gave it to the priests, the sons
of Levi, who carried the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and to all the
elders of Israel. 10 Moses commanded them: "Every seventh year, in the
scheduled year of remission, during the festival of booths, 11 when all
Israel comes to appear before the LORD your God at the place that he
will choose, you shall read this law before all Israel in their hearing. 12
Assemble the people — men, women, and children, as well as the
aliens residing in your towns — so that they may hear and learn to fear
the LORD your God and to observe diligently all the words of this law,
13 and so that their children, who have not known it, may hear and
learn to fear the LORD your God, as long as you live in the land that you
are crossing over the Jordan to possess."
14 The LORD said to Moses, "Your time to die is near; call Joshua and
present yourselves in the tent of meeting, so that I may commission
him." So Moses and Joshua went and presented themselves in the tent
of meeting, 15 and the LORD appeared at the tent in a pillar of cloud;
the pillar of cloud stood at the entrance to the tent.
16 The LORD said to Moses, "Soon you will lie down with your ancestors.
Then this people will begin to prostitute themselves to the foreign
gods in their midst, the gods of the land into which they are going;
they will forsake me, breaking my covenant that I have made with
them. 17 My anger will be kindled against them in that day. I will
forsake them and hide my face from them; they will become easy prey,
and many terrible troubles will come upon them. In that day they will
say, 'Have not these troubles come upon us because our God is not in
our midst?' 18 On that day I will surely hide my face on account of all
the evil they have done by turning to other gods. 19 Now therefore
write this song, and teach it to the Israelites; put it in their mouths, in
order that this song may be a witness for me against the Israelites. 20
For when I have brought them into the land flowing with milk and
honey, which I promised on oath to their ancestors, and they have
eaten their fill and grown fat, they will turn to other gods and serve
them, despising me and breaking my covenant. 21 And when many

414

DEUTERONOMY 415

terrible troubles come upon them, this song will confront them as a
witness, because it will not be lost from the mouths of their
descendants. For I know what they are inclined to do even now, before
I have brought them into the land that I promised them on oath." 22
That very day Moses wrote this song and taught it to the Israelites.
23 Then the LORD commissioned Joshua son of Nun and said, "Be strong
and bold, for you shall bring the Israelites into the land that I promised
them; I will be with you."
24 When Moses had finished writing down in a book the words of this
law to the very end, 25 Moses commanded the Levites who carried the
ark of the covenant of the LORD, saying, 26 "Take this book of the law
and put it beside the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God; let it
remain there as a witness against you. 27 For I know well how
rebellious and stubborn you are. If you already have been so rebellious
toward the LORD while I am still alive among you, how much more after
my death! 28 Assemble to me all the elders of your tribes and your
officials, so that I may recite these words in their hearing and call
heaven and earth to witness against them. 29 For I know that after my
death you will surely act corruptly, turning aside from the way that I
have commanded you. In time to come trouble will befall you, because
you will do what is evil in the sight of the LORD, provoking him to
anger through the work of your hands."
The Song of Moses
30 Then Moses recited the words of this song, to the very end, in the
hearing of the whole assembly of Israel:
[Deuteronomy 32]
1 Give ear, O heavens, and I will speak;
let the earth hear the words of my mouth.
2 May my teaching drop like the rain,
my speech condense like the dew;
like gentle rain on grass,
like showers on new growth.

415

DEUTERONOMY 416

3 For I will proclaim the name of the LORD;
ascribe greatness to our God!
4 The Rock, his work is perfect,
and all his ways are just.
A faithful God, without deceit,
just and upright is he;
5 yet his degenerate children have dealt falsely with him,
a perverse and crooked generation.
6 Do you thus repay the LORD,
O foolish and senseless people?
Is not he your father, who created you,
who made you and established you?
7 Remember the days of old,
consider the years long past;
ask your father, and he will inform you;
your elders, and they will tell you.
8 When the Most High apportioned the nations,
when he divided humankind,
he fixed the boundaries of the peoples
according to the number of the gods;
9 the LORD's own portion was his people,
Jacob his allotted share.
10 He sustained him in a desert land,
in a howling wilderness waste;
he shielded him, cared for him,
guarded him as the apple of his eye.
11 As an eagle stirs up its nest,
and hovers over its young;
as it spreads its wings, takes them up,
and bears them aloft on its pinions,
12 the LORD alone guided him;
no foreign god was with him.
13 He set him atop the heights of the land,
and fed him with produce of the field;
he nursed him with honey from the crags,
with oil from flinty rock;

416

DEUTERONOMY 417

14 curds from the herd, and milk from the flock,
with fat of lambs and rams;
Bashan bulls and goats,
together with the choicest wheat —
you drank fine wine from the blood of grapes.
15 Jacob ate his fill;
Jeshurun grew fat, and kicked.
You grew fat, bloated, and gorged!
He abandoned God who made him,
and scoffed at the Rock of his salvation.
16 They made him jealous with strange gods,
with abhorrent things they provoked him.
17 They sacrificed to demons, not God,
to deities they had never known,
to new ones recently arrived,
whom your ancestors had not feared.
18 You were unmindful of the Rock that bore you;
you forgot the God who gave you birth.
19 The LORD saw it, and was jealous;
he spurned his sons and daughters.
20 He said: I will hide my face from them,
I will see what their end will be;
for they are a perverse generation,
children in whom there is no faithfulness.
21 They made me jealous with what is no god,
provoked me with their idols.
So I will make them jealous with what is no people,
provoke them with a foolish nation.
22 For a fire is kindled by my anger,
and burns to the depths of Sheol;
it devours the earth and its increase,
and sets on fire the foundations of the mountains.
23 I will heap disasters upon them,
spend my arrows against them:

417

DEUTERONOMY 418

24 wasting hunger,
burning consumption,
bitter pestilence.
The teeth of beasts I will send against them,
with venom of things crawling in the dust.
25 In the street the sword shall bereave,
and in the chambers terror,
for young man and woman alike,
nursing child and old gray head.
26 I thought to scatter them
and blot out the memory of them from humankind;
27 but I feared provocation by the enemy,
for their adversaries might misunderstand
and say, "Our hand is triumphant;
it was not the LORD who did all this."
28 They are a nation void of sense;
there is no understanding in them.
29 If they were wise, they would understand this;
they would discern what the end would be.
30 How could one have routed a thousand,
and two put a myriad to flight,
unless their Rock had sold them,
the LORD had given them up?
31 Indeed their rock is not like our Rock;
our enemies are fools.
32 Their vine comes from the vinestock of Sodom,
from the vineyards of Gomorrah;
their grapes are grapes of poison,
their clusters are bitter;
33 their wine is the poison of serpents,
the cruel venom of asps.

418

DEUTERONOMY 419

34 Is not this laid up in store with me,
sealed up in my treasuries?
35 Vengeance is mine, and recompense,
for the time when their foot shall slip;
because the day of their calamity is at hand,
their doom comes swiftly.
36 Indeed the LORD will vindicate his people,
have compassion on his servants,
when he sees that their power is gone,
neither bond nor free remaining.
37 Then he will say: Where are their gods,
the rock in which they took refuge,
38 who ate the fat of their sacrifices,
and drank the wine of their libations?
Let them rise up and help you,
let them be your protection!
39 See now that I, even I, am he;
there is no god besides me.
I kill and I make alive;
I wound and I heal;
and no one can deliver from my hand.
40 For I lift up my hand to heaven,
and swear: As I live forever,
41 when I whet my flashing sword,
and my hand takes hold on judgment;
I will take vengeance on my adversaries,
and will repay those who hate me.
42 I will make my arrows drunk with blood,
and my sword shall devour flesh —
with the blood of the slain and the captives,
from the long-haired enemy.

419

DEUTERONOMY 420

43 Praise, O heavens, his people,
worship him, all you gods!
For he will avenge the blood of his children,
and take vengeance on his adversaries;
he will repay those who hate him,
and cleanse the land for his people.
Double conclusion
44 Moses came and recited all the words of this song in the hearing of
the people, he and Joshua son of Nun. 45 When Moses had finished
reciting all these words to all Israel, 46 he said to them: "Take to heart
all the words that I am giving in witness against you today; give them
as a command to your children, so that they may diligently observe all
the words of this law. 47 This is no trifling matter for you, but rather
your very life; through it you may live long in the land that you are
crossing over the Jordan to possess."
Moses commanded to die
48 On that very day the LORD addressed Moses as follows: 49 "Ascend
this mountain of the Abarim, Mount Nebo, which is in the land of
Moab, across from Jericho, and view the land of Canaan, which I am
giving to the Israelites for a possession; 50 you shall die there on the
mountain that you ascend and shall be gathered to your kin, as your
brother Aaron died on Mount Hor and was gathered to his kin; 51
because both of you broke faith with me among the Israelites at the
waters of Meribath-kadesh in the wilderness of Zin, by failing to
maintain my holiness among the Israelites. 52 Although you may view
the land from a distance, you shall not enter it — the land that I am
giving to the Israelites."

420

DEUTERONOMY 421

[Deuteronomy 33]
The blessing of Moses
1 This is the blessing with which Moses, the man of God, blessed the
Israelites before his death. 2 He said:
The LORD came from Sinai,
and dawned from Seir upon us;
he shone forth from Mount Paran.
With him were myriads of holy ones;
at his right, a host of his own.
3 Indeed, O favorite among peoples,
all his holy ones were in your charge;
they marched at your heels,
accepted direction from you.
4 Moses charged us with the law,
as a possession for the assembly of Jacob.
5 There arose a king in Jeshurun,
when the leaders of the people assembled —
the united tribes of Israel.
6 May Reuben live, and not die out,
even though his numbers are few.
7 And this he said of Judah:
O LORD, give heed to Judah,
and bring him to his people;
strengthen his hands for him,
and be a help against his adversaries.
8 And of Levi he said:
Give to Levi your Thummim,
and your Urim to your loyal one,
whom you tested at Massah,
with whom you contended at the waters of Meribah;

421

DEUTERONOMY 422

9 who said of his father and mother,
"I regard them not";
he ignored his kin,
and did not acknowledge his children.
For they observed your word,
and kept your covenant.
10 They teach Jacob your ordinances,
and Israel your law;
they place incense before you,
and whole burnt offerings on your altar.
11 Bless, O LORD, his substance,
and accept the work of his hands;
crush the loins of his adversaries,
of those that hate him, so that they do not rise again.
12 Of Benjamin he said:
The beloved of the LORD rests in safety —
the High God surrounds him all day long —
the beloved rests between his shoulders.
13 And of Joseph he said:
Blessed by the LORD be his land,
with the choice gifts of heaven above,
and of the deep that lies beneath;
14 with the choice fruits of the sun,
and the rich yield of the months;
15 with the finest produce of the ancient mountains,
and the abundance of the everlasting hills;
16 with the choice gifts of the earth and its fullness,
and the favor of the one who dwells on Sinai.
Let these come on the head of Joseph,
on the brow of the prince among his brothers.
17 A firstborn bull — majesty is his!
His horns are the horns of a wild ox;
with them he gores the peoples,
driving them to the ends of the earth;
such are the myriads of Ephraim,
such the thousands of Manasseh.

422

DEUTERONOMY 423

18 And of Zebulun he said:
Rejoice, Zebulun, in your going out;
and Issachar, in your tents.
19 They call peoples to the mountain;
there they offer the right sacrifices;
for they suck the affluence of the seas
and the hidden treasures of the sand.
20 And of Gad he said:
Blessed be the enlargement of Gad!
Gad lives like a lion;
he tears at arm and scalp.
21 He chose the best for himself,
for there a commander's allotment was reserved;
he came at the head of the people,
he executed the justice of the LORD,
and his ordinances for Israel.
22 And of Dan he said:
Dan is a lion's whelp
that leaps forth from Bashan.
23 And of Naphtali he said:
O Naphtali, sated with favor,
full of the blessing of the LORD,
possess the west and the south.
24 And of Asher he said:
Most blessed of sons be Asher;
may he be the favorite of his brothers,
and may he dip his foot in oil.
25 Your bars are iron and bronze;
and as your days, so is your strength.
26 There is none like God, O Jeshurun,
who rides through the heavens to your help,
majestic through the skies.

423

DEUTERONOMY 424

27 He subdues the ancient gods,
shatters the forces of old;
he drove out the enemy before you,
and said, "Destroy!"
28 So Israel lives in safety,
untroubled is Jacob's abode
in a land of grain and wine,
where the heavens drop down dew.
29 Happy are you, O Israel! Who is like you,
a people saved by the LORD,
the shield of your help,
and the sword of your triumph!
Your enemies shall come fawning to you,
and you shall tread on their backs.
[Deuteronomy 34]
The death of Moses
1 Then Moses went up from the plains of Moab to Mount Nebo, to the
top of Pisgah, which is opposite Jericho, and the LORD showed him the
whole land: Gilead as far as Dan, 2 all Naphtali, the land of Ephraim
and Manasseh, all the land of Judah as far as the Western Sea, 3 the
Negeb, and the Plain — that is, the valley of Jericho, the city of palm
trees — as far as Zoar. 4 The LORD said to him, "This is the land of which
I swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, 'I will give it to your
descendants'; I have let you see it with your eyes, but you shall not
cross over there." 5 Then Moses, the servant of the LORD, died there in
the land of Moab, at the LORD's command. 6 He was buried in a valley
in the land of Moab, opposite Beth-peor, but no one knows his burial
place to this day. 7 Moses was one hundred twenty years old when he
died; his sight was unimpaired and his vigor had not abated. 8 The
Israelites wept for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days; then the
period of mourning for Moses was ended.
9 Joshua son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom, because Moses
had laid his hands on him; and the Israelites obeyed him, doing as the
LORD had commanded Moses.

424

DEUTERONOMY 425

10 Never since has there arisen a prophet in Israel like Moses, whom
the LORD knew face to face. 11 He was unequaled for all the signs and
wonders that the LORD sent him to perform in the land of Egypt,
against Pharaoh and all his servants and his entire land, 12 and for all
the mighty deeds and all the terrifying displays of power that Moses
performed in the sight of all Israel.

425

INTRO TO THE HISTORICAL BOOKS 426

INTRODUCTION TO THE
HISTORICAL BOOKS
The Historical Books and Historiography
The Christian Bishop Athanasius, in the fourth century CE, first used the
term "histories" for this section of the Bible, which now covers the
books Joshua, Judges, Ruth, Samuel, Kings, Chronicles, Ezra-Nehemiah,
and Esther. It is a misleading title, since these books cover a wide range
of genres and often are not historical in modern senses of the word.
Furthermore, there are several books that are similar to some of these
Historical Books, yet they are found in different sections of the Bible.
Large sections of Genesis, Exodus, and Numbers, and much of the
introduction to Deuteronomy in the Torah, contain narratives about
the past. Similarly, there are several psalms that survey the past (e.g., Ps
78, 105, 106, 107). Yet, this material is not incorporated into the
Historical Books. Thus, this section does not represent the collection of
all works of the same genre, and its development as a canonical
division is best understood in relation to the broader development of
the biblical canon (see the essay, "The Canons of the Bible"). Moreover,
in the traditional Jewish arrangement of the books of the Bible, the
books of Joshua, Samuel, and Kings are called the Former Prophets,
thus opening the second major division of the Hebrew Bible, the
Prophets, which follows the Torah. The books of Ruth, Chronicles, EzraNehemiah, and Esther, however, are found in the third major division,
the Writings. For these reasons, the rest of this introduction examines
the nature of biblical historical texts, broadly construed, with a focus
on the books Joshua through Esther, which now comprise the section
of the Bible called Historical Books.
The idea that historical writing should capture the events "as they
really were," that historians should attempt to write an objective

426

INTRO TO THE HISTORICAL BOOKS 427

account of the events of the past, is a relatively recent notion that
developed in the European universities several centuries ago. Before
that, history was often didactic in nature, teaching the readers how to
be good citizens or how to lead proper religious lives. Sometimes
histories were produced in the royal court, in which case they were
apologetic, showing how the king fulfilled his royal duties. Surviving
historical documents from the ancient Near East show similar religious
and ideological goals. Thus, it should not be surprising that the biblical
writers are not primarily interested in the accurate recording of real
events; rather, they use narratives about the past to illustrate various
issues of significance to their earliest audience, the ancient Israelite
community.
It is easiest to understand the biblical notion of history by first focusing
on works that are outside this canonical division. Exodus 13.3 begins:
"Moses said to the people, 'Remember this day on which you came out
of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.'" This would seem to suggest the
importance of history for its own sake. However, this unit continues
with a set of commandments that result directly from this event: "no
leavened bread shall be eaten" (v. 3); "Seven days you shall eat
unleavened bread, and on the seventh day there shall be a festival to
the Lord" (v. 6); "no leavened bread shall be seen in your possession,
and no leaven shall be seen among you in all your territory" (v. 7);
"You shall tell your child on that day..." (v. 8); "It shall serve for you as
a sign on your hand and as a reminder on your forehead" (v. 9); "you
shall set apart to the Lord all that first opens the womb. All the
firstborn of your livestock that are males shall be the LORD's" (v. 12).
Read in context, it is not important to remember the Exodus as a
disembodied historical event, as the beginning of v. 3 might suggest;
rather, the Exodus is key because it serves as the basis for the
observance of a central set of laws or norms.
The use of historical material in Psalms is even more instructive, since
these traditions about the past are typically surrounded by a
framework that explicitly highlights their theological significance or
purpose. For example, in Psalm 78 a particular set of traditions is
chosen and shaped so:

427

INTRO TO THE HISTORICAL BOOKS 428

"that the next generation might know them,
the children yet unborn,
and rise up and tell them to their children,
so that they should set their hope in god,
and not forget the works of God,
but keep his commandments;
and that they should not be like their ancestors,
a stubborn and rebellious generation,
a generation whose heart was not steadfast,
whose spirit was not faithful to God" (vv. 6-8).
Psalm 106 tells how God saved Israel time after time, despite their
covenant violations. This is used as an argument to God that they
should be rescued again:
"Save us, O Lord our God,
and gather us from among the nations,
that we may give thanks to your holy name
and glory in your praise" (v. 47).
Unfortunately, the material collected in the Historical Books is not as
straightforward about its purposes as these psalms or Exodus 13; for
this reason, the Historical Books need to be subjected to internal
analysis, in order to see what motivations and interests best explain
their shape.
Organization into Books and Larger Units
In pursuing this task, we must be mindful that the division of some
biblical writings into separate books is just as arbitrary as the
designation of a particular set of books as a single canonical unit, such
as Historical Books. The division of Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles into
separate books is not original and was first done in the Greek Bible so
that each book would have a more reasonable size. In the formation of
the canon, Ezra-Nehemiah was originally considered a single work, and
it is possible that Joshua and Judges, which blend together well (see
especially Josh 24.29-31 and Judg 2.8-10), were also perceived as a single
work at an earlier period. Even the divisions between these larger

428

INTRO TO THE HISTORICAL BOOKS 429

works are not always certain: the first two chapters of Kings, for
example, which narrate the events at the end of David's life, fit the
book of Samuel better than their current place.
In fact, it has been proposed that since the books of Joshua, Judges,
Samuel, and Kings, along with the preceding books of Deuteronomy,
fit so well together, these five books were edited together as a single
work. This work is typically called the Deuteronomistic History,
meaning the history written under the influence of ideas found in the
book of Deuteronomy. This theory has much to commend it: These five
books do reader as a unified whole from a chronological perspective,
narrating a continuous history from the end of the life of Moses
through the Babylonian Exile (586 BCE), and they share many phrases
and ideological notions, such as an insistence on exclusive worship of
God and the tragic consequences of idolatry, a concern with the
centrality of Jerusalem, and a belief in the supremacy of the eternal
Davidic dynasty. If this theory is correct, the size of the Deuteronomistic
History, and the long period that it depicts, is quite remarkable,
especially for an ancient historical work.
Many details of this theory remain debated; some scholars suggest that
these books are not quite unified enough to represent the product of a
single individual, intellectual school, or movement. For example, the
book of Samuel shows remarkably few contacts with the language of
Deuteronomy, and the book of Kings contains narratives in which the
great prophets Elijah and Elisha are legitimately active outside the
Jerusalem Temple (see especially 1 King 18, concerning Elijah on Mount
Carmel). Thus, various theories have been suggested concerning
successive editions of the Deuteronomistic History, which many believe
was begun in the seventh century under the Judean King Josiah (640609 BCE), but completed only in the Babylonian Exile (586-538 BCE) or
beyond. Some suggest that the lack of unity is due to nonDeuteronomistic material that has been added at a late stage to an
earlier Deuteronomistic History. There have also been attempts to
isolate narratives that might have preceded the Deuteronomistic
History and other sources used by the Deuteronomist(s), and to discern
their original purposes before these narratives and sources became
integrated into the larger literary work. In sum, this collection has a

429

INTRO TO THE HISTORICAL BOOKS 430

long and complicated history, so it is impossible to speak of a unified
purpose or interest in the compilation of the books of Joshua, Judges,
Samuel, and Kings. They reflect many different interests and stages of
development: pre-Deuteronomic, Deuteronomistic, and later, postexilic
concerns. The interests of each individual book of the Deuteronomistic
History are discussed in the Introduction to that particular book.
Scholars have also found many similarities between Chronicles and
Ezra-Nehemiah and have posited that these works belong to a single
large history composed by the Chronicler, which parallels the
Deuteronomistic History. A closer look at Chronicles and EzraNehemiah, however, shows that they differ from each other in outlook
and vocabulary, and that the general similarities between them are
best attributed to the common time in which they were written, most
likely in the fourth century BCE.
Chronicles is a retelling with significant variations of the books of
Genesis through Kings. It is unclear if its author had access to a
significant number of external sources not found in our canonical
Bibles, but in any case, a close examination of the book illustrates the
remarkable way in which its author deals with sources, rewriting them
to fit a particular not of "historical probability," namely, what really
could have happened based on notions of how the world worked. For
example, in the book of Kings, which does not have a clear retribution
theory (a theory concerning punishment and reward), the Judean King
Manasseh (698/687-642 BCE) is depicted as the most evil king of Judah,
who is ultimately responsible for the destruction of the Temple in 586
(2 Kings 21). However, that same source indicates that Manasseh
reigned for fifty-five years.
This "contradiction" between the behavior of Manasseh and his long
reign did not bother the Deuteronomist, who did not believe that each
individual king needs to be punished or rewarded for his behavior.
However, the Chronicler did believe in this type of retribution
theology, and the Deuteronomist's depiction of Manasseh in Kings was
clearly very troublesome. For this reason, the Chronicler rewrote the
life of Manasseh, adding 2 Chronicles 33.10-13: "The Lord spoke to
Manasseh and to his people, but they gave no heed. Therefore the

430

INTRO TO THE HISTORICAL BOOKS 431

Lord brought against them the commanders of the army of the king of
Assyria, who took Manasseh captive in manacles, bound him with
fetters, and brought him to Babylon. While he was in distress he
entreated the favor of the Lord his God and humbled himself greatly
before the God of his ancestors. He prayed to him, and God received
his entreaty, heard his plea, and restored him again to Jerusalem and
to his kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that the Lord indeed was God."
Thus, Manasseh fits the paradigms that the author of Chronicles
believed to be true: All people need to be warned before they are
punished; repentance is extremely efficacious; and individuals may only
succeed if their behavior is meritorious. These external beliefs forced a
revision of the source's account so that Manasseh's life could be
properly illustrative. Other examples of this type of revisionism are
found throughout Chronicles and are discussed in the Introduction to
that book; since, in the case of Samuel and Kings, we do not have
access to the sources on which they are based, we can only wonder if
this type of radical reworking characterizes the entire corpus of
Historical Texts.
HT

TH

Smaller Works
Ruth and Esther are both short stories, historical fictions, which are
quite different in nature from the works discussed above, but very
similar to the books of Tobit and Judith in the Apocrypha. They are
more literary than these larger works; that is, their authors selfconsciously manipulated their prose for aesthetic as well as ideological
purposes. For example, part of the structuring of Ruth involves
symmetry, whereby an "eshet hayil" ("a worthy woman" [3.11]), meets
and marries a "gibbor hayil" ("a worthy man"; NRSV "a prominent rich
man" [2.1]), and they live happily ever after. The book also opens with
an ironic statement that is only apparent in the Hebrew: There is a
famine in "the house of bread" (Bethlehem). Esther as well is tightly
structured, for example, using dinner parties as a major plot device for
the book's progress. Despite the literary artistry of these books,
however, they are also history in the sense outlined above: They
narrate a past in order to convey lessons relevant to the community.
The particular characteristics of these two very different books, each
from a distinct country and time period, and each reflecting

431

INTRO TO THE HISTORICAL BOOKS 432

remarkably different ideologies, may be found in the Introduction to
each book.
Ezra differs from these other Historical Books in its use of extensive
quotations of official Persian documents (e.g., 7.12-26), which many
believe to be authentic. Nehemiah lacks these documents but is
exceptional in its own way: It is the only book in this collectio to
narrate history from the first-person perspective, as in 13.15: "In those
days I saw in Judah people treading wine presses on the sabbath, and
bringing in heaps of grain and loading them on donkeys; and also
wine, grapes, figs, and all kings of burdens, which they brought into
Jerusalem on the sabbath day; and I warned them at that time against
selling food." In general Ezra-Nehemiah is closer to the events that it
narrates than any other biblical book, and it is thus possible that it may
reflect those events with greater accuracy than other biblical works,
which are typically removed by centuries from the events being
described. Nevertheless, we must also recognize that strong biases of
this book, which is interested in fostering the importance of the Torah
as the central document for the postexilic community (see esp. Neh 89), and in emphasizing the grave dangers of intermarriage (Ezra 9-10,
Neh 13). Thus, even Ezra-Nehemiah, which contains archival material
and first-person accounts, and is among the latest of the books in this
canonical division, should not be seen as straightforward,
representative, and accurate history.
The Historical Books and Historicity
The problematic nature of all of these texts as historical documents
does not mean that we have no idea of the historical periods that they
cover, or that they are entirely useless as historical sources. Each text
needs to be weighed individually in terms of its date of composition
and its likely goals. Using these criteria, there are reasons to accept the
veracity of, for example, the dry notice in 1 Kings 14.25-26 ("In the fifth
year of King Rehoboam, King Shishak of Egypt came up against
Jerusalem; he took away the treasures of the house of the Lord and the
treasures of the king's house; he took everything. He also took away all
the shields of gold that Solomon had made"), which might even come
from an archival source. In contrast, there are good reasons to be

432

INTRO TO THE HISTORICAL BOOKS 433

suspicious of the historicity of the long, detailed, and embellished story
of David slaying Goliath in 1 Sam 17; this story uses late biblical Hebrew
language, comes from a different source than the surrounding material
in Samuel, and is structured like a fairy-tale, in that the poor, short,
unexpected hero gets to marry the tall king's daughter by killing the
giant who had vilified God. Additionally, 2 Sam 21.19 reads: "Then
there was another battle with the Philistines at Gob; and Elhanan son
of Jarre-oregim, the Bethlehemite, killed Goliath in Gittite, the shaft of
whose spear was like a weaver's beam." It is much more likely that a
short tradition in which Goliath is killed by a relatively unknown figure
(Elhanan) would be the source for the long, elaborate tale attributing
the same event to the well-known David, rather than vice-versa. Thus,
the modern historian must subject each text in these Historical Books
to the type of internal analysis used on nonbiblical historical texts
when external information bearing on the text is lacking.
There are a number of cases where we do not have external, ancient
Near Eastern written evidence that deals with events depicted in these
Historical Books. For example, the events surrounding the siege of
Jerusalem by the Assyrian King Sennacherib in 701 BCE are narrated in
several Assyrian sources and are also depicted in the palace reliefs of
that king. These sources suggest that part of the terse account in 2
Kings 18.13-16 is quite accurate, while the highly developed
continuation of the story in chs 19 and 20, especially the note in 19.35,
that the angel of the Lord killed 185,000 Assyrian soldiers in a single
night, is most likely imaginative. Similarly, from various Mesopotamian
sources, we know of a "house of Omri"; Omri's name is also mentioned
on the Moabite Mesha Stele. This confirms the existence of the
northern (Israelite) king mentioned in 1 Kings 16.23-38. However, Kings
tells little of his achievements during his twelve years as monarch,
other than his building of Samaria and the notice that: "Omri did what
was evil in the sight of the Lord; he did more evil than all who were
before him. For he walked in all the way of Jeroboam son of Nebat,
and in the sins that he caused Israel to commit, provoking the Lord, the
God of Israel, to anger by their idols" (vv. 25-26). The external sources,
however, suggest that Omri was a powerful king who established a
significant name for himself through his military activities. This
highlights the extreme selectivity of the biblical sources.

433

INTRO TO THE HISTORICAL BOOKS 434

Archaeological evidence confirms the picture suggested above: There
may be some truth (or kernel of truth) to some of the biblical stories,
but in their current form, they lack historical veracity, because that is
not their prime concern. Recent decades, for example, have seen a
remarkable reevaluation of the evidence concerning the conquest of
the land of Canaan by Joshua. As more sites have been excavated,
there is a growing consensus that the main story of Joshua, that of a
speedy and complete conquest (e.g., Josh 11.23: "So Joshua took the
whole land, according to all that the Lord had spoken to Moses"),
cannot be upheld by the archaeological record, though there are
indications of some destruction and conquest at the appropriate time.
Various events and traditions have been reworked very substantially
over time and ultimately included in the Bible in order to substantiate
a particular picture of God.
In sum, the title Historical Books must not frame the way we read the
following texts. Many of these texts do contain the raw materials for a
modern historian researching the history of ancient Israel from the
time of the conquest through the fourth century BCE, but this material
can only be teased out using sophisticated and complex tools. This is
because these various biblical historians each wrote accounts,
sometimes using sources, to illustrate particular perspectives
concerning the relationship between God and Israel. It is these
religious and religio-political perspectives that we must try to
appreciate as we study these books; if we read them as we read
modern historical accounts, we will misunderstand these texts in the
most fundamental way.

Copyright ©2001, New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha: New Revised Standard
Version. Ed. Michael D. Coogan. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001. Used by
permission. All rights reserved.

434

JOSHUA 435

JOSHUA
Introduction
The book of Joshua describes the "conquest" of Canaan and its
allotment to the Israelite tribes. Through well-known traditional stories
(e.g., Rahab and the spies, the crossing of the Jordan River, the capture
of Jericho) as well as non-narrative lists and ritual texts, the book
portrays the fulfillment of God's covenantal promise to the patriarchs
that their descendants would possess the land. Moreover, these stories
challenge the book's readers to live in obedience to the Deuteronomic
covenant so that they also will receive God's blessings in the land.
The historicity of the book cannot simply be assumed since it telescopes
and simplifies what was a long and complex process of occupation of
the land by the Israelite tribes. Some details are lacking (e.g., how the
Israelites came into possession of Shechem, 8.30-35), while the other
events narrated in the book are selectively arranged to heighten the
book's message. Thus the book's presentation of reality does not
necessarily reflect the actual course of events. Consequently,
archaeological
excavations,
together
with
sociological
and
anthropological analyses, must be used to understand the early history
of Israel in the land.
The authorship of the book of Joshua is unknown. Some types of
sources for the book's composition are identifiable (for example, the
border descriptions and city lists in chs 14-19), though their origin and
date are often disputed. Scholars commonly perceive the book in its
final form to be part of a larger historical work, the Deuteronomistic
History, stretching from Deuteronomy through 2 Kings. The book's
final date of composition is unknown; it is dependent upon the dating
of the various editions of the Deuteronomistic History, of which it is
now a part. One major edition of the larger work is generally agreed
to date to the late seventh century BCE. The connections between the
435

JOSHUA 436

book of Joshua and Deuteronomy led earlier scholars to posit a
Hexateuch, with the book of Joshua completing the Pentateuch. More
recently scholars have viewed Deuteronomy as the introduction to the
books of Deuteronomy through Kings, the Deuteronomistic History.
The historiographic materials used in the book of Joshua correspond to
those found in the ancient Near East as a whole. Thus there are
traditional stories, etiologies, boundary and town lists, summary
accounts and lists, and accounts patterned after redundant annalistic
documents. These have been woven together with ritual and
covenantal materials and other matters of priestly interest to
communicate the book's ideological message.
Several themes and literary devices characterize the book. First, the
structure of the book has two main divisions: the conquests (1.1-12.24)
and the allotment of the land (13.1-24.33). Within each main division,
there are two subdivisions: A1: preparations for the conquest (1.1-5.12)
and B1: the conquest's campaigns (5.13-12.24); B2: the allotment of the
conquered land (13.1-21.45) and A2: epilogue to the conquest and
allotment (22.1-24.33). The body of the book (5.13-21.45) is bracketed by
specially chosen introductory and concluding materials (1.1-5.12; 22.124.33). Each subdivision contains a number of units that contribute to
the development of the plot and message of the book.
Second, the book follows a logical geographic arrangement. An eastto-west crossing into Canaan (chs 2-5) is followed by military campaigns
directed at the center (chs 6-8), south (chs 9-10), and north (ch 11),
concluded by a summary list (ch 12). The division of the land first covers
the Transjordanian tribes (ch 13), then the south and central tribes (chs
14-17), then the northern and peripheral tribes (chs 18-19), and finally
entities of marginal status (chs 20-21). At times, however, the technique
of "backtrack and overlap" is imposed upon the narration, as the story
backs up and retells the events in a type of flashback. This is especially
noticeable in chs 3-4 (the crossing of the Jordan) and 10 (the conquest
of the south).

436

JOSHUA 437

Third, the law (Heb "torah") plays a normative role in the book, and
Israel's obedience or disobedience to the law determines success or
failure. This law, especially prominent in chs 1 and 23, is further
specified as "the law of Moses" and refers to the law or teaching of
Moses as contained in some form of the book of Deuteronomy.
Fourth, typology (that is, representing one character or event as an
echo or foreshadowing of another) is utilized to portray Joshua as
parallel to Moses. A few examples will illustrate: Moses leads the
Israelites out of Egypt, Joshua leads the Israelites into Canaan; Moses
leads Israel in a miraculous crossing of the Reed Sea, Joshua leads Israel
in a miraculous crossing of the Jordan River; Moses sends out spies,
Joshua sends out spies; Moses allots land to the tribes east of the
Jordan, Joshua allots land to the tribes west of the Jordan.
Fifth, the book utilizes a number of different land ideologies. Some of
these may be anchored in concrete reality, while others are purely
idealistic or a mixture of the two. In the book's final form, these
produce an abstract, idealized concept of the land, create tensions, and
set the stage for irony. The dominant land ideology is the territory of
the twelve tribes (both west and east of the Jordan) who completely
fill up the land (chs 15-19; cf. Deut 4.45-49). In this view, the two and
on-half Transjordanian tribes (those settled east of the Jordan) are an
integral and vital part of "all Israel." A second, contrasting ideology
restricts the true land of inheritance to the territory west of the Jordan
(Cisjordan, the land of Canaan) (cf. Deut 12.10). It is the image of the
land that lies behind the belief that crossing the Jordan was a step of
outstanding significance (chs 3-4). This view also creates ironic tensions
in 22.10-34, where the two and one-half tribes set up an alter in
Transjordan. A third ideology presents the land as claimed but
unconquered, noting "the land that remains" (13.2-6; and a fourth
ideology is an expansionistic, utopian "Euphratic Israel," which claims
the distant Euphrates as the northern boundary of Israel's inheritance
(1.4; cf. Gen 15.18; Deut 1.7; 11.24). These last two notions instill the
book with the flavor of unredeemed promise, and again set the stage
for irony. The text develops two understandings of Israel's unfulfilled
expectations. On the one hand, the incomplete conquest is judged to
be the result of Israel's disobedience or military inability (15.63; 16.10;

437

JOSHUA 438

17.12-13; 19.47). This serves as the basis for future threats to Israel's wellbeing (7.12; 23.12-13). On the other hand, the last two land ideologies
function as hopeful indications of greater future land blessings to Israel
(13.6b; 17.18; 23.5).
Sixth, ritual concerns dictate some of the narration. For example, the
crossing of the Jordan River (chs 3-4), circumcision and Passover (ch 5),
the conquest of Jericho (ch 6), and the implementations of the
"herem" (chs 6-8) all reflect ritual concerns that undergird the book's
land claims.
Finally, the concept of the "herem" plays a significant role in the book.
This noun is usually translated "devoted thing" (7.1) and the related
verb "utterly destroy" (10.28). The term is used primarily in contexts of
warfare and destruction where the "herem" stories are connected with
the notion of obedience/disobedience to the Lord (cf. Deut 7; 20). Its
purpose was to "drive out" or "dispossess" the Canaanites in order to
carry out divine judgment on them, to protect the Israelites from
Canaanite religious influence, and to fulfill the promises concerning
the land. This kind of warfare is part of the political ideology that Israel
shared with other nations in the ancient Near East, in which wars were
dedicated to the glorification of the deity and the extension of the
deity's land and reign.
Thus the book of Joshua plays an important role not only in the story
of the early history of Israel in the land, but also in the development of
the theology of the Hebrew Bible. In many ways, it serves as the
prologue for the remainder of the Deuteronomistic History's story of
Israel's struggles in the land.

438

JOSHUA 439

[Joshua 1]
Preparation for the conquest; the commission
1 After the death of Moses the servant of the LORD, the LORD spoke to
Joshua son of Nun, Moses' assistant, saying, 2 "My servant Moses is
dead. Now proceed to cross the Jordan, you and all this people, into
the land that I am giving to them, to the Israelites. 3 Every place that
the sole of your foot will tread upon I have given to you, as I promised
to Moses. 4 From the wilderness and the Lebanon as far as the great
river, the river Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, to the Great Sea
in the west shall be your territory. 5 No one shall be able to stand
against you all the days of your life. As I was with Moses, so I will be
with you; I will not fail you or forsake you. 6 Be strong and courageous;
for you shall put this people in possession of the land that I swore to
their ancestors to give them. 7 Only be strong and very courageous,
being careful to act in accordance with all the law that my servant
Moses commanded you; do not turn from it to the right hand or to the
left, so that you may be successful wherever you go. 8 This book of the
law shall not depart out of your mouth; you shall meditate on it day
and night, so that you may be careful to act in accordance with all that
is written in it. For then you shall make your way prosperous, and then
you shall be successful. 9 I hereby command you: Be strong and
courageous; do not be frightened or dismayed, for the LORD your God
is with you wherever you go."
10 Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people, 11 "Pass
through the camp, and command the people: 'Prepare your provisions;
for in three days you are to cross over the Jordan, to go in to take
possession of the land that the LORD your God gives you to possess.'"
12 To the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh
Joshua said, 13 "Remember the word that Moses the servant of the
LORD commanded you, saying, 'The LORD your God is providing you a
place of rest, and will give you this land.' 14 Your wives, your little
ones, and your livestock shall remain in the land that Moses gave you
beyond the Jordan. But all the warriors among you shall cross over
armed before your kindred and shall help them, 15 until the LORD gives
rest to your kindred as well as to you, and they too take possession of

439

JOSHUA 440

the land that the LORD your God is giving them. Then you shall return
to your own land and take possession of it, the land that Moses the
servant of the LORD gave you beyond the Jordan to the east."
16 They answered Joshua: "All that you have commanded us we will
do, and wherever you send us we will go. 17 Just as we obeyed Moses
in all things, so we will obey you. Only may the LORD your God be with
you, as he was with Moses! 18 Whoever rebels against your orders and
disobeys your words, whatever you command, shall be put to death.
Only be strong and courageous."
[Joshua 2]
The story of the spies and Rahab
1 Then Joshua son of Nun sent two men secretly from Shittim as spies,
saying, "Go, view the land, especially Jericho." So they went, and
entered the house of a prostitute whose name was Rahab, and spent
the night there. 2 The king of Jericho was told, "Some Israelites have
come here tonight to search out the land." 3 Then the king of Jericho
sent orders to Rahab, "Bring out the men who have come to you, who
entered your house, for they have come only to search out the whole
land." 4 But the woman took the two men and hid them. Then she
said, "True, the men came to me, but I did not know where they came
from. 5 And when it was time to close the gate at dark, the men went
out. Where the men went I do not know. Pursue them quickly, for you
can overtake them." 6 She had, however, brought them up to the roof
and hidden them with the stalks of flax that she had laid out on the
roof. 7 So the men pursued them on the way to the Jordan as far as the
fords. As soon as the pursuers had gone out, the gate was shut.
8 Before they went to sleep, she came up to them on the roof 9 and
said to the men: "I know that the LORD has given you the land, and
that dread of you has fallen on us, and that all the inhabitants of the
land melt in fear before you. 10 For we have heard how the LORD dried
up the water of the Red Sea before you when you came out of Egypt,
and what you did to the two kings of the Amorites that were beyond
the Jordan, to Sihon and Og, whom you utterly destroyed. 11 As soon as
we heard it, our hearts melted, and there was no courage left in any of

440

JOSHUA 441

us because of you. The LORD your God is indeed God in heaven above
and on earth below. 12 Now then, since I have dealt kindly with you,
swear to me by the LORD that you in turn will deal kindly with my
family. Give me a sign of good faith 13 that you will spare my father
and mother, my brothers and sisters, and all who belong to them, and
deliver our lives from death." 14 The men said to her, "Our life for
yours! If you do not tell this business of ours, then we will deal kindly
and faithfully with you when the LORD gives us the land."
15 Then she let them down by a rope through the window, for her
house was on the outer side of the city wall and she resided within the
wall itself. 16 She said to them, "Go toward the hill country, so that the
pursuers may not come upon you. Hide yourselves there three days,
until the pursuers have returned; then afterward you may go your
way." 17 The men said to her, "We will be released from this oath that
you have made us swear to you 18 if we invade the land and you do
not tie this crimson cord in the window through which you let us
down, and you do not gather into your house your father and mother,
your brothers, and all your family. 19 If any of you go out of the doors
of your house into the street, they shall be responsible for their own
death, and we shall be innocent; but if a hand is laid upon any who are
with you in the house, we shall bear the responsibility for their death.
20 But if you tell this business of ours, then we shall be released from
this oath that you made us swear to you." 21 She said, "According to
your words, so be it." She sent them away and they departed. Then she
tied the crimson cord in the window.
22 They departed and went into the hill country and stayed there three
days, until the pursuers returned. The pursuers had searched all along
the way and found nothing. 23 Then the two men came down again
from the hill country. They crossed over, came to Joshua son of Nun,
and told him all that had happened to them. 24 They said to Joshua,
"Truly the LORD has given all the land into our hands; moreover all the
inhabitants of the land melt in fear before us."

441

JOSHUA 442

[Joshua 3]
The crossing of the Jordan
1 Early in the morning Joshua rose and set out from Shittim with all the
Israelites, and they came to the Jordan. They camped there before
crossing over. 2 At the end of three days the officers went through the
camp 3 and commanded the people, "When you see the ark of the
covenant of the LORD your God being carried by the levitical priests,
then you shall set out from your place. Follow it, 4 so that you may
know the way you should go, for you have not passed this way before.
Yet there shall be a space between you and it, a distance of about two
thousand cubits; do not come any nearer to it." 5 Then Joshua said to
the people, "Sanctify yourselves; for tomorrow the LORD will do
wonders among you." 6 To the priests Joshua said, "Take up the ark of
the covenant, and pass on in front of the people." So they took up the
ark of the covenant and went in front of the people.
7 The LORD said to Joshua, "This day I will begin to exalt you in the
sight of all Israel, so that they may know that I will be with you as I was
with Moses. 8 You are the one who shall command the priests who
bear the ark of the covenant, 'When you come to the edge of the
waters of the Jordan, you shall stand still in the Jordan.'" 9 Joshua then
said to the Israelites, "Draw near and hear the words of the LORD your
God." 10 Joshua said, "By this you shall know that among you is the
living God who without fail will drive out from before you the
Canaanites, Hittites, Hivites, Perizzites, Girgashites, Amorites, and
Jebusites: 11 the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth is
going to pass before you into the Jordan. 12 So now select twelve men
from the tribes of Israel, one from each tribe. 13 When the soles of the
feet of the priests who bear the ark of the LORD, the Lord of all the
earth, rest in the waters of the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan
flowing from above shall be cut off; they shall stand in a single heap."
14 When the people set out from their tents to cross over the Jordan,
the priests bearing the ark of the covenant were in front of the people.
15 Now the Jordan overflows all its banks throughout the time of
harvest. So when those who bore the ark had come to the Jordan, and
the feet of the priests bearing the ark were dipped in the edge of the

442

JOSHUA 443

water, 16 the waters flowing from above stood still, rising up in a single
heap far off at Adam, the city that is beside Zarethan, while those
flowing toward the sea of the Arabah, the Dead Sea, were wholly cut
off. Then the people crossed over opposite Jericho. 17 While all Israel
were crossing over on dry ground, the priests who bore the ark of the
covenant of the LORD stood on dry ground in the middle of the Jordan,
until the entire nation finished crossing over the Jordan.
[Joshua 4]
The erecting of the twelve-stone memorial
1 When the entire nation had finished crossing over the Jordan, the
LORD said to Joshua: 2 "Select twelve men from the people, one from
each tribe, 3 and command them, 'Take twelve stones from here out of
the middle of the Jordan, from the place where the priests' feet stood,
carry them over with you, and lay them down in the place where you
camp tonight.'" 4 Then Joshua summoned the twelve men from the
Israelites, whom he had appointed, one from each tribe. 5 Joshua said
to them, "Pass on before the ark of the LORD your God into the middle
of the Jordan, and each of you take up a stone on his shoulder, one for
each of the tribes of the Israelites, 6 so that this may be a sign among
you. When your children ask in time to come, 'What do those stones
mean to you?' 7 then you shall tell them that the waters of the Jordan
were cut off in front of the ark of the covenant of the LORD. When it
crossed over the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan were cut off. So
these stones shall be to the Israelites a memorial forever."
8 The Israelites did as Joshua commanded. They took up twelve stones
out of the middle of the Jordan, according to the number of the tribes
of the Israelites, as the LORD told Joshua, carried them over with them
to the place where they camped, and laid them down there. 9 (Joshua
set up twelve stones in the middle of the Jordan, in the place where
the feet of the priests bearing the ark of the covenant had stood; and
they are there to this day.)
10 The priests who bore the ark remained standing in the middle of the
Jordan, until everything was finished that the LORD commanded Joshua
to tell the people, according to all that Moses had commanded Joshua.
The people crossed over in haste. 11 As soon as all the people had

443

JOSHUA 444

finished crossing over, the ark of the LORD, and the priests, crossed over
in front of the people. 12 The Reubenites, the Gadites, and the halftribe of Manasseh crossed over armed before the Israelites, as Moses
had ordered them. 13 About forty thousand armed for war crossed over
before the LORD to the plains of Jericho for battle.
14 On that day the LORD exalted Joshua in the sight of all Israel; and
they stood in awe of him, as they had stood in awe of Moses, all the
days of his life.
15 The LORD said to Joshua, 16 "Command the priests who bear the ark
of the covenant, to come up out of the Jordan." 17 Joshua therefore
commanded the priests, "Come up out of the Jordan." 18 When the
priests bearing the ark of the covenant of the LORD came up from the
middle of the Jordan, and the soles of the priests' feet touched dry
ground, the waters of the Jordan returned to their place and
overflowed all its banks, as before.
The final unit emphasizes the instructional value of the memorial
19 The people came up out of the Jordan on the tenth day of the first
month, and they camped in Gilgal on the east border of Jericho. 20
Those twelve stones, which they had taken out of the Jordan, Joshua
set up in Gilgal, 21 saying to the Israelites, "When your children ask
their parents in time to come, 'What do these stones mean?' 22 then
you shall let your children know, 'Israel crossed over the Jordan here on
dry ground.' 23 For the LORD your God dried up the waters of the
Jordan for you until you crossed over, as the LORD your God did to the
Red Sea, which he dried up for us until we crossed over, 24 so that all
the peoples of the earth may know that the hand of the LORD is
mighty, and so that you may fear the LORD your God forever."
[Joshua 5]
1 When all the kings of the Amorites beyond the Jordan to the west,
and all the kings of the Canaanites by the sea, heard that the LORD had
dried up the waters of the Jordan for the Israelites until they had

444

JOSHUA 445

crossed over, their hearts melted, and there was no longer any spirit in
them, because of the Israelites.
Final preparatory events at Gilgal
2 At that time the LORD said to Joshua, "Make flint knives and
circumcise the Israelites a second time." 3 So Joshua made flint knives,
and circumcised the Israelites at Gibeath-haaraloth. 4 This is the reason
why Joshua circumcised them: all the males of the people who came
out of Egypt, all the warriors, had died during the journey through the
wilderness after they had come out of Egypt. 5 Although all the people
who came out had been circumcised, yet all the people born on the
journey through the wilderness after they had come out of Egypt had
not been circumcised. 6 For the Israelites traveled forty years in the
wilderness, until all the nation, the warriors who came out of Egypt,
perished, not having listened to the voice of the LORD. To them the
LORD swore that he would not let them see the land that he had sworn
to their ancestors to give us, a land flowing with milk and honey. 7 So
it was their children, whom he raised up in their place, that Joshua
circumcised; for they were uncircumcised, because they had not been
circumcised on the way.
8 When the circumcising of all the nation was done, they remained in
their places in the camp until they were healed. 9 The LORD said to
Joshua, "Today I have rolled away from you the disgrace of Egypt."
And so that place is called Gilgal to this day.
10 While the Israelites were camped in Gilgal they kept the passover in
the evening on the fourteenth day of the month in the plains of
Jericho. 11 On the day after the passover, on that very day, they ate the
produce of the land, unleavened cakes and parched grain. 12 The
manna ceased on the day they ate the produce of the land, and the
Israelites no longer had manna; they ate the crops of the land of
Canaan that year.

445

JOSHUA 446

Conquest of the land; central campaign; Jericho: first application of
"herem"
13 Once when Joshua was by Jericho, he looked up and saw a man
standing before him with a drawn sword in his hand. Joshua went to
him and said to him, "Are you one of us, or one of our adversaries?" 14
He replied, "Neither; but as commander of the army of the LORD I have
now come." And Joshua fell on his face to the earth and worshiped,
and he said to him, "What do you command your servant, my lord?" 15
The commander of the army of the LORD said to Joshua, "Remove the
sandals from your feet, for the place where you stand is holy." And
Joshua did so.
[Joshua 6]
1 Now Jericho was shut up inside and out because of the Israelites; no
one came out and no one went in. 2 The LORD said to Joshua, "See, I
have handed Jericho over to you, along with its king and soldiers. 3
You shall march around the city, all the warriors circling the city once.
Thus you shall do for six days, 4 with seven priests bearing seven
trumpets of rams' horns before the ark. On the seventh day you shall
march around the city seven times, the priests blowing the trumpets. 5
When they make a long blast with the ram's horn, as soon as you hear
the sound of the trumpet, then all the people shall shout with a great
shout; and the wall of the city will fall down flat, and all the people
shall charge straight ahead." 6 So Joshua son of Nun summoned the
priests and said to them, "Take up the ark of the covenant, and have
seven priests carry seven trumpets of rams' horns in front of the ark of
the LORD." 7 To the people he said, "Go forward and march around the
city; have the armed men pass on before the ark of the LORD."
Jericho is captured by following the LORD's instructions
8 As Joshua had commanded the people, the seven priests carrying the
seven trumpets of rams' horns before the LORD went forward, blowing
the trumpets, with the ark of the covenant of the LORD following them.
9 And the armed men went before the priests who blew the trumpets;
the rear guard came after the ark, while the trumpets blew continually.

446

JOSHUA 447

10 To the people Joshua gave this command: "You shall not shout or
let your voice be heard, nor shall you utter a word, until the day I tell
you to shout. Then you shall shout." 11 So the ark of the LORD went
around the city, circling it once; and they came into the camp, and
spent the night in the camp.
12 Then Joshua rose early in the morning, and the priests took up the
ark of the LORD. 13 The seven priests carrying the seven trumpets of
rams' horns before the ark of the LORD passed on, blowing the
trumpets continually. The armed men went before them, and the rear
guard came after the ark of the LORD, while the trumpets blew
continually. 14 On the second day they marched around the city once
and then returned to the camp. They did this for six days.
15 On the seventh day they rose early, at dawn, and marched around
the city in the same manner seven times. It was only on that day that
they marched around the city seven times. 16 And at the seventh time,
when the priests had blown the trumpets, Joshua said to the people,
"Shout! For the LORD has given you the city. 17 The city and all that is in
it shall be devoted to the LORD for destruction. Only Rahab the
prostitute and all who are with her in her house shall live because she
hid the messengers we sent. 18 As for you, keep away from the things
devoted to destruction, so as not to covet and take any of the devoted
things and make the camp of Israel an object for destruction, bringing
trouble upon it. 19 But all silver and gold, and vessels of bronze and
iron, are sacred to the LORD; they shall go into the treasury of the
LORD." 20 So the people shouted, and the trumpets were blown. As
soon as the people heard the sound of the trumpets, they raised a
great shout, and the wall fell down flat; so the people charged straight
ahead into the city and captured it. 21 Then they devoted to
destruction by the edge of the sword all in the city, both men and
women, young and old, oxen, sheep, and donkeys.
22 Joshua said to the two men who had spied out the land, "Go into
the prostitute's house, and bring the woman out of it and all who
belong to her, as you swore to her." 23 So the young men who had
been spies went in and brought Rahab out, along with her father, her
mother, her brothers, and all who belonged to her — they brought all

447

JOSHUA 448

her kindred out — and set them outside the camp of Israel. 24 They
burned down the city, and everything in it; only the silver and gold,
and the vessels of bronze and iron, they put into the treasury of the
house of the LORD. 25 But Rahab the prostitute, with her family and all
who belonged to her, Joshua spared. Her family has lived in Israel ever
since. For she hid the messengers whom Joshua sent to spy out Jericho.
26 Joshua then pronounced this oath, saying,
"Cursed before the LORD be anyone who tries
to build this city — this Jericho!
At the cost of his firstborn he shall lay its foundation,
and at the cost of his youngest he shall set up its gates!"
27 So the LORD was with Joshua; and his fame was in all the land.
[Joshua 7]
Achan and Ai; first battle of Ai and Achan's sin
1 But the Israelites broke faith in regard to the devoted things: Achan
son of Carmi son of Zabdi son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took
some of the devoted things; and the anger of the LORD burned against
the Israelites.
2 Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is near Beth-aven, east of
Bethel, and said to them, "Go up and spy out the land." And the men
went up and spied out Ai. 3 Then they returned to Joshua and said to
him, "Not all the people need go up; about two or three thousand
men should go up and attack Ai. Since they are so few, do not make
the whole people toil up there." 4 So about three thousand of the
people went up there; and they fled before the men of Ai. 5 The men
of Ai killed about thirty-six of them, chasing them from outside the
gate as far as Shebarim and killing them on the slope. The hearts of the
people melted and turned to water.
Second application of "herem": Achan's execution
6 Then Joshua tore his clothes, and fell to the ground on his face
before the ark of the LORD until the evening, he and the elders of

448

JOSHUA 449

Israel; and they put dust on their heads. 7 Joshua said, "Ah, Lord GOD!
Why have you brought this people across the Jordan at all, to hand us
over to the Amorites so as to destroy us? Would that we had been
content to settle beyond the Jordan! 8 O Lord, what can I say, now
that Israel has turned their backs to their enemies! 9 The Canaanites
and all the inhabitants of the land will hear of it, and surround us, and
cut off our name from the earth. Then what will you do for your great
name?"
10 The LORD said to Joshua, "Stand up! Why have you fallen upon your
face? 11 Israel has sinned; they have transgressed my covenant that I
imposed on them. They have taken some of the devoted things; they
have stolen, they have acted deceitfully, and they have put them
among their own belongings. 12 Therefore the Israelites are unable to
stand before their enemies; they turn their backs to their enemies,
because they have become a thing devoted for destruction themselves.
I will be with you no more, unless you destroy the devoted things from
among you. 13 Proceed to sanctify the people, and say, 'Sanctify
yourselves for tomorrow; for thus says the LORD, the God of Israel,
"There are devoted things among you, O Israel; you will be unable to
stand before your enemies until you take away the devoted things
from among you." 14 In the morning therefore you shall come forward
tribe by tribe. The tribe that the LORD takes shall come near by clans,
the clan that the LORD takes shall come near by households, and the
household that the LORD takes shall come near one by one. 15 And the
one who is taken as having the devoted things shall be burned with
fire, together with all that he has, for having transgressed the
covenant of the LORD, and for having done an outrageous thing in
Israel.'"
16 So Joshua rose early in the morning, and brought Israel near tribe by
tribe, and the tribe of Judah was taken. 17 He brought near the clans of
Judah, and the clan of the Zerahites was taken; and he brought near
the clan of the Zerahites, family by family, and Zabdi was taken. 18 And
he brought near his household one by one, and Achan son of Carmi
son of Zabdi son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was taken. 19 Then
Joshua said to Achan, "My son, give glory to the LORD God of Israel and
make confession to him. Tell me now what you have done; do not hide

449

JOSHUA 450

it from me." 20 And Achan answered Joshua, "It is true; I am the one
who sinned against the LORD God of Israel. This is what I did: 21 when I
saw among the spoil a beautiful mantle from Shinar, and two hundred
shekels of silver, and a bar of gold weighing fifty shekels, then I
coveted them and took them. They now lie hidden in the ground inside
my tent, with the silver underneath."
22 So Joshua sent messengers, and they ran to the tent; and there it
was, hidden in his tent with the silver underneath. 23 They took them
out of the tent and brought them to Joshua and all the Israelites; and
they spread them out before the LORD. 24 Then Joshua and all Israel
with him took Achan son of Zerah, with the silver, the mantle, and the
bar of gold, with his sons and daughters, with his oxen, donkeys, and
sheep, and his tent and all that he had; and they brought them up to
the Valley of Achor. 25 Joshua said, "Why did you bring trouble on us?
The LORD is bringing trouble on you today." And all Israel stoned him
to death; they burned them with fire, cast stones on them, 26 and
raised over him a great heap of stones that remains to this day. Then
the LORD turned from his burning anger. Therefore that place to this
day is called the Valley of Achor.
[Joshua 8]
Third application of "herem": second battle of Ai and Ai's description
1 Then the LORD said to Joshua, "Do not fear or be dismayed; take all
the fighting men with you, and go up now to Ai. See, I have handed
over to you the king of Ai with his people, his city, and his land. 2 You
shall do to Ai and its king as you did to Jericho and its king; only its
spoil and its livestock you may take as booty for yourselves. Set an
ambush against the city, behind it."
3 So Joshua and all the fighting men set out to go up against Ai.
Joshua chose thirty thousand warriors and sent them out by night 4
with the command, "You shall lie in ambush against the city, behind it;
do not go very far from the city, but all of you stay alert. 5 I and all the
people who are with me will approach the city. When they come out
against us, as before, we shall flee from them. 6 They will come out
after us until we have drawn them away from the city; for they will say,

450

JOSHUA 451

'They are fleeing from us, as before.' While we flee from them, 7 you
shall rise up from the ambush and seize the city; for the LORD your God
will give it into your hand. 8 And when you have taken the city, you
shall set the city on fire, doing as the LORD has ordered; see, I have
commanded you." 9 So Joshua sent them out; and they went to the
place of ambush, and lay between Bethel and Ai, to the west of Ai; but
Joshua spent that night in the camp.
10 In the morning Joshua rose early and mustered the people, and
went up, with the elders of Israel, before the people to Ai. 11 All the
fighting men who were with him went up, and drew near before the
city, and camped on the north side of Ai, with a ravine between them
and Ai. 12 Taking about five thousand men, he set them in ambush
between Bethel and Ai, to the west of the city. 13 So they stationed the
forces, the main encampment that was north of the city and its rear
guard west of the city. But Joshua spent that night in the valley. 14
When the king of Ai saw this, he and all his people, the inhabitants of
the city, hurried out early in the morning to the meeting place facing
the Arabah to meet Israel in battle; but he did not know that there was
an ambush against him behind the city. 15 And Joshua and all Israel
made a pretense of being beaten before them, and fled in the
direction of the wilderness. 16 So all the people who were in the city
were called together to pursue them, and as they pursued Joshua they
were drawn away from the city. 17 There was not a man left in Ai or
Bethel who did not go out after Israel; they left the city open, and
pursued Israel.
18 Then the LORD said to Joshua, "Stretch out the sword that is in your
hand toward Ai; for I will give it into your hand." And Joshua stretched
out the sword that was in his hand toward the city. 19 As soon as he
stretched out his hand, the troops in ambush rose quickly out of their
place and rushed forward. They entered the city, took it, and at once
set the city on fire. 20 So when the men of Ai looked back, the smoke
of the city was rising to the sky. They had no power to flee this way or
that, for the people who fled to the wilderness turned back against the
pursuers. 21 When Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush had taken
the city and that the smoke of the city was rising, then they turned
back and struck down the men of Ai. 22 And the others came out from

451

JOSHUA 452

the city against them; so they were surrounded by Israelites, some on
one side, and some on the other; and Israel struck them down until no
one was left who survived or escaped. 23 But the king of Ai was taken
alive and brought to Joshua.
24 When Israel had finished slaughtering all the inhabitants of Ai in the
open wilderness where they pursued them, and when all of them to
the very last had fallen by the edge of the sword, all Israel returned to
Ai, and attacked it with the edge of the sword. 25 The total of those
who fell that day, both men and women, was twelve thousand — all
the people of Ai. 26 For Joshua did not draw back his hand, with which
he stretched out the sword, until he had utterly destroyed all the
inhabitants of Ai. 27 Only the livestock and the spoil of that city Israel
took as their booty, according to the word of the LORD that he had
issued to Joshua. 28 So Joshua burned Ai, and made it forever a heap
of ruins, as it is to this day. 29 And he hanged the king of Ai on a tree
until evening; and at sunset Joshua commanded, and they took his
body down from the tree, threw it down at the entrance of the gate of
the city, and raised over it a great heap of stones, which stands there
to this day.
Covenant renewal as land grant: Shechem
30 Then Joshua built on Mount Ebal an altar to the LORD, the God of
Israel, 31 just as Moses the servant of the LORD had commanded the
Israelites, as it is written in the book of the law of Moses, "an altar of
unhewn stones, on which no iron tool has been used"; and they
offered on it burnt offerings to the LORD, and sacrificed offerings of
well-being. 32 And there, in the presence of the Israelites, Joshua wrote
on the stones a copy of the law of Moses, which he had written. 33 All
Israel, alien as well as citizen, with their elders and officers and their
judges, stood on opposite sides of the ark in front of the levitical
priests who carried the ark of the covenant of the LORD, half of them in
front of Mount Gerizim and half of them in front of Mount Ebal, as
Moses the servant of the LORD had commanded at the first, that they
should bless the people of Israel. 34 And afterward he read all the
words of the law, blessings and curses, according to all that is written
in the book of the law. 35 There was not a word of all that Moses

452

JOSHUA 453

commanded that Joshua did not read before all the assembly of Israel,
and the women, and the little ones, and the aliens who resided among
them.
[Joshua 9]
The southern and northern campaigns
1 Now when all the kings who were beyond the Jordan in the hill
country and in the lowland all along the coast of the Great Sea toward
Lebanon — the Hittites, the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Perizzites,
the Hivites, and the Jebusites — heard of this, 2 they gathered together
with one accord to fight Joshua and Israel.
Southern campaign; Gibeon
3 But when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done to
Jericho and to Ai, 4 they on their part acted with cunning: they went
and prepared provisions, and took worn-out sacks for their donkeys,
and wineskins, worn-out and torn and mended, 5 with worn-out,
patched sandals on their feet, and worn-out clothes; and all their
provisions were dry and moldy. 6 They went to Joshua in the camp at
Gilgal, and said to him and to the Israelites, "We have come from a far
country; so now make a treaty with us." 7 But the Israelites said to the
Hivites, "Perhaps you live among us; then how can we make a treaty
with you?" 8 They said to Joshua, "We are your servants." And Joshua
said to them, "Who are you? And where do you come from?" 9 They
said to him, "Your servants have come from a very far country, because
of the name of the LORD your God; for we have heard a report of him,
of all that he did in Egypt, 10 and of all that he did to the two kings of
the Amorites who were beyond the Jordan, King Sihon of Heshbon,
and King Og of Bashan who lived in Ashtaroth. 11 So our elders and all
the inhabitants of our country said to us, 'Take provisions in your hand
for the journey; go to meet them, and say to them, "We are your
servants; come now, make a treaty with us."' 12 Here is our bread; it
was still warm when we took it from our houses as our food for the
journey, on the day we set out to come to you, but now, see, it is dry
and moldy; 13 these wineskins were new when we filled them, and see,
they are burst; and these garments and sandals of ours are worn out

453

JOSHUA 454

from the very long journey." 14 So the leaders partook of their
provisions, and did not ask direction from the LORD. 15 And Joshua
made peace with them, guaranteeing their lives by a treaty; and the
leaders of the congregation swore an oath to them.
16 But when three days had passed after they had made a treaty with
them, they heard that they were their neighbors and were living
among them. 17 So the Israelites set out and reached their cities on the
third day. Now their cities were Gibeon, Chephirah, Beeroth, and
Kiriath-jearim. 18 But the Israelites did not attack them, because the
leaders of the congregation had sworn to them by the LORD, the God
of Israel. Then all the congregation murmured against the leaders. 19
But all the leaders said to all the congregation, "We have sworn to
them by the LORD, the God of Israel, and now we must not touch them.
20 This is what we will do to them: We will let them live, so that wrath
may not come upon us, because of the oath that we swore to them." 21
The leaders said to them, "Let them live." So they became hewers of
wood and drawers of water for all the congregation, as the leaders
had decided concerning them.
22 Joshua summoned them, and said to them, "Why did you deceive us,
saying, 'We are very far from you,' while in fact you are living among
us? 23 Now therefore you are cursed, and some of you shall always be
slaves, hewers of wood and drawers of water for the house of my
God." 24 They answered Joshua, "Because it was told to your servants
for a certainty that the LORD your God had commanded his servant
Moses to give you all the land, and to destroy all the inhabitants of the
land before you; so we were in great fear for our lives because of you,
and did this thing. 25 And now we are in your hand: do as it seems
good and right in your sight to do to us." 26 This is what he did for
them: he saved them from the Israelites; and they did not kill them. 27
But on that day Joshua made them hewers of wood and drawers of
water for the congregation and for the altar of the LORD, to continue
to this day, in the place that he should choose.

454

JOSHUA 455

[Joshua 10]
The defeat of the Amorite alliance; scene one
1 When King Adoni-zedek of Jerusalem heard how Joshua had taken
Ai, and had utterly destroyed it, doing to Ai and its king as he had
done to Jericho and its king, and how the inhabitants of Gibeon had
made peace with Israel and were among them, 2 he became greatly
frightened, because Gibeon was a large city, like one of the royal cities,
and was larger than Ai, and all its men were warriors. 3 So King Adonizedek of Jerusalem sent a message to King Hoham of Hebron, to King
Piram of Jarmuth, to King Japhia of Lachish, and to King Debir of
Eglon, saying, 4 "Come up and help me, and let us attack Gibeon; for it
has made peace with Joshua and with the Israelites." 5 Then the five
kings of the Amorites — the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the
king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon — gathered
their forces, and went up with all their armies and camped against
Gibeon, and made war against it.
6 And the Gibeonites sent to Joshua at the camp in Gilgal, saying, "Do
not abandon your servants; come up to us quickly, and save us, and
help us; for all the kings of the Amorites who live in the hill country are
gathered against us." 7 So Joshua went up from Gilgal, he and all the
fighting force with him, all the mighty warriors. 8 The LORD said to
Joshua, "Do not fear them, for I have handed them over to you; not
one of them shall stand before you." 9 So Joshua came upon them
suddenly, having marched up all night from Gilgal. 10 And the LORD
threw them into a panic before Israel, who inflicted a great slaughter
on them at Gibeon, chased them by the way of the ascent of Bethhoron, and struck them down as far as Azekah and Makkedah. 11 As
they fled before Israel, while they were going down the slope of Bethhoron, the LORD threw down huge stones from heaven on them as far
as Azekah, and they died; there were more who died because of the
hailstones than the Israelites killed with the sword.
Joshua's request to the Lord and the divine intervention
12 On the day when the LORD gave the Amorites over to the Israelites,
Joshua spoke to the LORD; and he said in the sight of Israel,

455

JOSHUA 456

"Sun, stand still at Gibeon,
and Moon, in the valley of Aijalon."
13 And the sun stood still, and the moon stopped,
until the nation took vengeance on their enemies.
Is this not written in the Book of Jashar? The sun stopped in
midheaven, and did not hurry to set for about a whole day. 14 There
has been no day like it before or since, when the LORD heeded a human
voice; for the LORD fought for Israel.
15 Then Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, to the camp at Gilgal.
Scene two; the capture and execution of the kings
16 Meanwhile, these five kings fled and hid themselves in the cave at
Makkedah. 17 And it was told Joshua, "The five kings have been found,
hidden in the cave at Makkedah." 18 Joshua said, "Roll large stones
against the mouth of the cave, and set men by it to guard them; 19 but
do not stay there yourselves; pursue your enemies, and attack them
from the rear. Do not let them enter their towns, for the LORD your
God has given them into your hand." 20 When Joshua and the
Israelites had finished inflicting a very great slaughter on them, until
they were wiped out, and when the survivors had entered into the
fortified towns, 21 all the people returned safe to Joshua in the camp
at Makkedah; no one dared to speak against any of the Israelites.
22 Then Joshua said, "Open the mouth of the cave, and bring those
five kings out to me from the cave." 23 They did so, and brought the
five kings out to him from the cave, the king of Jerusalem, the king of
Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of
Eglon. 24 When they brought the kings out to Joshua, Joshua
summoned all the Israelites, and said to the chiefs of the warriors who
had gone with him, "Come near, put your feet on the necks of these
kings." Then they came near and put their feet on their necks. 25 And
Joshua said to them, "Do not be afraid or dismayed; be strong and
courageous; for thus the LORD will do to all the enemies against whom
you fight." 26 Afterward Joshua struck them down and put them to
death, and he hung them on five trees. And they hung on the trees

456

JOSHUA 457

until evening. 27 At sunset Joshua commanded, and they took them
down from the trees and threw them into the cave where they had
hidden themselves; they set large stones against the mouth of the cave,
which remain to this very day.
The capture and "herem" of the cities
28 Joshua took Makkedah on that day, and struck it and its king with
the edge of the sword; he utterly destroyed every person in it; he left
no one remaining. And he did to the king of Makkedah as he had done
to the king of Jericho.
29 Then Joshua passed on from Makkedah, and all Israel with him, to
Libnah, and fought against Libnah. 30 The LORD gave it also and its
king into the hand of Israel; and he struck it with the edge of the
sword, and every person in it; he left no one remaining in it; and he did
to its king as he had done to the king of Jericho.
31 Next Joshua passed on from Libnah, and all Israel with him, to
Lachish, and laid siege to it, and assaulted it. 32 The LORD gave Lachish
into the hand of Israel, and he took it on the second day, and struck it
with the edge of the sword, and every person in it, as he had done to
Libnah.
33 Then King Horam of Gezer came up to help Lachish; and Joshua
struck him and his people, leaving him no survivors.
34 From Lachish Joshua passed on with all Israel to Eglon; and they laid
siege to it, and assaulted it; 35 and they took it that day, and struck it
with the edge of the sword; and every person in it he utterly destroyed
that day, as he had done to Lachish.
36 Then Joshua went up with all Israel from Eglon to Hebron; they
assaulted it, 37 and took it, and struck it with the edge of the sword,
and its king and its towns, and every person in it; he left no one
remaining, just as he had done to Eglon, and utterly destroyed it with
every person in it.

457

JOSHUA 458

38 Then Joshua, with all Israel, turned back to Debir and assaulted it,
39 and he took it with its king and all its towns; they struck them with
the edge of the sword, and utterly destroyed every person in it; he left
no one remaining; just as he had done to Hebron, and, as he had done
to Libnah and its king, so he did to Debir and its king.
Summary of the southern campaign
40 So Joshua defeated the whole land, the hill country and the Negeb
and the lowland and the slopes, and all their kings; he left no one
remaining, but utterly destroyed all that breathed, as the LORD God of
Israel commanded. 41 And Joshua defeated them from Kadesh-barnea
to Gaza, and all the country of Goshen, as far as Gibeon. 42 Joshua
took all these kings and their land at one time, because the LORD God
of Israel fought for Israel. 43 Then Joshua returned, and all Israel with
him, to the camp at Gilgal.
[Joshua 11]
Northern campaign; defeat of the Canaanite coalition
1 When King Jabin of Hazor heard of this, he sent to King Jobab of
Madon, to the king of Shimron, to the king of Achshaph, 2 and to the
kings who were in the northern hill country, and in the Arabah south
of Chinneroth, and in the lowland, and in Naphoth-dor on the west, 3
to the Canaanites in the east and the west, the Amorites, the Hittites,
the Perizzites, and the Jebusites in the hill country, and the Hivites
under Hermon in the land of Mizpah. 4 They came out, with all their
troops, a great army, in number like the sand on the seashore, with
very many horses and chariots. 5 All these kings joined their forces, and
came and camped together at the waters of Merom, to fight with
Israel.
6 And the LORD said to Joshua, "Do not be afraid of them, for
tomorrow at this time I will hand over all of them, slain, to Israel; you
shall hamstring their horses, and burn their chariots with fire." 7 So
Joshua came suddenly upon them with all his fighting force, by the
waters of Merom, and fell upon them. 8 And the LORD handed them
over to Israel, who attacked them and chased them as far as Great

458

JOSHUA 459

Sidon and Misrephoth-maim, and eastward as far as the valley of
Mizpeh. They struck them down, until they had left no one remaining.
9 And Joshua did to them as the LORD commanded him; he hamstrung
their horses, and burned their chariots with fire.
Summary of the northern campaign
10 Joshua turned back at that time, and took Hazor, and struck its king
down with the sword. Before that time Hazor was the head of all those
kingdoms. 11 And they put to the sword all who were in it, utterly
destroying them; there was no one left who breathed, and he burned
Hazor with fire. 12 And all the towns of those kings, and all their kings,
Joshua took, and struck them with the edge of the sword, utterly
destroying them, as Moses the servant of the LORD had commanded. 13
But Israel burned none of the towns that stood on mounds except
Hazor, which Joshua did burn. 14 All the spoil of these towns, and the
livestock, the Israelites took for their booty; but all the people they
struck down with the edge of the sword, until they had destroyed
them, and they did not leave any who breathed. 15 As the LORD had
commanded his servant Moses, so Moses commanded Joshua, and so
Joshua did; he left nothing undone of all that the LORD had
commanded Moses.
Summary of the total conquest
16 So Joshua took all that land: the hill country and all the Negeb and
all the land of Goshen and the lowland and the Arabah and the hill
country of Israel and its lowland, 17 from Mount Halak, which rises
toward Seir, as far as Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon below Mount
Hermon. He took all their kings, struck them down, and put them to
death. 18 Joshua made war a long time with all those kings. 19 There
was not a town that made peace with the Israelites, except the Hivites,
the inhabitants of Gibeon; all were taken in battle. 20 For it was the
LORD's doing to harden their hearts so that they would come against
Israel in battle, in order that they might be utterly destroyed, and
might receive no mercy, but be exterminated, just as the LORD had
commanded Moses.

459

JOSHUA 460

21 At that time Joshua came and wiped out the Anakim from the hill
country, from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, and from all the hill
country of Judah, and from all the hill country of Israel; Joshua utterly
destroyed them with their towns. 22 None of the Anakim was left in
the land of the Israelites; some remained only in Gaza, in Gath, and in
Ashdod. 23 So Joshua took the whole land, according to all that the
LORD had spoken to Moses; and Joshua gave it for an inheritance to
Israel according to their tribal allotments. And the land had rest from
war.
[Joshua 12]
A selective list of defeated cities' kings; Moses exploits the
Transjordan
1 Now these are the kings of the land, whom the Israelites defeated,
whose land they occupied beyond the Jordan toward the east, from
the Wadi Arnon to Mount Hermon, with all the Arabah eastward: 2
King Sihon of the Amorites who lived at Heshbon, and ruled from
Aroer, which is on the edge of the Wadi Arnon, and from the middle
of the valley as far as the river Jabbok, the boundary of the
Ammonites, that is, half of Gilead, 3 and the Arabah to the Sea of
Chinneroth eastward, and in the direction of Beth-jeshimoth, to the
sea of the Arabah, the Dead Sea, southward to the foot of the slopes
of Pisgah; 4 and King Og of Bashan, one of the last of the Rephaim,
who lived at Ashtaroth and at Edrei 5 and ruled over Mount Hermon
and Salecah and all Bashan to the boundary of the Geshurites and the
Maacathites, and over half of Gilead to the boundary of King Sihon of
Heshbon. 6 Moses, the servant of the LORD, and the Israelites defeated
them; and Moses the servant of the LORD gave their land for a
possession to the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of
Manasseh.
Joshua's victories west of the Jordan
7 The following are the kings of the land whom Joshua and the
Israelites defeated on the west side of the Jordan, from Baal-gad in the
valley of Lebanon to Mount Halak, that rises toward Seir (and Joshua
gave their land to the tribes of Israel as a possession according to their

460

JOSHUA 461

allotments, 8 in the hill country, in the lowland, in the Arabah, in the
slopes, in the wilderness, and in the Negeb, the land of the Hittites,
Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites):
9

the king of Jericho
one
the king of Ai, which is next to Bethel one
10
the king of Jerusalem
one
the king of Hebron
one
11
the king of Jarmuth
one
the king of Lachish
one
12
the king of Eglon
one
the king of Gezer
one
13
the king of Debir
one
the king of Geder
one
14
the king of Hormah
one
the king of Arad
one
15
the king of Libnah
one
the king of Adullam
one
16
the king of Makkedah
one
the king of Bethel
one
17
the king of Tappuah
one
the king of Hepher
one
18
the king of Aphek
one
the king of Lasharon
one
19
the king of Madon
one
the king of Hazor
one
20 the king of Shimron-meron
one
the king of Achshaph
one
21
the king of Taanach
one
the king of Megiddo
one
22
the king of Kedesh
one
the king of Jokneam in Carmel
one
23
the king of Dor in Naphath-dor
one
the king of Goiim in Galilee,
one
24
the king of Tirzah
one
thirty-one kings in all.

461

JOSHUA 462

[Joshua 13]
Division of the land; land remaining
1 Now Joshua was old and advanced in years; and the LORD said to him,
"You are old and advanced in years, and very much of the land still
remains to be possessed. 2 This is the land that still remains: all the
regions of the Philistines, and all those of the Geshurites 3 (from the
Shihor, which is east of Egypt, northward to the boundary of Ekron, it
is reckoned as Canaanite; there are five rulers of the Philistines, those
of Gaza, Ashdod, Ashkelon, Gath, and Ekron), and those of the Avvim 4
in the south; all the land of the Canaanites, and Mearah that belongs
to the Sidonians, to Aphek, to the boundary of the Amorites, 5 and the
land of the Gebalites, and all Lebanon, toward the east, from Baal-gad
below Mount Hermon to Lebo-hamath, 6 all the inhabitants of the hill
country from Lebanon to Misrephoth-maim, even all the Sidonians. I
will myself drive them out from before the Israelites; only allot the land
to Israel for an inheritance, as I have commanded you. 7 Now therefore
divide this land for an inheritance to the nine tribes and the half-tribe
of Manasseh."
Transjordanian tribal allotment
8 With the other half-tribe of Manasseh the Reubenites and the
Gadites received their inheritance, which Moses gave them, beyond the
Jordan eastward, as Moses the servant of the LORD gave them: 9 from
Aroer, which is on the edge of the Wadi Arnon, and the town that is in
the middle of the valley, and all the tableland from Medeba as far as
Dibon; 10 and all the cities of King Sihon of the Amorites, who reigned
in Heshbon, as far as the boundary of the Ammonites; 11 and Gilead,
and the region of the Geshurites and Maacathites, and all Mount
Hermon, and all Bashan to Salecah; 12 all the kingdom of Og in Bashan,
who reigned in Ashtaroth and in Edrei (he alone was left of the
survivors of the Rephaim); these Moses had defeated and driven out. 13
Yet the Israelites did not drive out the Geshurites or the Maacathites;
but Geshur and Maacath live within Israel to this day.

462

JOSHUA 463

14 To the tribe of Levi alone Moses gave no inheritance; the offerings
by fire to the LORD God of Israel are their inheritance, as he said to
them.
15 Moses gave an inheritance to the tribe of the Reubenites according
to their clans. 16 Their territory was from Aroer, which is on the edge
of the Wadi Arnon, and the town that is in the middle of the valley,
and all the tableland by Medeba; 17 with Heshbon, and all its towns
that are in the tableland; Dibon, and Bamoth-baal, and Beth-baalmeon, 18 and Jahaz, and Kedemoth, and Mephaath, 19 and Kiriathaim,
and Sibmah, and Zereth-shahar on the hill of the valley, 20 and Bethpeor, and the slopes of Pisgah, and Beth-jeshimoth, 21 that is, all the
towns of the tableland, and all the kingdom of King Sihon of the
Amorites, who reigned in Heshbon, whom Moses defeated with the
leaders of Midian, Evi and Rekem and Zur and Hur and Reba, as princes
of Sihon, who lived in the land. 22 Along with the rest of those they
put to death, the Israelites also put to the sword Balaam son of Beor,
who practiced divination. 23 And the border of the Reubenites was the
Jordan and its banks. This was the inheritance of the Reubenites
according to their families, with their towns and villages.
24 Moses gave an inheritance also to the tribe of the Gadites,
according to their families. 25 Their territory was Jazer, and all the
towns of Gilead, and half the land of the Ammonites, to Aroer, which
is east of Rabbah, 26 and from Heshbon to Ramath-mizpeh and
Betonim, and from Mahanaim to the territory of Debir, 27 and in the
valley Beth-haram, Beth-nimrah, Succoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the
kingdom of King Sihon of Heshbon, the Jordan and its banks, as far as
the lower end of the Sea of Chinnereth, eastward beyond the Jordan.
28 This is the inheritance of the Gadites according to their clans, with
their towns and villages.
29 Moses gave an inheritance to the half-tribe of Manasseh; it was
allotted to the half-tribe of the Manassites according to their families.
30 Their territory extended from Mahanaim, through all Bashan, the
whole kingdom of King Og of Bashan, and all the settlements of Jair,
which are in Bashan, sixty towns, 31 and half of Gilead, and Ashtaroth,
and Edrei, the towns of the kingdom of Og in Bashan; these were

463

JOSHUA 464

allotted to the people of Machir son of Manasseh according to their
clans — for half the Machirites.
32 These are the inheritances that Moses distributed in the plains of
Moab, beyond the Jordan east of Jericho. 33 But to the tribe of Levi
Moses gave no inheritance; the LORD God of Israel is their inheritance,
as he said to them.
[Joshua 14]
Cisjordanian tribal allotment; introduction to the process of allotment
1 These are the inheritances that the Israelites received in the land of
Canaan, which the priest Eleazar, and Joshua son of Nun, and the
heads of the families of the tribes of the Israelites distributed to them.
2 Their inheritance was by lot, as the LORD had commanded Moses for
the nine and one-half tribes. 3 For Moses had given an inheritance to
the two and one-half tribes beyond the Jordan; but to the Levites he
gave no inheritance among them. 4 For the people of Joseph were two
tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim; and no portion was given to the Levites
in the land, but only towns to live in, with their pasture lands for their
flocks and herds. 5 The Israelites did as the LORD commanded Moses;
they allotted the land.
Judah and Joseph allotments; Caleb's conquest
6 Then the people of Judah came to Joshua at Gilgal; and Caleb son of
Jephunneh the Kenizzite said to him, "You know what the LORD said to
Moses the man of God in Kadesh-barnea concerning you and me. 7 I
was forty years old when Moses the servant of the LORD sent me from
Kadesh-barnea to spy out the land; and I brought him an honest
report. 8 But my companions who went up with me made the heart of
the people melt; yet I wholeheartedly followed the LORD my God. 9
And Moses swore on that day, saying, 'Surely the land on which your
foot has trodden shall be an inheritance for you and your children
forever, because you have wholeheartedly followed the LORD my God.'
10 And now, as you see, the LORD has kept me alive, as he said, these
forty-five years since the time that the LORD spoke this word to Moses,
while Israel was journeying through the wilderness; and here I am

464

JOSHUA 465

today, eighty-five years old. 11 I am still as strong today as I was on the
day that Moses sent me; my strength now is as my strength was then,
for war, and for going and coming. 12 So now give me this hill country
of which the LORD spoke on that day; for you heard on that day how
the Anakim were there, with great fortified cities; it may be that the
LORD will be with me, and I shall drive them out, as the LORD said."
13 Then Joshua blessed him, and gave Hebron to Caleb son of
Jephunneh for an inheritance. 14 So Hebron became the inheritance of
Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite to this day, because he
wholeheartedly followed the LORD, the God of Israel. 15 Now the name
of Hebron formerly was Kiriath-arba; this Arba was the greatest man
among the Anakim. And the land had rest from war.
[Joshua 15]
Judah's boundary description
1 The lot for the tribe of the people of Judah according to their families
reached southward to the boundary of Edom, to the wilderness of Zin
at the farthest south. 2 And their south boundary ran from the end of
the Dead Sea, from the bay that faces southward; 3 it goes out
southward of the ascent of Akrabbim, passes along to Zin, and goes up
south of Kadesh-barnea, along by Hezron, up to Addar, makes a turn
to Karka, 4 passes along to Azmon, goes out by the Wadi of Egypt, and
comes to its end at the sea. This shall be your south boundary. 5 And
the east boundary is the Dead Sea, to the mouth of the Jordan. And
the boundary on the north side runs from the bay of the sea at the
mouth of the Jordan; 6 and the boundary goes up to Beth-hoglah, and
passes along north of Beth-arabah; and the boundary goes up to the
Stone of Bohan, Reuben's son; 7 and the boundary goes up to Debir
from the Valley of Achor, and so northward, turning toward Gilgal,
which is opposite the ascent of Adummim, which is on the south side
of the valley; and the boundary passes along to the waters of Enshemesh, and ends at En-rogel; 8 then the boundary goes up by the
valley of the son of Hinnom at the southern slope of the Jebusites (that
is, Jerusalem); and the boundary goes up to the top of the mountain
that lies over against the valley of Hinnom, on the west, at the
northern end of the valley of Rephaim; 9 then the boundary extends

465

JOSHUA 466

from the top of the mountain to the spring of the Waters of Nephtoah,
and from there to the towns of Mount Ephron; then the boundary
bends around to Baalah (that is, Kiriath-jearim); 10 and the boundary
circles west of Baalah to Mount Seir, passes along to the northern slope
of Mount Jearim (that is, Chesalon), and goes down to Beth-shemesh,
and passes along by Timnah; 11 the boundary goes out to the slope of
the hill north of Ekron, then the boundary bends around to Shikkeron,
and passes along to Mount Baalah, and goes out to Jabneel; then the
boundary comes to an end at the sea. 12 And the west boundary was
the Mediterranean with its coast. This is the boundary surrounding the
people of Judah according to their families.
Vignettes about Judah's heroes
13 According to the commandment of the LORD to Joshua, he gave to
Caleb son of Jephunneh a portion among the people of Judah, Kiriatharba, that is, Hebron (Arba was the father of Anak). 14 And Caleb
drove out from there the three sons of Anak: Sheshai, Ahiman, and
Talmai, the descendants of Anak. 15 From there he went up against the
inhabitants of Debir; now the name of Debir formerly was Kiriathsepher. 16 And Caleb said, "Whoever attacks Kiriath-sepher and takes
it, to him I will give my daughter Achsah as wife." 17 Othniel son of
Kenaz, the brother of Caleb, took it; and he gave him his daughter
Achsah as wife. 18 When she came to him, she urged him to ask her
father for a field. As she dismounted from her donkey, Caleb said to
her, "What do you wish?" 19 She said to him, "Give me a present; since
you have set me in the land of the Negeb, give me springs of water as
well." So Caleb gave her the upper springs and the lower springs.
A list of Judah's towns
20 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the people of Judah according
to their families. 21 The towns belonging to the tribe of the people of
Judah in the extreme south, toward the boundary of Edom, were
Kabzeel, Eder, Jagur, 22 Kinah, Dimonah, Adadah, 23 Kedesh, Hazor,
Ithnan, 24 Ziph, Telem, Bealoth, 25 Hazor-hadattah, Kerioth-hezron
(that is, Hazor), 26 Amam, Shema, Moladah, 27 Hazar-gaddah,
Heshmon, Beth-pelet, 28 Hazar-shual, Beer-sheba, Biziothiah, 29

466

JOSHUA 467

Baalah, Iim, Ezem, 30 Eltolad, Chesil, Hormah, 31 Ziklag, Madmannah,
Sansannah, 32 Lebaoth, Shilhim, Ain, and Rimmon: in all, twenty-nine
towns, with their villages.
33 And in the lowland, Eshtaol, Zorah, Ashnah, 34 Zanoah, En-gannim,
Tappuah, Enam, 35 Jarmuth, Adullam, Socoh, Azekah, 36 Shaaraim,
Adithaim, Gederah, Gederothaim: fourteen towns with their villages.
37 Zenan, Hadashah, Migdal-gad, 38 Dilan, Mizpeh, Jokthe-el, 39
Lachish, Bozkath, Eglon, 40 Cabbon, Lahmam, Chitlish, 41 Gederoth,
Beth-dagon, Naamah, and Makkedah: sixteen towns with their villages.
42 Libnah, Ether, Ashan, 43 Iphtah, Ashnah, Nezib, 44 Keilah, Achzib,
and Mareshah: nine towns with their villages.
45 Ekron, with its dependencies and its villages; 46 from Ekron to the
sea, all that were near Ashdod, with their villages.
47 Ashdod, its towns and its villages; Gaza, its towns and its villages; to
the Wadi of Egypt, and the Great Sea with its coast.
48 And in the hill country, Shamir, Jattir, Socoh, 49 Dannah, Kiriathsannah (that is, Debir), 50 Anab, Eshtemoh, Anim, 51 Goshen, Holon,
and Giloh: eleven towns with their villages.
52 Arab, Dumah, Eshan, 53 Janim, Beth-tappuah, Aphekah, 54 Humtah,
Kiriath-arba (that is, Hebron), and Zior: nine towns with their villages.
55 Maon, Carmel, Ziph, Juttah, 56 Jezreel, Jokdeam, Zanoah, 57 Kain,
Gibeah, and Timnah: ten towns with their villages.
58 Halhul, Beth-zur, Gedor, 59 Maarath, Beth-anoth, and Eltekon: six
towns with their villages.
60 Kiriath-baal (that is, Kiriath-jearim) and Rabbah: two towns with
their villages.
61 In the wilderness, Beth-arabah, Middin, Secacah, 62 Nibshan, the
City of Salt, and En-gedi: six towns with their villages.

467

JOSHUA 468

A narrative postscript
63 But the people of Judah could not drive out the Jebusites, the
inhabitants of Jerusalem; so the Jebusites live with the people of Judah
in Jerusalem to this day.
[Joshua 16]
Joseph (Ephraim and Half-Manasseh)
1 The allotment of the Josephites went from the Jordan by Jericho, east
of the waters of Jericho, into the wilderness, going up from Jericho
into the hill country to Bethel; 2 then going from Bethel to Luz, it
passes along to Ataroth, the territory of the Archites; 3 then it goes
down westward to the territory of the Japhletites, as far as the
territory of Lower Beth-horon, then to Gezer, and it ends at the sea.
4 The Josephites, Manasseh and Ephraim, received their inheritance.
Ephraim's boundary description is delineated
5 The territory of the Ephraimites by their families was as follows: the
boundary of their inheritance on the east was Ataroth-addar as far as
Upper Beth-horon, 6 and the boundary goes from there to the sea; on
the north is Michmethath; then on the east the boundary makes a turn
toward Taanath-shiloh, and passes along beyond it on the east to
Janoah, 7 then it goes down from Janoah to Ataroth and to Naarah,
and touches Jericho, ending at the Jordan. 8 From Tappuah the
boundary goes westward to the Wadi Kanah, and ends at the sea. Such
is the inheritance of the tribe of the Ephraimites by their families, 9
together with the towns that were set apart for the Ephraimites within
the inheritance of the Manassites, all those towns with their villages. 10
They did not, however, drive out the Canaanites who lived in Gezer: so
the Canaanites have lived within Ephraim to this day but have been
made to do forced labor.

468

JOSHUA 469

[Joshua 17]
Ephraim's heroes
1 Then allotment was made to the tribe of Manasseh, for he was the
firstborn of Joseph. To Machir the firstborn of Manasseh, the father of
Gilead, were allotted Gilead and Bashan, because he was a warrior. 2
And allotments were made to the rest of the tribe of Manasseh, by
their families, Abiezer, Helek, Asriel, Shechem, Hepher, and Shemida;
these were the male descendants of Manasseh son of Joseph, by their
families.
3 Now Zelophehad son of Hepher son of Gilead son of Machir son of
Manasseh had no sons, but only daughters; and these are the names of
his daughters: Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah. 4 They came
before the priest Eleazar and Joshua son of Nun and the leaders, and
said, "The LORD commanded Moses to give us an inheritance along
with our male kin." So according to the commandment of the LORD he
gave them an inheritance among the kinsmen of their father. 5 Thus
there fell to Manasseh ten portions, besides the land of Gilead and
Bashan, which is on the other side of the Jordan, 6 because the
daughters of Manasseh received an inheritance along with his sons.
The land of Gilead was allotted to the rest of the Manassites.
Manasseh's boundary description
7 The territory of Manasseh reached from Asher to Michmethath,
which is east of Shechem; then the boundary goes along southward to
the inhabitants of En-tappuah. 8 The land of Tappuah belonged to
Manasseh, but the town of Tappuah on the boundary of Manasseh
belonged to the Ephraimites. 9 Then the boundary went down to the
Wadi Kanah. The towns here, to the south of the wadi, among the
towns of Manasseh, belong to Ephraim. Then the boundary of
Manasseh goes along the north side of the wadi and ends at the sea. 10
The land to the south is Ephraim's and that to the north is Manasseh's,
with the sea forming its boundary; on the north Asher is reached, and
on the east Issachar. 11 Within Issachar and Asher, Manasseh had Bethshean and its villages, Ibleam and its villages, the inhabitants of Dor
and its villages, the inhabitants of En-dor and its villages, the

469

JOSHUA 470

inhabitants of Taanach and its villages, and the inhabitants of Megiddo
and its villages (the third is Naphath). 12 Yet the Manassites could not
take possession of those towns; but the Canaanites continued to live in
that land. 13 But when the Israelites grew strong, they put the
Canaanites to forced labor, but did not utterly drive them out.
Joseph's portion
14 The tribe of Joseph spoke to Joshua, saying, "Why have you given
me but one lot and one portion as an inheritance, since we are a
numerous people, whom all along the LORD has blessed?" 15 And
Joshua said to them, "If you are a numerous people, go up to the
forest, and clear ground there for yourselves in the land of the
Perizzites and the Rephaim, since the hill country of Ephraim is too
narrow for you." 16 The tribe of Joseph said, "The hill country is not
enough for us; yet all the Canaanites who live in the plain have
chariots of iron, both those in Beth-shean and its villages and those in
the Valley of Jezreel." 17 Then Joshua said to the house of Joseph, to
Ephraim and Manasseh, "You are indeed a numerous people, and have
great power; you shall not have one lot only, 18 but the hill country
shall be yours, for though it is a forest, you shall clear it and possess it
to its farthest borders; for you shall drive out the Canaanites, though
they have chariots of iron, and though they are strong."
[Joshua 18]
Seven other tribal allotments; Assembly of Shiloh
1 Then the whole congregation of the Israelites assembled at Shiloh,
and set up the tent of meeting there. The land lay subdued before
them.
2 There remained among the Israelites seven tribes whose inheritance
had not yet been apportioned. 3 So Joshua said to the Israelites, "How
long will you be slack about going in and taking possession of the land
that the LORD, the God of your ancestors, has given you? 4 Provide
three men from each tribe, and I will send them out that they may
begin to go throughout the land, writing a description of it with a
view to their inheritances. Then come back to me. 5 They shall divide it

470

JOSHUA 471

into seven portions, Judah continuing in its territory on the south, and
the house of Joseph in their territory on the north. 6 You shall describe
the land in seven divisions and bring the description here to me; and I
will cast lots for you here before the LORD our God. 7 The Levites have
no portion among you, for the priesthood of the LORD is their heritage;
and Gad and Reuben and the half-tribe of Manasseh have received
their inheritance beyond the Jordan eastward, which Moses the servant
of the LORD gave them."
8 So the men started on their way; and Joshua charged those who
went to write the description of the land, saying, "Go throughout the
land and write a description of it, and come back to me; and I will cast
lots for you here before the LORD in Shiloh." 9 So the men went and
traversed the land and set down in a book a description of it by towns
in seven divisions; then they came back to Joshua in the camp at Shiloh,
10 and Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before the LORD; and there
Joshua apportioned the land to the Israelites, to each a portion.
Benjamin
11 The lot of the tribe of Benjamin according to its families came up,
and the territory allotted to it fell between the tribe of Judah and the
tribe of Joseph. 12 On the north side their boundary began at the
Jordan; then the boundary goes up to the slope of Jericho on the
north, then up through the hill country westward; and it ends at the
wilderness of Beth-aven. 13 From there the boundary passes along
southward in the direction of Luz, to the slope of Luz (that is, Bethel),
then the boundary goes down to Ataroth-addar, on the mountain that
lies south of Lower Beth-horon. 14 Then the boundary goes in another
direction, turning on the western side southward from the mountain
that lies to the south, opposite Beth-horon, and it ends at Kiriath-baal
(that is, Kiriath-jearim), a town belonging to the tribe of Judah. This
forms the western side. 15 The southern side begins at the outskirts of
Kiriath-jearim; and the boundary goes from there to Ephron, to the
spring of the Waters of Nephtoah; 16 then the boundary goes down to
the border of the mountain that overlooks the valley of the son of
Hinnom, which is at the north end of the valley of Rephaim; and it
then goes down the valley of Hinnom, south of the slope of the

471

JOSHUA 472

Jebusites, and downward to En-rogel; 17 then it bends in a northerly
direction going on to En-shemesh, and from there goes to Geliloth,
which is opposite the ascent of Adummim; then it goes down to the
Stone of Bohan, Reuben's son; 18 and passing on to the north of the
slope of Beth-arabah it goes down to the Arabah; 19 then the
boundary passes on to the north of the slope of Beth-hoglah; and the
boundary ends at the northern bay of the Dead Sea, at the south end
of the Jordan: this is the southern border. 20 The Jordan forms its
boundary on the eastern side. This is the inheritance of the tribe of
Benjamin, according to its families, boundary by boundary all around.
21 Now the towns of the tribe of Benjamin according to their families
were Jericho, Beth-hoglah, Emek-keziz, 22 Beth-arabah, Zemaraim,
Bethel, 23 Avvim, Parah, Ophrah, 24 Chephar-ammoni, Ophni, and
Geba — twelve towns with their villages: 25 Gibeon, Ramah, Beeroth,
26 Mizpeh, Chephirah, Mozah, 27 Rekem, Irpeel, Taralah, 28 Zela,
Haeleph, Jebus (that is, Jerusalem), Gibeah and Kiriath-jearim —
fourteen towns with their villages. This is the inheritance of the tribe
of Benjamin according to its families.
[Joshua 19]
Simeon
1 The second lot came out for Simeon, for the tribe of Simeon,
according to its families; its inheritance lay within the inheritance of
the tribe of Judah. 2 It had for its inheritance Beer-sheba, Sheba,
Moladah, 3 Hazar-shual, Balah, Ezem, 4 Eltolad, Bethul, Hormah, 5
Ziklag, Beth-marcaboth, Hazar-susah, 6 Beth-lebaoth, and Sharuhen —
thirteen towns with their villages; 7 Ain, Rimmon, Ether, and Ashan —
four towns with their villages; 8 together with all the villages all
around these towns as far as Baalath-beer, Ramah of the Negeb. This
was the inheritance of the tribe of Simeon according to its families. 9
The inheritance of the tribe of Simeon formed part of the territory of
Judah; because the portion of the tribe of Judah was too large for
them, the tribe of Simeon obtained an inheritance within their
inheritance.

472

JOSHUA 473

Zebulun
10 The third lot came up for the tribe of Zebulun, according to its
families. The boundary of its inheritance reached as far as Sarid; 11 then
its boundary goes up westward, and on to Maralah, and touches
Dabbesheth, then the wadi that is east of Jokneam; 12 from Sarid it
goes in the other direction eastward toward the sunrise to the
boundary of Chisloth-tabor; from there it goes to Daberath, then up to
Japhia; 13 from there it passes along on the east toward the sunrise to
Gath-hepher, to Eth-kazin, and going on to Rimmon it bends toward
Neah; 14 then on the north the boundary makes a turn to Hannathon,
and it ends at the valley of Iphtah-el; 15 and Kattath, Nahalal, Shimron,
Idalah, and Bethlehem — twelve towns with their villages. 16 This is the
inheritance of the tribe of Zebulun, according to its families — these
towns with their villages.
Issachar
17 The fourth lot came out for Issachar, for the tribe of Issachar,
according to its families. 18 Its territory included Jezreel, Chesulloth,
Shunem, 19 Hapharaim, Shion, Anaharath, 20 Rabbith, Kishion, Ebez, 21
Remeth, En-gannim, En-haddah, Beth-pazzez; 22 the boundary also
touches Tabor, Shahazumah, and Beth-shemesh, and its boundary ends
at the Jordan — sixteen towns with their villages. 23 This is the
inheritance of the tribe of Issachar, according to its families — the
towns with their villages.
Asher
24 The fifth lot came out for the tribe of Asher according to its families.
25 Its boundary included Helkath, Hali, Beten, Achshaph, 26
Allammelech, Amad, and Mishal; on the west it touches Carmel and
Shihor-libnath, 27 then it turns eastward, goes to Beth-dagon, and
touches Zebulun and the valley of Iphtah-el northward to Beth-emek
and Neiel; then it continues in the north to Cabul, 28 Ebron, Rehob,
Hammon, Kanah, as far as Great Sidon; 29 then the boundary turns to
Ramah, reaching to the fortified city of Tyre; then the boundary turns
to Hosah, and it ends at the sea; Mahalab, Achzib, 30 Ummah, Aphek,

473

JOSHUA 474

and Rehob — twenty-two towns with their villages. 31 This is the
inheritance of the tribe of Asher according to its families — these
towns with their villages.
Naphtali
32 The sixth lot came out for the tribe of Naphtali, for the tribe of
Naphtali, according to its families. 33 And its boundary ran from
Heleph, from the oak in Zaanannim, and Adami-nekeb, and Jabneel, as
far as Lakkum; and it ended at the Jordan; 34 then the boundary turns
westward to Aznoth-tabor, and goes from there to Hukkok, touching
Zebulun at the south, and Asher on the west, and Judah on the east at
the Jordan. 35 The fortified towns are Ziddim, Zer, Hammath, Rakkath,
Chinnereth, 36 Adamah, Ramah, Hazor, 37 Kedesh, Edrei, En-hazor, 38
Iron, Migdal-el, Horem, Beth-anath, and Beth-shemesh — nineteen
towns with their villages. 39 This is the inheritance of the tribe of
Naphtali according to its families — the towns with their villages.
Dan
40 The seventh lot came out for the tribe of Dan, according to its
families. 41 The territory of its inheritance included Zorah, Eshtaol, Irshemesh, 42 Shaalabbin, Aijalon, Ithlah, 43 Elon, Timnah, Ekron, 44
Eltekeh, Gibbethon, Baalath, 45 Jehud, Bene-berak, Gath-rimmon, 46
Me-jarkon, and Rakkon at the border opposite Joppa. 47 When the
territory of the Danites was lost to them, the Danites went up and
fought against Leshem, and after capturing it and putting it to the
sword, they took possession of it and settled in it, calling Leshem, Dan,
after their ancestor Dan. 48 This is the inheritance of the tribe of Dan,
according to their families — these towns with their villages.
Final allotment
49 When they had finished distributing the several territories of the
land as inheritances, the Israelites gave an inheritance among them to
Joshua son of Nun. 50 By command of the LORD they gave him the
town that he asked for, Timnath-serah in the hill country of Ephraim;
he rebuilt the town, and settled in it.

474

JOSHUA 475

Summary of the process of allotment
51 These are the inheritances that the priest Eleazar and Joshua son of
Nun and the heads of the families of the tribes of the Israelites
distributed by lot at Shiloh before the LORD, at the entrance of the tent
of meeting. So they finished dividing the land.
[Joshua 20]
Allotments to persons of marginal status; cities of refuge
1 Then the LORD spoke to Joshua, saying, 2 "Say to the Israelites,
'Appoint the cities of refuge, of which I spoke to you through Moses, 3
so that anyone who kills a person without intent or by mistake may
flee there; they shall be for you a refuge from the avenger of blood. 4
The slayer shall flee to one of these cities and shall stand at the
entrance of the gate of the city, and explain the case to the elders of
that city; then the fugitive shall be taken into the city, and given a
place, and shall remain with them. 5 And if the avenger of blood is in
pursuit, they shall not give up the slayer, because the neighbor was
killed by mistake, there having been no enmity between them before.
6 The slayer shall remain in that city until there is a trial before the
congregation, until the death of the one who is high priest at the time:
then the slayer may return home, to the town in which the deed was
done.'"
7 So they set apart Kedesh in Galilee in the hill country of Naphtali, and
Shechem in the hill country of Ephraim, and Kiriath-arba (that is,
Hebron) in the hill country of Judah. 8 And beyond the Jordan east of
Jericho, they appointed Bezer in the wilderness on the tableland, from
the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in Gilead, from the tribe of Gad, and
Golan in Bashan, from the tribe of Manasseh. 9 These were the cities
designated for all the Israelites, and for the aliens residing among
them, that anyone who killed a person without intent could flee there,
so as not to die by the hand of the avenger of blood, until there was a
trial before the congregation.

475

JOSHUA 476

[Joshua 21]
Levitical cities
1 Then the heads of the families of the Levites came to the priest
Eleazar and to Joshua son of Nun and to the heads of the families of
the tribes of the Israelites; 2 they said to them at Shiloh in the land of
Canaan, "The LORD commanded through Moses that we be given towns
to live in, along with their pasture lands for our livestock." 3 So by
command of the LORD the Israelites gave to the Levites the following
towns and pasture lands out of their inheritance.
4 The lot came out for the families of the Kohathites. So those Levites
who were descendants of Aaron the priest received by lot thirteen
towns from the tribes of Judah, Simeon, and Benjamin.
5 The rest of the Kohathites received by lot ten towns from the families
of the tribe of Ephraim, from the tribe of Dan, and the half-tribe of
Manasseh.
6 The Gershonites received by lot thirteen towns from the families of
the tribe of Issachar, from the tribe of Asher, from the tribe of
Naphtali, and from the half-tribe of Manasseh in Bashan.
7 The Merarites according to their families received twelve towns from
the tribe of Reuben, the tribe of Gad, and the tribe of Zebulun.
8 These towns and their pasture lands the Israelites gave by lot to the
Levites, as the LORD had commanded through Moses.
9 Out of the tribe of Judah and the tribe of Simeon they gave the
following towns mentioned by name, 10 which went to the
descendants of Aaron, one of the families of the Kohathites who
belonged to the Levites, since the lot fell to them first. 11 They gave
them Kiriath-arba (Arba being the father of Anak), that is Hebron, in
the hill country of Judah, along with the pasture lands around it. 12 But
the fields of the town and its villages had been given to Caleb son of
Jephunneh as his holding.

476

JOSHUA 477

13 To the descendants of Aaron the priest they gave Hebron, the city of
refuge for the slayer, with its pasture lands, Libnah with its pasture
lands, 14 Jattir with its pasture lands, Eshtemoa with its pasture lands,
15 Holon with its pasture lands, Debir with its pasture lands, 16 Ain with
its pasture lands, Juttah with its pasture lands, and Beth-shemesh with
its pasture lands — nine towns out of these two tribes. 17 Out of the
tribe of Benjamin: Gibeon with its pasture lands, Geba with its pasture
lands, 18 Anathoth with its pasture lands, and Almon with its pasture
lands — four towns. 19 The towns of the descendants of Aaron — the
priests — were thirteen in all, with their pasture lands.
20 As to the rest of the Kohathites belonging to the Kohathite families
of the Levites, the towns allotted to them were out of the tribe of
Ephraim. 21 To them were given Shechem, the city of refuge for the
slayer, with its pasture lands in the hill country of Ephraim, Gezer with
its pasture lands, 22 Kibzaim with its pasture lands, and Beth-horon
with its pasture lands — four towns. 23 Out of the tribe of Dan: Elteke
with its pasture lands, Gibbethon with its pasture lands, 24 Aijalon with
its pasture lands, Gath-rimmon with its pasture lands — four towns. 25
Out of the half-tribe of Manasseh: Taanach with its pasture lands, and
Gath-rimmon with its pasture lands — two towns. 26 The towns of the
families of the rest of the Kohathites were ten in all, with their pasture
lands.
27 To the Gershonites, one of the families of the Levites, were given
out of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Golan in Bashan with its pasture
lands, the city of refuge for the slayer, and Beeshterah with its pasture
lands — two towns. 28 Out of the tribe of Issachar: Kishion with its
pasture lands, Daberath with its pasture lands, 29 Jarmuth with its
pasture lands, En-gannim with its pasture lands — four towns. 30 Out
of the tribe of Asher: Mishal with its pasture lands, Abdon with its
pasture lands, 31 Helkath with its pasture lands, and Rehob with its
pasture lands — four towns. 32 Out of the tribe of Naphtali: Kedesh in
Galilee with its pasture lands, the city of refuge for the slayer,
Hammoth-dor with its pasture lands, and Kartan with its pasture lands
— three towns. 33 The towns of the several families of the Gershonites
were in all thirteen, with their pasture lands.

477

JOSHUA 478

34 To the rest of the Levites — the Merarite families — were given out
of the tribe of Zebulun: Jokneam with its pasture lands, Kartah with its
pasture lands, 35 Dimnah with its pasture lands, Nahalal with its
pasture lands — four towns. 36 Out of the tribe of Reuben: Bezer with
its pasture lands, Jahzah with its pasture lands, 37 Kedemoth with its
pasture lands, and Mephaath with its pasture lands — four towns. 38
Out of the tribe of Gad: Ramoth in Gilead with its pasture lands, the
city of refuge for the slayer, Mahanaim with its pasture lands, 39
Heshbon with its pasture lands, Jazer with its pasture lands — four
towns in all. 40 As for the towns of the several Merarite families, that
is, the remainder of the families of the Levites, those allotted to them
were twelve in all.
41 The towns of the Levites within the holdings of the Israelites were in
all forty-eight towns with their pasture lands. 42 Each of these towns
had its pasture lands around it; so it was with all these towns.
Ironic conclusion
43 Thus the LORD gave to Israel all the land that he swore to their
ancestors that he would give them; and having taken possession of it,
they settled there. 44 And the LORD gave them rest on every side just as
he had sworn to their ancestors; not one of all their enemies had
withstood them, for the LORD had given all their enemies into their
hands. 45 Not one of all the good promises that the LORD had made to
the house of Israel had failed; all came to pass.
[Joshua 22]
Epilogue to the conquest and allotment; misunderstanding with the
Transjordanian tribes
1 Then Joshua summoned the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the halftribe of Manasseh, 2 and said to them, "You have observed all that
Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, and have obeyed me
in all that I have commanded you; 3 you have not forsaken your
kindred these many days, down to this day, but have been careful to
keep the charge of the LORD your God. 4 And now the LORD your God
has given rest to your kindred, as he promised them; therefore turn

478

JOSHUA 479

and go to your tents in the land where your possession lies, which
Moses the servant of the LORD gave you on the other side of the
Jordan. 5 Take good care to observe the commandment and instruction
that Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, to love the LORD
your God, to walk in all his ways, to keep his commandments, and to
hold fast to him, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your
soul." 6 So Joshua blessed them and sent them away, and they went to
their tents.
7 Now to the one half of the tribe of Manasseh Moses had given a
possession in Bashan; but to the other half Joshua had given a
possession beside their fellow Israelites in the land west of the Jordan.
And when Joshua sent them away to their tents and blessed them, 8 he
said to them, "Go back to your tents with much wealth, and with very
much livestock, with silver, gold, bronze, and iron, and with a great
quantity of clothing; divide the spoil of your enemies with your
kindred." 9 So the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of
Manasseh returned home, parting from the Israelites at Shiloh, which is
in the land of Canaan, to go to the land of Gilead, their own land of
which they had taken possession by command of the LORD through
Moses.
The debate over the altar built by the Transjordanians
10 When they came to the region near the Jordan that lies in the land
of Canaan, the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of
Manasseh built there an altar by the Jordan, an altar of great size. 11
The Israelites heard that the Reubenites and the Gadites and the halftribe of Manasseh had built an altar at the frontier of the land of
Canaan, in the region near the Jordan, on the side that belongs to the
Israelites. 12 And when the people of Israel heard of it, the whole
assembly of the Israelites gathered at Shiloh, to make war against
them.
13 Then the Israelites sent the priest Phinehas son of Eleazar to the
Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh, in the land
of Gilead, 14 and with him ten chiefs, one from each of the tribal
families of Israel, every one of them the head of a family among the

479

JOSHUA 480

clans of Israel. 15 They came to the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the
half-tribe of Manasseh, in the land of Gilead, and they said to them, 16
"Thus says the whole congregation of the LORD, 'What is this treachery
that you have committed against the God of Israel in turning away
today from following the LORD, by building yourselves an altar today in
rebellion against the LORD? 17 Have we not had enough of the sin at
Peor from which even yet we have not cleansed ourselves, and for
which a plague came upon the congregation of the LORD, 18 that you
must turn away today from following the LORD! If you rebel against the
LORD today, he will be angry with the whole congregation of Israel
tomorrow. 19 But now, if your land is unclean, cross over into the
LORD's land where the LORD's tabernacle now stands, and take for
yourselves a possession among us; only do not rebel against the LORD,
or rebel against us by building yourselves an altar other than the altar
of the LORD our God. 20 Did not Achan son of Zerah break faith in the
matter of the devoted things, and wrath fell upon all the congregation
of Israel? And he did not perish alone for his iniquity!'"
21 Then the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh
said in answer to the heads of the families of Israel, 22 "The LORD, God
of gods! The LORD, God of gods! He knows; and let Israel itself know! If
it was in rebellion or in breach of faith toward the LORD, do not spare
us today 23 for building an altar to turn away from following the LORD;
or if we did so to offer burnt offerings or grain offerings or offerings
of well-being on it, may the LORD himself take vengeance. 24 No! We
did it from fear that in time to come your children might say to our
children, 'What have you to do with the LORD, the God of Israel? 25 For
the LORD has made the Jordan a boundary between us and you, you
Reubenites and Gadites; you have no portion in the LORD.' So your
children might make our children cease to worship the LORD. 26
Therefore we said, 'Let us now build an altar, not for burnt offering,
nor for sacrifice, 27 but to be a witness between us and you, and
between the generations after us, that we do perform the service of
the LORD in his presence with our burnt offerings and sacrifices and
offerings of well-being; so that your children may never say to our
children in time to come, "You have no portion in the LORD."' 28 And
we thought, If this should be said to us or to our descendants in time
to come, we could say, 'Look at this copy of the altar of the LORD,

480

JOSHUA 481

which our ancestors made, not for burnt offerings, nor for sacrifice, but
to be a witness between us and you.' 29 Far be it from us that we
should rebel against the LORD, and turn away this day from following
the LORD by building an altar for burnt offering, grain offering, or
sacrifice, other than the altar of the LORD our God that stands before
his tabernacle!"
30 When the priest Phinehas and the chiefs of the congregation, the
heads of the families of Israel who were with him, heard the words
that the Reubenites and the Gadites and the Manassites spoke, they
were satisfied. 31 The priest Phinehas son of Eleazar said to the
Reubenites and the Gadites and the Manassites, "Today we know that
the LORD is among us, because you have not committed this treachery
against the LORD; now you have saved the Israelites from the hand of
the LORD."
32 Then the priest Phinehas son of Eleazar and the chiefs returned from
the Reubenites and the Gadites in the land of Gilead to the land of
Canaan, to the Israelites, and brought back word to them. 33 The
report pleased the Israelites; and the Israelites blessed God and spoke
no more of making war against them, to destroy the land where the
Reubenites and the Gadites were settled. 34 The Reubenites and the
Gadites called the altar Witness; "For," said they, "it is a witness
between us that the LORD is God."
[Joshua 23]
Concluding charges; covenantal charge to the leaders
1 A long time afterward, when the LORD had given rest to Israel from all
their enemies all around, and Joshua was old and well advanced in
years, 2 Joshua summoned all Israel, their elders and heads, their
judges and officers, and said to them, "I am now old and well
advanced in years; 3 and you have seen all that the LORD your God has
done to all these nations for your sake, for it is the LORD your God who
has fought for you. 4 I have allotted to you as an inheritance for your
tribes those nations that remain, along with all the nations that I have
already cut off, from the Jordan to the Great Sea in the west. 5 The
LORD your God will push them back before you, and drive them out of

481

JOSHUA 482

your sight; and you shall possess their land, as the LORD your God
promised you. 6 Therefore be very steadfast to observe and do all that
is written in the book of the law of Moses, turning aside from it
neither to the right nor to the left, 7 so that you may not be mixed
with these nations left here among you, or make mention of the
names of their gods, or swear by them, or serve them, or bow
yourselves down to them, 8 but hold fast to the LORD your God, as you
have done to this day. 9 For the LORD has driven out before you great
and strong nations; and as for you, no one has been able to withstand
you to this day. 10 One of you puts to flight a thousand, since it is the
LORD your God who fights for you, as he promised you. 11 Be very
careful, therefore, to love the LORD your God. 12 For if you turn back,
and join the survivors of these nations left here among you, and
intermarry with them, so that you marry their women and they yours,
13 know assuredly that the LORD your God will not continue to drive
out these nations before you; but they shall be a snare and a trap for
you, a scourge on your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until you perish
from this good land that the LORD your God has given you.
14 "And now I am about to go the way of all the earth, and you know
in your hearts and souls, all of you, that not one thing has failed of all
the good things that the LORD your God promised concerning you; all
have come to pass for you, not one of them has failed. 15 But just as all
the good things that the LORD your God promised concerning you have
been fulfilled for you, so the LORD will bring upon you all the bad
things, until he has destroyed you from this good land that the LORD
your God has given you. 16 If you transgress the covenant of the LORD
your God, which he enjoined on you, and go and serve other gods and
bow down to them, then the anger of the LORD will be kindled against
you, and you shall perish quickly from the good land that he has given
to you."
[Joshua 24]
Covenant renewal of the people
1 Then Joshua gathered all the tribes of Israel to Shechem, and
summoned the elders, the heads, the judges, and the officers of Israel;
and they presented themselves before God. 2 And Joshua said to all the

482

JOSHUA 483

people, "Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: Long ago your ancestors
— Terah and his sons Abraham and Nahor — lived beyond the
Euphrates and served other gods. 3 Then I took your father Abraham
from beyond the River and led him through all the land of Canaan and
made his offspring many. I gave him Isaac; 4 and to Isaac I gave Jacob
and Esau. I gave Esau the hill country of Seir to possess, but Jacob and
his children went down to Egypt. 5 Then I sent Moses and Aaron, and I
plagued Egypt with what I did in its midst; and afterwards I brought
you out. 6 When I brought your ancestors out of Egypt, you came to
the sea; and the Egyptians pursued your ancestors with chariots and
horsemen to the Red Sea. 7 When they cried out to the LORD, he put
darkness between you and the Egyptians, and made the sea come
upon them and cover them; and your eyes saw what I did to Egypt.
Afterwards you lived in the wilderness a long time. 8 Then I brought
you to the land of the Amorites, who lived on the other side of the
Jordan; they fought with you, and I handed them over to you, and you
took possession of their land, and I destroyed them before you. 9 Then
King Balak son of Zippor of Moab, set out to fight against Israel. He
sent and invited Balaam son of Beor to curse you, 10 but I would not
listen to Balaam; therefore he blessed you; so I rescued you out of his
hand. 11 When you went over the Jordan and came to Jericho, the
citizens of Jericho fought against you, and also the Amorites, the
Perizzites, the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Girgashites, the Hivites, and
the Jebusites; and I handed them over to you. 12 I sent the hornet
ahead of you, which drove out before you the two kings of the
Amorites; it was not by your sword or by your bow. 13 I gave you a land
on which you had not labored, and towns that you had not built, and
you live in them; you eat the fruit of vineyards and oliveyards that you
did not plant.
14 "Now therefore revere the LORD, and serve him in sincerity and in
faithfulness; put away the gods that your ancestors served beyond the
River and in Egypt, and serve the LORD. 15 Now if you are unwilling to
serve the LORD, choose this day whom you will serve, whether the gods
your ancestors served in the region beyond the River or the gods of the
Amorites in whose land you are living; but as for me and my
household, we will serve the LORD."

483

JOSHUA 484

16 Then the people answered, "Far be it from us that we should
forsake the LORD to serve other gods; 17 for it is the LORD our God who
brought us and our ancestors up from the land of Egypt, out of the
house of slavery, and who did those great signs in our sight. He
protected us along all the way that we went, and among all the
peoples through whom we passed; 18 and the LORD drove out before us
all the peoples, the Amorites who lived in the land. Therefore we also
will serve the LORD, for he is our God."
19 But Joshua said to the people, "You cannot serve the LORD, for he is
a holy God. He is a jealous God; he will not forgive your transgressions
or your sins. 20 If you forsake the LORD and serve foreign gods, then he
will turn and do you harm, and consume you, after having done you
good." 21 And the people said to Joshua, "No, we will serve the LORD!"
22 Then Joshua said to the people, "You are witnesses against
yourselves that you have chosen the LORD, to serve him." And they said,
"We are witnesses." 23 He said, "Then put away the foreign gods that
are among you, and incline your hearts to the LORD, the God of Israel."
24 The people said to Joshua, "The LORD our God we will serve, and
him we will obey." 25 So Joshua made a covenant with the people that
day, and made statutes and ordinances for them at Shechem. 26 Joshua
wrote these words in the book of the law of God; and he took a large
stone, and set it up there under the oak in the sanctuary of the LORD.
27 Joshua said to all the people, "See, this stone shall be a witness
against us; for it has heard all the words of the LORD that he spoke to
us; therefore it shall be a witness against you, if you deal falsely with
your God." 28 So Joshua sent the people away to their inheritances.
Appendices
29 After these things Joshua son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, died,
being one hundred ten years old. 30 They buried him in his own
inheritance at Timnath-serah, which is in the hill country of Ephraim,
north of Mount Gaash.

484

JOSHUA 485

31 Israel served the LORD all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the
elders who outlived Joshua and had known all the work that the LORD
did for Israel.
32 The bones of Joseph, which the Israelites had brought up from
Egypt, were buried at Shechem, in the portion of ground that Jacob
had bought from the children of Hamor, the father of Shechem, for
one hundred pieces of money; it became an inheritance of the
descendants of Joseph.
33 Eleazar son of Aaron died; and they buried him at Gibeah, the town
of his son Phinehas, which had been given him in the hill country of
Ephraim.

485

JUDGES 486

JUDGES
Introduction
The book of Judges continues Israel's story from the death of Joshua
(1.1-2.8) to just before the birth of Samuel, who is depicted as Israel's
last judge (1 Sam 7.15). After Israel's failure to conquer all the land
(described in this book's initial chapters), the nation's life fell into a
downward moral and religious spiral that reached its low point under
the leadership of the judge Samson. The final portion of the book, in
which "judges" are absent, describes Israel's further deterioration into
idolatry and civil war. The title "Judges" should not be interpreted in a
strictly judicial sense; the "judges" are really rulers in the wider sense
(see 2.16-19), often with significant military roles.
It is apparent that the book is a collection of various blocks of material
concerning different tribal heroes. Some of the stories may have
existed in oral and written form before they became part of the book,
but none are attributed to any particular source in the text. Most
scholars believe that at one point this collection became part of a
larger work, the Deuteronomistic History (see Introduction to the
Historical Books). The author of that history utilized these stories of
local tribal judges, adding introductions and conclusions at various
point to underscore his message. The book does not attempt to fully
depict this time period; not every oppression that Israel suffered during
the judges' era is fully narrated (see 10.11-14). A precise chronology of
the period of the judges is unknown since the oppressions and
judgeships noted were local or regional, and may at places overlap.
The book is not primarily interested in the real history of this period.
Rather, the book's selective presentation is clearly designed to instruct
the reader, to communicate a coherent, didactic message concerning
the consequences of disobedience to God.
HT

TH

486

JUDGES 487

The book of Judges has three main parts: a double introduction (1.13.6), a double conclusion (17.1-21.25) and a main section, commonly
called the "cycles" section (3.7-16.31).
The double introduction is symmetrical to the double conclusion,
framing the "cycles." The first introduction (A1: foreign wars with the
"herem" being applied, 1.1-2.5) is balanced by the second conclusion
(A2: domestic wars with the "herem" being applied, 19.1-21.25). The
second introduction (B1: difficulties in Israel with foreign idols, 2.6-3.6)
is balanced by the first conclusion (B2: difficulties with domestic idols,
17.1-18.31). For the meaning of "herem" see the Introduction to the
book of Joshua.
HT

TH

The double introduction initiates paradigms that create literary
expectations for the main "cycles" section. Judges 1.1-2.5 introduces the
reader to the pattern of Israel's increasing failure to drive out the
Canaanites, which will be mirrored in the degeneration of the "cycles"
section. It also reveals the geographic sequence pattern of Judah to
Dan reflected in the major judge cycles (Othniel to Samson). Judges 2.63.6 introduces the reader to the all-important "cycles" pattern, the very
framework of the "cycles" section.
The double conclusion is unified by the four-time repetition of a
distinctive refrain: In those days there was no king in Israel; twice this is
supplemented by all the people did what was right in their own eyes:
A1 (17.6), B1 (18.1), B2 (19.1), A2 (21.25). Although this refrain serves as a
bridge to Samuel, in which the monarchy is introduced, this is more
than simply a promonarchic statement; it also has implications in light
of the Deuteronomistic, covenantal concerns about the theocracy (see
8.23, the LORD's rule as king over Israel).
The "cycles" section (3.7-16.31) contains six major judge stories built
around a basic literary cycle made up of the following components: (1)
Israel does evil in the eyes of the Lord; (2) the Lord gives them into the
hands of oppressors; (3) Israel serves the oppressor for x years; (4) Israel
cries out to the Lord (5) the Lord raises up a deliverer (i.e., a judge); (6)
the spirit of the Lord is upon the deliverer; (7) the oppressor is
subdued; (8) the land has "rest" for x years.

487

JUDGES 488

It is very important that the six major judge cycles (Othniel, Ehud,
Deborah, Gideon, Jephthah, Samson) be read within the larger
narrative complex of 3.7-16.13. The components are varied in such a way
as to contribute to the book's message. With each major judge, the
cycle unravels. In turn, this unraveling enhances the communication of
the moral deterioration taking place throughout the period of the
judges. In fact, by the time of Samson, the cycle has almost
disappeared. The Samson cycle serves as both a literary climax and
moral nadir of the "cycles" section.
Moreover, this moral decline can also be seen in the characterization of
the women of the book, degenerating from the outspoken Achsah
(1.12-15), to Deborah and Jael (4.1-5.31), to the "certain woman" (9.53),
to Jephthah's daughter (11.35), to Delilah (16.4-22), and finally to the
completely dependent and silent women of 19.1-21.25.
Finally, this section also contains interspersed stories of minor judges
(10.1-5; 12.8-15), occurring in a one, two, three sequence. These stories
also contribute literarily to the section's message. The exact function of
these minor judges, however, remains unclear.

[Judges 1]
Double introduction; foreign wars of subjugation with the "herem"
being applied; stage one
1 After the death of Joshua, the Israelites inquired of the LORD, "Who
shall go up first for us against the Canaanites, to fight against them?" 2
The LORD said, "Judah shall go up. I hereby give the land into his
hand." 3 Judah said to his brother Simeon, "Come up with me into the
territory allotted to me, that we may fight against the Canaanites; then
I too will go with you into the territory allotted to you." So Simeon
went with him. 4 Then Judah went up and the LORD gave the
Canaanites and the Perizzites into their hand; and they defeated ten
thousand of them at Bezek. 5 They came upon Adoni-bezek at Bezek,
and fought against him, and defeated the Canaanites and the

488

JUDGES 489

Perizzites. 6 Adoni-bezek fled; but they pursued him, and caught him,
and cut off his thumbs and big toes. 7 Adoni-bezek said, "Seventy kings
with their thumbs and big toes cut off used to pick up scraps under my
table; as I have done, so God has paid me back." They brought him to
Jerusalem, and he died there.
8 Then the people of Judah fought against Jerusalem and took it. They
put it to the sword and set the city on fire. 9 Afterward the people of
Judah went down to fight against the Canaanites who lived in the hill
country, in the Negeb, and in the lowland. 10 Judah went against the
Canaanites who lived in Hebron (the name of Hebron was formerly
Kiriath-arba); and they defeated Sheshai and Ahiman and Talmai.
11 From there they went against the inhabitants of Debir (the name of
Debir was formerly Kiriath-sepher). 12 Then Caleb said, "Whoever
attacks Kiriath-sepher and takes it, I will give him my daughter Achsah
as wife." 13 And Othniel son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother, took it;
and he gave him his daughter Achsah as wife. 14 When she came to
him, she urged him to ask her father for a field. As she dismounted
from her donkey, Caleb said to her, "What do you wish?" 15 She said to
him, "Give me a present; since you have set me in the land of the
Negeb, give me also Gulloth-mayim." So Caleb gave her Upper Gulloth
and Lower Gulloth.
16 The descendants of Hobab the Kenite, Moses' father-in-law, went up
with the people of Judah from the city of palms into the wilderness of
Judah, which lies in the Negeb near Arad. Then they went and settled
with the Amalekites. 17 Judah went with his brother Simeon, and they
defeated the Canaanites who inhabited Zephath, and devoted it to
destruction. So the city was called Hormah. 18 Judah took Gaza with its
territory, Ashkelon with its territory, and Ekron with its territory. 19 The
LORD was with Judah, and he took possession of the hill country, but
could not drive out the inhabitants of the plain, because they had
chariots of iron. 20 Hebron was given to Caleb, as Moses had said; and
he drove out from it the three sons of Anak. 21 But the Benjaminites
did not drive out the Jebusites who lived in Jerusalem; so the Jebusites
have lived in Jerusalem among the Benjaminites to this day.

489

JUDGES 490

Stage two
22 The house of Joseph also went up against Bethel; and the LORD was
with them. 23 The house of Joseph sent out spies to Bethel (the name
of the city was formerly Luz). 24 When the spies saw a man coming out
of the city, they said to him, "Show us the way into the city, and we
will deal kindly with you." 25 So he showed them the way into the city;
and they put the city to the sword, but they let the man and all his
family go. 26 So the man went to the land of the Hittites and built a
city, and named it Luz; that is its name to this day.
27 Manasseh did not drive out the inhabitants of Beth-shean and its
villages, or Taanach and its villages, or the inhabitants of Dor and its
villages, or the inhabitants of Ibleam and its villages, or the inhabitants
of Megiddo and its villages; but the Canaanites continued to live in
that land. 28 When Israel grew strong, they put the Canaanites to
forced labor, but did not in fact drive them out.
29 And Ephraim did not drive out the Canaanites who lived in Gezer;
but the Canaanites lived among them in Gezer.
30 Zebulun did not drive out the inhabitants of Kitron, or the
inhabitants of Nahalol; but the Canaanites lived among them, and
became subject to forced labor.
Stage three
31 Asher did not drive out the inhabitants of Acco, or the inhabitants of
Sidon, or of Ahlab, or of Achzib, or of Helbah, or of Aphik, or of
Rehob; 32 but the Asherites lived among the Canaanites, the
inhabitants of the land; for they did not drive them out.
33 Naphtali did not drive out the inhabitants of Beth-shemesh, or the
inhabitants of Beth-anath, but lived among the Canaanites, the
inhabitants of the land; nevertheless the inhabitants of Beth-shemesh
and of Beth-anath became subject to forced labor for them.

490

JUDGES 491

Stage four
34 The Amorites pressed the Danites back into the hill country; they did
not allow them to come down to the plain. 35 The Amorites continued
to live in Har-heres, in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim, but the hand of the
house of Joseph rested heavily on them, and they became subject to
forced labor. 36 The border of the Amorites ran from the ascent of
Akrabbim, from Sela and upward.
[Judges 2]
The angel of the Lord indicts the Israelites who had not done as he
commanded
1 Now the angel of the LORD went up from Gilgal to Bochim, and said,
"I brought you up from Egypt, and brought you into the land that I
had promised to your ancestors. I said, 'I will never break my covenant
with you. 2 For your part, do not make a covenant with the inhabitants
of this land; tear down their altars.' But you have not obeyed my
command. See what you have done! 3 So now I say, I will not drive
them out before you; but they shall become adversaries to you, and
their gods shall be a snare to you." 4 When the angel of the LORD
spoke these words to all the Israelites, the people lifted up their voices
and wept. 5 So they named that place Bochim, and there they
sacrificed to the LORD.
Apostasy and its consequences
6 When Joshua dismissed the people, the Israelites all went to their
own inheritances to take possession of the land. 7 The people
worshiped the LORD all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the
elders who outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great work that the
LORD had done for Israel. 8 Joshua son of Nun, the servant of the LORD,
died at the age of one hundred ten years. 9 So they buried him within
the bounds of his inheritance in Timnath-heres, in the hill country of
Ephraim, north of Mount Gaash. 10 Moreover, that whole generation
was gathered to their ancestors, and another generation grew up after
them, who did not know the LORD or the work that he had done for
Israel.

491

JUDGES 492

11 Then the Israelites did what was evil in the sight of the LORD and
worshiped the Baals; 12 and they abandoned the LORD, the God of their
ancestors, who had brought them out of the land of Egypt; they
followed other gods, from among the gods of the peoples who were
all around them, and bowed down to them; and they provoked the
LORD to anger. 13 They abandoned the LORD, and worshiped Baal and
the Astartes. 14 So the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel,
and he gave them over to plunderers who plundered them, and he
sold them into the power of their enemies all around, so that they
could no longer withstand their enemies. 15 Whenever they marched
out, the hand of the LORD was against them to bring misfortune, as the
LORD had warned them and sworn to them; and they were in great
distress.
The resultant conclusion to the cyclical, downward pattern
16 Then the LORD raised up judges, who delivered them out of the
power of those who plundered them. 17 Yet they did not listen even to
their judges; for they lusted after other gods and bowed down to
them. They soon turned aside from the way in which their ancestors
had walked, who had obeyed the commandments of the LORD; they did
not follow their example. 18 Whenever the LORD raised up judges for
them, the LORD was with the judge, and he delivered them from the
hand of their enemies all the days of the judge; for the LORD would be
moved to pity by their groaning because of those who persecuted and
oppressed them. 19 But whenever the judge died, they would relapse
and behave worse than their ancestors, following other gods,
worshiping them and bowing down to them. They would not drop any
of their practices or their stubborn ways. 20 So the anger of the LORD
was kindled against Israel; and he said, "Because this people have
transgressed my covenant that I commanded their ancestors, and have
not obeyed my voice, 21 I will no longer drive out before them any of
the nations that Joshua left when he died." 22 In order to test Israel,
whether or not they would take care to walk in the way of the LORD as
their ancestors did, 23 the LORD had left those nations, not driving them
out at once, and had not handed them over to Joshua.

492

JUDGES 493

[Judges 3]
Summary conclusion of the whole introduction
1 Now these are the nations that the LORD left to test all those in Israel
who had no experience of any war in Canaan 2 (it was only that
successive generations of Israelites might know war, to teach those
who had no experience of it before): 3 the five lords of the Philistines,
and all the Canaanites, and the Sidonians, and the Hivites who lived on
Mount Lebanon, from Mount Baal-hermon as far as Lebo-hamath. 4
They were for the testing of Israel, to know whether Israel would obey
the commandments of the LORD, which he commanded their ancestors
by Moses. 5 So the Israelites lived among the Canaanites, the Hittites,
the Amorites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites; 6 and they
took their daughters as wives for themselves, and their own daughters
they gave to their sons; and they worshiped their gods.
Cycle of the judges; major judge cycle: Othniel
7 The Israelites did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, forgetting
the LORD their God, and worshiping the Baals and the Asherahs. 8
Therefore the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and he sold
them into the hand of King Cushan-rishathaim of Aram-naharaim; and
the Israelites served Cushan-rishathaim eight years. 9 But when the
Israelites cried out to the LORD, the LORD raised up a deliverer for the
Israelites, who delivered them, Othniel son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger
brother. 10 The spirit of the LORD came upon him, and he judged Israel;
he went out to war, and the LORD gave King Cushan-rishathaim of
Aram into his hand; and his hand prevailed over Cushan-rishathaim. 11
So the land had rest forty years. Then Othniel son of Kenaz died.
Major judge cycle: Ehud
12 The Israelites again did what was evil in the sight of the LORD; and
the LORD strengthened King Eglon of Moab against Israel, because they
had done what was evil in the sight of the LORD. 13 In alliance with the
Ammonites and the Amalekites, he went and defeated Israel; and they
took possession of the city of palms. 14 So the Israelites served King
Eglon of Moab eighteen years.

493

JUDGES 494

15 But when the Israelites cried out to the LORD, the LORD raised up for
them a deliverer, Ehud son of Gera, the Benjaminite, a left-handed
man. The Israelites sent tribute by him to King Eglon of Moab. 16 Ehud
made for himself a sword with two edges, a cubit in length; and he
fastened it on his right thigh under his clothes. 17 Then he presented
the tribute to King Eglon of Moab. Now Eglon was a very fat man. 18
When Ehud had finished presenting the tribute, he sent the people
who carried the tribute on their way. 19 But he himself turned back at
the sculptured stones near Gilgal, and said, "I have a secret message for
you, O king." So the king said, "Silence!" and all his attendants went
out from his presence. 20 Ehud came to him, while he was sitting alone
in his cool roof chamber, and said, "I have a message from God for
you." So he rose from his seat. 21 Then Ehud reached with his left hand,
took the sword from his right thigh, and thrust it into Eglon's belly; 22
the hilt also went in after the blade, and the fat closed over the blade,
for he did not draw the sword out of his belly; and the dirt came out.
23 Then Ehud went out into the vestibule, and closed the doors of the
roof chamber on him, and locked them.
24 After he had gone, the servants came. When they saw that the
doors of the roof chamber were locked, they thought, "He must be
relieving himself in the cool chamber." 25 So they waited until they
were embarrassed. When he still did not open the doors of the roof
chamber, they took the key and opened them. There was their lord
lying dead on the floor.
26 Ehud escaped while they delayed, and passed beyond the sculptured
stones, and escaped to Seirah. 27 When he arrived, he sounded the
trumpet in the hill country of Ephraim; and the Israelites went down
with him from the hill country, having him at their head. 28 He said to
them, "Follow after me; for the LORD has given your enemies the
Moabites into your hand." So they went down after him, and seized
the fords of the Jordan against the Moabites, and allowed no one to
cross over. 29 At that time they killed about ten thousand of the
Moabites, all strong, able-bodied men; no one escaped. 30 So Moab
was subdued that day under the hand of Israel. And the land had rest
eighty years.

494

JUDGES 495

Major judge cycle: Shamgar
31 After him came Shamgar son of Anath, who killed six hundred of the
Philistines with an oxgoad. He too delivered Israel.
[Judges 4]
Major judge cycle: Deborah and Barak; the prose narrative, prologue
1 The Israelites again did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, after
Ehud died. 2 So the LORD sold them into the hand of King Jabin of
Canaan, who reigned in Hazor; the commander of his army was Sisera,
who lived in Harosheth-ha-goiim. 3 Then the Israelites cried out to the
LORD for help; for he had nine hundred chariots of iron, and had
oppressed the Israelites cruelly twenty years.
The call of Barak and the defeat of Sisera's army
4 At that time Deborah, a prophetess, wife of Lappidoth, was judging
Israel. 5 She used to sit under the palm of Deborah between Ramah
and Bethel in the hill country of Ephraim; and the Israelites came up to
her for judgment. 6 She sent and summoned Barak son of Abinoam
from Kedesh in Naphtali, and said to him, "The LORD, the God of Israel,
commands you, 'Go, take position at Mount Tabor, bringing ten
thousand from the tribe of Naphtali and the tribe of Zebulun. 7 I will
draw out Sisera, the general of Jabin's army, to meet you by the Wadi
Kishon with his chariots and his troops; and I will give him into your
hand.'" 8 Barak said to her, "If you will go with me, I will go; but if you
will not go with me, I will not go." 9 And she said, "I will surely go with
you; nevertheless, the road on which you are going will not lead to
your glory, for the LORD will sell Sisera into the hand of a woman."
Then Deborah got up and went with Barak to Kedesh. 10 Barak
summoned Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh; and ten thousand
warriors went up behind him; and Deborah went up with him.
11 Now Heber the Kenite had separated from the other Kenites, that is,
the descendants of Hobab the father-in-law of Moses, and had
encamped as far away as Elon-bezaanannim, which is near Kedesh.

495

JUDGES 496

12 When Sisera was told that Barak son of Abinoam had gone up to
Mount Tabor, 13 Sisera called out all his chariots, nine hundred chariots
of iron, and all the troops who were with him, from Harosheth-hagoiim to the Wadi Kishon. 14 Then Deborah said to Barak, "Up! For this
is the day on which the LORD has given Sisera into your hand. The LORD
is indeed going out before you." So Barak went down from Mount
Tabor with ten thousand warriors following him. 15 And the LORD
threw Sisera and all his chariots and all his army into a panic before
Barak; Sisera got down from his chariot and fled away on foot, 16 while
Barak pursued the chariots and the army to Harosheth-ha-goiim. All
the army of Sisera fell by the sword; no one was left.
The murder of Sisera by Jael
17 Now Sisera had fled away on foot to the tent of Jael wife of Heber
the Kenite; for there was peace between King Jabin of Hazor and the
clan of Heber the Kenite. 18 Jael came out to meet Sisera, and said to
him, "Turn aside, my lord, turn aside to me; have no fear." So he
turned aside to her into the tent, and she covered him with a rug. 19
Then he said to her, "Please give me a little water to drink; for I am
thirsty." So she opened a skin of milk and gave him a drink and
covered him. 20 He said to her, "Stand at the entrance of the tent, and
if anybody comes and asks you, 'Is anyone here?' say, 'No.'" 21 But Jael
wife of Heber took a tent peg, and took a hammer in her hand, and
went softly to him and drove the peg into his temple, until it went
down into the ground — he was lying fast asleep from weariness —
and he died. 22 Then, as Barak came in pursuit of Sisera, Jael went out
to meet him, and said to him, "Come, and I will show you the man
whom you are seeking." So he went into her tent; and there was Sisera
lying dead, with the tent peg in his temple.
Epilogue
23 So on that day God subdued King Jabin of Canaan before the
Israelites. 24 Then the hand of the Israelites bore harder and harder on
King Jabin of Canaan, until they destroyed King Jabin of Canaan.

496

JUDGES 497

[Judges 5]
The poem: Song of Deborah
1 Then Deborah and Barak son of Abinoam sang on that day, saying:
Initial call to praise and report of need
2 "When locks are long in Israel,
when the people offer themselves willingly —
bless the LORD!
3 "Hear, O kings; give ear, O princes;
to the LORD I will sing,
I will make melody to the LORD, the God of Israel.
4 "LORD, when you went out from Seir,
when you marched from the region of Edom,
the earth trembled,
and the heavens poured,
the clouds indeed poured water.
5 The mountains quaked before the LORD, the One of Sinai,
before the LORD, the God of Israel.
6 "In the days of Shamgar son of Anath,
in the days of Jael, caravans ceased
and travelers kept to the byways.
7 The peasantry prospered in Israel,
they grew fat on plunder,
because you arose, Deborah,
arose as a mother in Israel.
8 When new gods were chosen,
then war was in the gates.
Was shield or spear to be seen
among forty thousand in Israel?

497

JUDGES 498

Renewal of call to praise because of the volunteers
9 My heart goes out to the commanders of Israel
who offered themselves willingly among the people.
Bless the LORD.
10 "Tell of it, you who ride on white donkeys,
you who sit on rich carpets
and you who walk by the way.
11 To the sound of musicians at the watering places,
there they repeat the triumphs of the LORD,
the triumphs of his peasantry in Israel.
"Then down to the gates marched the people of the LORD.
12 "Awake, awake, Deborah!
Awake, awake, utter a song!
Arise, Barak, lead away your captives,
O son of Abinoam.
13 Then down marched the remnant of the noble;
the people of the LORD marched down for him against
the mighty.
Recognition of the tribes who did or did not participate
14 From Ephraim they set out into the valley,
following you, Benjamin, with your kin;
from Machir marched down the commanders,
and from Zebulun those who bear the marshal's staff;
15 the chiefs of Issachar came with Deborah,
and Issachar faithful to Barak;
into the valley they rushed out at his heels.
Among the clans of Reuben
there were great searchings of heart.
16 Why did you tarry among the sheepfolds,
to hear the piping for the flocks?
Among the clans of Reuben
there were great searchings of heart.

498

JUDGES 499

17 Gilead stayed beyond the Jordan;
and Dan, why did he abide with the ships?
Asher sat still at the coast of the sea,
settling down by his landings.
18 Zebulun is a people that scorned death;
Naphtali too, on the heights of the field.
The battle and the curse of Meroz
19 "The kings came, they fought;
then fought the kings of Canaan,
at Taanach, by the waters of Megiddo;
they got no spoils of silver.
20 The stars fought from heaven,
from their courses they fought against Sisera.
21 The torrent Kishon swept them away,
the onrushing torrent, the torrent Kishon.
March on, my soul, with might!
22 "Then loud beat the horses' hoofs
with the galloping, galloping of his steeds.
23 "Curse Meroz, says the angel of the LORD,
curse bitterly its inhabitants,
because they did not come to the help of the LORD,
to the help of the LORD against the mighty.
Jael's deed and Sisera's mother
24 "Most blessed of women be Jael,
the wife of Heber the Kenite,
of tent-dwelling women most blessed.
25 He asked water and she gave him milk,
she brought him curds in a lordly bowl.
26 She put her hand to the tent peg
and her right hand to the workmen's mallet;
she struck Sisera a blow,
she crushed his head,
she shattered and pierced his temple.

499

JUDGES 500

27 He sank, he fell,
he lay still at her feet;
at her feet he sank, he fell;
where he sank, there he fell dead.
28 "Out of the window she peered,
the mother of Sisera gazed through the lattice:
'Why is his chariot so long in coming?
Why tarry the hoofbeats of his chariots?'
29 Her wisest ladies make answer,
indeed, she answers the question herself:
30 'Are they not finding and dividing the spoil? —
A girl or two for every man;
spoil of dyed stuffs for Sisera,
spoil of dyed stuffs embroidered,
two pieces of dyed work embroidered for my neck as spoil?'
31 "So perish all your enemies, O LORD!
But may your friends be like the sun as it rises in its might."
And the land had rest forty years.
[Judges 6]
Major judge cycle: Gideon and Abimelech; the setting before Gideon's
call
1 The Israelites did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, and the LORD
gave them into the hand of Midian seven years. 2 The hand of Midian
prevailed over Israel; and because of Midian the Israelites provided for
themselves hiding places in the mountains, caves and strongholds. 3 For
whenever the Israelites put in seed, the Midianites and the Amalekites
and the people of the east would come up against them. 4 They would
encamp against them and destroy the produce of the land, as far as the
neighborhood of Gaza, and leave no sustenance in Israel, and no sheep
or ox or donkey. 5 For they and their livestock would come up, and
they would even bring their tents, as thick as locusts; neither they nor
their camels could be counted; so they wasted the land as they came in.

500

JUDGES 501

6 Thus Israel was greatly impoverished because of Midian; and the
Israelites cried out to the LORD for help.
7 When the Israelites cried to the LORD on account of the Midianites, 8
the LORD sent a prophet to the Israelites; and he said to them, "Thus
says the LORD, the God of Israel: I led you up from Egypt, and brought
you out of the house of slavery; 9 and I delivered you from the hand of
the Egyptians, and from the hand of all who oppressed you, and drove
them out before you, and gave you their land; 10 and I said to you, 'I
am the LORD your God; you shall not pay reverence to the gods of the
Amorites, in whose land you live.' But you have not given heed to my
voice."
The call of Gideon
11 Now the angel of the LORD came and sat under the oak at Ophrah,
which belonged to Joash the Abiezrite, as his son Gideon was beating
out wheat in the wine press, to hide it from the Midianites. 12 The
angel of the LORD appeared to him and said to him, "The LORD is with
you, you mighty warrior." 13 Gideon answered him, "But sir, if the LORD
is with us, why then has all this happened to us? And where are all his
wonderful deeds that our ancestors recounted to us, saying, 'Did not
the LORD bring us up from Egypt?' But now the LORD has cast us off,
and given us into the hand of Midian." 14 Then the LORD turned to him
and said, "Go in this might of yours and deliver Israel from the hand of
Midian; I hereby commission you." 15 He responded, "But sir, how can I
deliver Israel? My clan is the weakest in Manasseh, and I am the least in
my family." 16 The LORD said to him, "But I will be with you, and you
shall strike down the Midianites, every one of them." 17 Then he said
to him, "If now I have found favor with you, then show me a sign that
it is you who speak with me. 18 Do not depart from here until I come
to you, and bring out my present, and set it before you." And he said,
"I will stay until you return."
19 So Gideon went into his house and prepared a kid, and unleavened
cakes from an ephah of flour; the meat he put in a basket, and the
broth he put in a pot, and brought them to him under the oak and
presented them. 20 The angel of God said to him, "Take the meat and

501

JUDGES 502

the unleavened cakes, and put them on this rock, and pour out the
broth." And he did so. 21 Then the angel of the LORD reached out the
tip of the staff that was in his hand, and touched the meat and the
unleavened cakes; and fire sprang up from the rock and consumed the
meat and the unleavened cakes; and the angel of the LORD vanished
from his sight. 22 Then Gideon perceived that it was the angel of the
LORD; and Gideon said, "Help me, Lord GOD! For I have seen the angel
of the LORD face to face." 23 But the LORD said to him, "Peace be to
you; do not fear, you shall not die." 24 Then Gideon built an altar there
to the LORD, and called it, The LORD is peace. To this day it still stands at
Ophrah, which belongs to the Abiezrites.
25 That night the LORD said to him, "Take your father's bull, the second
bull seven years old, and pull down the altar of Baal that belongs to
your father, and cut down the sacred pole that is beside it; 26 and build
an altar to the LORD your God on the top of the stronghold here, in
proper order; then take the second bull, and offer it as a burnt offering
with the wood of the sacred pole that you shall cut down." 27 So
Gideon took ten of his servants, and did as the LORD had told him; but
because he was too afraid of his family and the townspeople to do it
by day, he did it by night.
28 When the townspeople rose early in the morning, the altar of Baal
was broken down, and the sacred pole beside it was cut down, and the
second bull was offered on the altar that had been built. 29 So they
said to one another, "Who has done this?" After searching and
inquiring, they were told, "Gideon son of Joash did it." 30 Then the
townspeople said to Joash, "Bring out your son, so that he may die, for
he has pulled down the altar of Baal and cut down the sacred pole
beside it." 31 But Joash said to all who were arrayed against him, "Will
you contend for Baal? Or will you defend his cause? Whoever contends
for him shall be put to death by morning. If he is a god, let him
contend for himself, because his altar has been pulled down." 32
Therefore on that day Gideon was called Jerubbaal, that is to say, "Let
Baal contend against him," because he pulled down his altar.

502

JUDGES 503

Gideon's struggle with belief in God's promise
33 Then all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the people of the
east came together, and crossing the Jordan they encamped in the
Valley of Jezreel. 34 But the spirit of the LORD took possession of
Gideon; and he sounded the trumpet, and the Abiezrites were called
out to follow him. 35 He sent messengers throughout all Manasseh,
and they too were called out to follow him. He also sent messengers to
Asher, Zebulun, and Naphtali, and they went up to meet them.
36 Then Gideon said to God, "In order to see whether you will deliver
Israel by my hand, as you have said, 37 I am going to lay a fleece of
wool on the threshing floor; if there is dew on the fleece alone, and it
is dry on all the ground, then I shall know that you will deliver Israel by
my hand, as you have said." 38 And it was so. When he rose early next
morning and squeezed the fleece, he wrung enough dew from the
fleece to fill a bowl with water. 39 Then Gideon said to God, "Do not
let your anger burn against me, let me speak one more time; let me,
please, make trial with the fleece just once more; let it be dry only on
the fleece, and on all the ground let there be dew." 40 And God did so
that night. It was dry on the fleece only, and on all the ground there
was dew.
[Judges 7]
1 Then Jerubbaal (that is, Gideon) and all the troops that were with
him rose early and encamped beside the spring of Harod; and the camp
of Midian was north of them, below the hill of Moreh, in the valley.
2 The LORD said to Gideon, "The troops with you are too many for me
to give the Midianites into their hand. Israel would only take the credit
away from me, saying, 'My own hand has delivered me.' 3 Now
therefore proclaim this in the hearing of the troops, 'Whoever is
fearful and trembling, let him return home.'" Thus Gideon sifted them
out; twenty-two thousand returned, and ten thousand remained.
4 Then the LORD said to Gideon, "The troops are still too many; take
them down to the water and I will sift them out for you there. When I
say, 'This one shall go with you,' he shall go with you; and when I say,

503

JUDGES 504

'This one shall not go with you,' he shall not go." 5 So he brought the
troops down to the water; and the LORD said to Gideon, "All those who
lap the water with their tongues, as a dog laps, you shall put to one
side; all those who kneel down to drink, putting their hands to their
mouths, you shall put to the other side." 6 The number of those that
lapped was three hundred; but all the rest of the troops knelt down to
drink water. 7 Then the LORD said to Gideon, "With the three hundred
that lapped I will deliver you, and give the Midianites into your hand.
Let all the others go to their homes." 8 So he took the jars of the
troops from their hands, and their trumpets; and he sent all the rest of
Israel back to their own tents, but retained the three hundred. The
camp of Midian was below him in the valley.
9 That same night the LORD said to him, "Get up, attack the camp; for I
have given it into your hand. 10 But if you fear to attack, go down to
the camp with your servant Purah; 11 and you shall hear what they say,
and afterward your hands shall be strengthened to attack the camp."
Then he went down with his servant Purah to the outposts of the
armed men that were in the camp. 12 The Midianites and the
Amalekites and all the people of the east lay along the valley as thick
as locusts; and their camels were without number, countless as the
sand on the seashore. 13 When Gideon arrived, there was a man telling
a dream to his comrade; and he said, "I had a dream, and in it a cake of
barley bread tumbled into the camp of Midian, and came to the tent,
and struck it so that it fell; it turned upside down, and the tent
collapsed." 14 And his comrade answered, "This is no other than the
sword of Gideon son of Joash, a man of Israel; into his hand God has
given Midian and all the army."
15 When Gideon heard the telling of the dream and its interpretation,
he worshiped; and he returned to the camp of Israel, and said, "Get up;
for the LORD has given the army of Midian into your hand." 16 After he
divided the three hundred men into three companies, and put
trumpets into the hands of all of them, and empty jars, with torches
inside the jars, 17 he said to them, "Look at me, and do the same; when
I come to the outskirts of the camp, do as I do. 18 When I blow the
trumpet, I and all who are with me, then you also blow the trumpets
around the whole camp, and shout, 'For the LORD and for Gideon!'"

504

JUDGES 505

God's deliverance from the Midianites
19 So Gideon and the hundred who were with him came to the
outskirts of the camp at the beginning of the middle watch, when they
had just set the watch; and they blew the trumpets and smashed the
jars that were in their hands. 20 So the three companies blew the
trumpets and broke the jars, holding in their left hands the torches,
and in their right hands the trumpets to blow; and they cried, "A
sword for the LORD and for Gideon!" 21 Every man stood in his place all
around the camp, and all the men in camp ran; they cried out and fled.
22 When they blew the three hundred trumpets, the LORD set every
man's sword against his fellow and against all the army; and the army
fled as far as Beth-shittah toward Zererah, as far as the border of Abelmeholah, by Tabbath. 23 And the men of Israel were called out from
Naphtali and from Asher and from all Manasseh, and they pursued
after the Midianites.
24 Then Gideon sent messengers throughout all the hill country of
Ephraim, saying, "Come down against the Midianites and seize the
waters against them, as far as Beth-barah, and also the Jordan." So all
the men of Ephraim were called out, and they seized the waters as far
as Beth-barah, and also the Jordan. 25 They captured the two captains
of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb; they killed Oreb at the rock of Oreb, and
Zeeb they killed at the wine press of Zeeb, as they pursued the
Midianites. They brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to Gideon
beyond the Jordan.
[Judges 8]
1 Then the Ephraimites said to him, "What have you done to us, not to
call us when you went to fight against the Midianites?" And they
upbraided him violently. 2 So he said to them, "What have I done now
in comparison with you? Is not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim
better than the vintage of Abiezer? 3 God has given into your hands
the captains of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb; what have I been able to do in
comparison with you?" When he said this, their anger against him
subsided.

505

JUDGES 506

4 Then Gideon came to the Jordan and crossed over, he and the three
hundred who were with him, exhausted and famished. 5 So he said to
the people of Succoth, "Please give some loaves of bread to my
followers, for they are exhausted, and I am pursuing Zebah and
Zalmunna, the kings of Midian." 6 But the officials of Succoth said, "Do
you already have in your possession the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna,
that we should give bread to your army?" 7 Gideon replied, "Well
then, when the LORD has given Zebah and Zalmunna into my hand, I
will trample your flesh on the thorns of the wilderness and on briers."
8 From there he went up to Penuel, and made the same request of
them; and the people of Penuel answered him as the people of Succoth
had answered. 9 So he said to the people of Penuel, "When I come
back victorious, I will break down this tower."
10 Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor with their army, about
fifteen thousand men, all who were left of all the army of the people
of the east; for one hundred twenty thousand men bearing arms had
fallen. 11 So Gideon went up by the caravan route east of Nobah and
Jogbehah, and attacked the army; for the army was off its guard. 12
Zebah and Zalmunna fled; and he pursued them and took the two
kings of Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, and threw all the army into a
panic.
13 When Gideon son of Joash returned from the battle by the ascent of
Heres, 14 he caught a young man, one of the people of Succoth, and
questioned him; and he listed for him the officials and elders of
Succoth, seventy-seven people. 15 Then he came to the people of
Succoth, and said, "Here are Zebah and Zalmunna, about whom you
taunted me, saying, 'Do you already have in your possession the hands
of Zebah and Zalmunna, that we should give bread to your troops who
are exhausted?'" 16 So he took the elders of the city and he took
thorns of the wilderness and briers and with them he trampled the
people of Succoth. 17 He also broke down the tower of Penuel, and
killed the men of the city.
18 Then he said to Zebah and Zalmunna, "What about the men whom
you killed at Tabor?" They answered, "As you are, so were they, every
one of them; they resembled the sons of a king." 19 And he replied,

506

JUDGES 507

"They were my brothers, the sons of my mother; as the LORD lives, if
you had saved them alive, I would not kill you." 20 So he said to Jether
his firstborn, "Go kill them!" But the boy did not draw his sword, for
he was afraid, because he was still a boy. 21 Then Zebah and Zalmunna
said, "You come and kill us; for as the man is, so is his strength." So
Gideon proceeded to kill Zebah and Zalmunna; and he took the
crescents that were on the necks of their camels.
Conclusion of Gideon's life after the victory
22 Then the Israelites said to Gideon, "Rule over us, you and your son
and your grandson also; for you have delivered us out of the hand of
Midian." 23 Gideon said to them, "I will not rule over you, and my son
will not rule over you; the LORD will rule over you." 24 Then Gideon
said to them, "Let me make a request of you; each of you give me an
earring he has taken as booty." (For the enemy had golden earrings,
because they were Ishmaelites.) 25 "We will willingly give them," they
answered. So they spread a garment, and each threw into it an earring
he had taken as booty. 26 The weight of the golden earrings that he
requested was one thousand seven hundred shekels of gold (apart
from the crescents and the pendants and the purple garments worn by
the kings of Midian, and the collars that were on the necks of their
camels). 27 Gideon made an ephod of it and put it in his town, in
Ophrah; and all Israel prostituted themselves to it there, and it became
a snare to Gideon and to his family. 28 So Midian was subdued before
the Israelites, and they lifted up their heads no more. So the land had
rest forty years in the days of Gideon.
29 Jerubbaal son of Joash went to live in his own house. 30 Now
Gideon had seventy sons, his own offspring, for he had many wives. 31
His concubine who was in Shechem also bore him a son, and he named
him Abimelech. 32 Then Gideon son of Joash died at a good old age,
and was buried in the tomb of his father Joash at Ophrah of the
Abiezrites.

507

JUDGES 508

The prologue to the story
33 As soon as Gideon died, the Israelites relapsed and prostituted
themselves with the Baals, making Baal-berith their god. 34 The
Israelites did not remember the LORD their God, who had rescued them
from the hand of all their enemies on every side; 35 and they did not
exhibit loyalty to the house of Jerubbaal (that is, Gideon) in return for
all the good that he had done to Israel.
[Judges 9]
Abimelech's rise
1 Now Abimelech son of Jerubbaal went to Shechem to his mother's
kinsfolk and said to them and to the whole clan of his mother's family,
2 "Say in the hearing of all the lords of Shechem, 'Which is better for
you, that all seventy of the sons of Jerubbaal rule over you, or that one
rule over you?' Remember also that I am your bone and your flesh." 3
So his mother's kinsfolk spoke all these words on his behalf in the
hearing of all the lords of Shechem; and their hearts inclined to follow
Abimelech, for they said, "He is our brother." 4 They gave him seventy
pieces of silver out of the temple of Baal-berith with which Abimelech
hired worthless and reckless fellows, who followed him. 5 He went to
his father's house at Ophrah, and killed his brothers the sons of
Jerubbaal, seventy men, on one stone; but Jotham, the youngest son of
Jerubbaal, survived, for he hid himself. 6 Then all the lords of Shechem
and all Beth-millo came together, and they went and made Abimelech
king, by the oak of the pillar at Shechem.
7 When it was told to Jotham, he went and stood on the top of Mount
Gerizim, and cried aloud and said to them, "Listen to me, you lords of
Shechem, so that God may listen to you.
8 The trees once went out
to anoint a king over themselves.
So they said to the olive tree,
'Reign over us.'

508

JUDGES 509

9 The olive tree answered them,
'Shall I stop producing my rich oil
by which gods and mortals are honored,
and go to sway over the trees?'
10 Then the trees said to the fig tree,
'You come and reign over us.'
11 But the fig tree answered them,
'Shall I stop producing my sweetness
and my delicious fruit,
and go to sway over the trees?'
12 Then the trees said to the vine,
'You come and reign over us.'
13 But the vine said to them,
'Shall I stop producing my wine
that cheers gods and mortals,
and go to sway over the trees?'
14 So all the trees said to the bramble,
'You come and reign over us.'
15 And the bramble said to the trees,
'If in good faith you are anointing me king over you,
then come and take refuge in my shade;
but if not, let fire come out of the bramble
and devour the cedars of Lebanon.'
16 "Now therefore, if you acted in good faith and honor when you
made Abimelech king, and if you have dealt well with Jerubbaal and
his house, and have done to him as his actions deserved — 17 for my
father fought for you, and risked his life, and rescued you from the
hand of Midian; 18 but you have risen up against my father's house this
day, and have killed his sons, seventy men on one stone, and have
made Abimelech, the son of his slave woman, king over the lords of
Shechem, because he is your kinsman — 19 if, I say, you have acted in
good faith and honor with Jerubbaal and with his house this day, then
rejoice in Abimelech, and let him also rejoice in you; 20 but if not, let
fire come out from Abimelech, and devour the lords of Shechem, and
Beth-millo; and let fire come out from the lords of Shechem, and from
Beth-millo, and devour Abimelech." 21 Then Jotham ran away and fled,
going to Beer, where he remained for fear of his brother Abimelech.

509

JUDGES 510

22 Abimelech ruled over Israel three years. 23 But God sent an evil spirit
between Abimelech and the lords of Shechem; and the lords of
Shechem dealt treacherously with Abimelech. 24 This happened so that
the violence done to the seventy sons of Jerubbaal might be avenged
and their blood be laid on their brother Abimelech, who killed them,
and on the lords of Shechem, who strengthened his hands to kill his
brothers. 25 So, out of hostility to him, the lords of Shechem set
ambushes on the mountain tops. They robbed all who passed by them
along that way; and it was reported to Abimelech.
Abimelech's decline
26 When Gaal son of Ebed moved into Shechem with his kinsfolk, the
lords of Shechem put confidence in him. 27 They went out into the
field and gathered the grapes from their vineyards, trod them, and
celebrated. Then they went into the temple of their god, ate and
drank, and ridiculed Abimelech. 28 Gaal son of Ebed said, "Who is
Abimelech, and who are we of Shechem, that we should serve him?
Did not the son of Jerubbaal and Zebul his officer serve the men of
Hamor father of Shechem? Why then should we serve him? 29 If only
this people were under my command! Then I would remove
Abimelech; I would say to him, 'Increase your army, and come out.'"
30 When Zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of Gaal son of
Ebed, his anger was kindled. 31 He sent messengers to Abimelech at
Arumah, saying, "Look, Gaal son of Ebed and his kinsfolk have come to
Shechem, and they are stirring up the city against you. 32 Now
therefore, go by night, you and the troops that are with you, and lie in
wait in the fields. 33 Then early in the morning, as soon as the sun rises,
get up and rush on the city; and when he and the troops that are with
him come out against you, you may deal with them as best you can."
34 So Abimelech and all the troops with him got up by night and lay in
wait against Shechem in four companies. 35 When Gaal son of Ebed
went out and stood in the entrance of the gate of the city, Abimelech
and the troops with him rose from the ambush. 36 And when Gaal saw
them, he said to Zebul, "Look, people are coming down from the
mountain tops!" And Zebul said to him, "The shadows on the

510

JUDGES 511

mountains look like people to you." 37 Gaal spoke again and said,
"Look, people are coming down from Tabbur-erez, and one company is
coming from the direction of Elon-meonenim." 38 Then Zebul said to
him, "Where is your boast now, you who said, 'Who is Abimelech, that
we should serve him?' Are not these the troops you made light of? Go
out now and fight with them." 39 So Gaal went out at the head of the
lords of Shechem, and fought with Abimelech. 40 Abimelech chased
him, and he fled before him. Many fell wounded, up to the entrance of
the gate. 41 So Abimelech resided at Arumah; and Zebul drove out
Gaal and his kinsfolk, so that they could not live on at Shechem.
42 On the following day the people went out into the fields. When
Abimelech was told, 43 he took his troops and divided them into three
companies, and lay in wait in the fields. When he looked and saw the
people coming out of the city, he rose against them and killed them.
44 Abimelech and the company that was with him rushed forward and
stood at the entrance of the gate of the city, while the two companies
rushed on all who were in the fields and killed them. 45 Abimelech
fought against the city all that day; he took the city, and killed the
people that were in it; and he razed the city and sowed it with salt.
46 When all the lords of the Tower of Shechem heard of it, they
entered the stronghold of the temple of El-berith. 47 Abimelech was
told that all the lords of the Tower of Shechem were gathered
together. 48 So Abimelech went up to Mount Zalmon, he and all the
troops that were with him. Abimelech took an ax in his hand, cut down
a bundle of brushwood, and took it up and laid it on his shoulder.
Then he said to the troops with him, "What you have seen me do, do
quickly, as I have done." 49 So every one of the troops cut down a
bundle and following Abimelech put it against the stronghold, and
they set the stronghold on fire over them, so that all the people of the
Tower of Shechem also died, about a thousand men and women.
50 Then Abimelech went to Thebez, and encamped against Thebez,
and took it. 51 But there was a strong tower within the city, and all the
men and women and all the lords of the city fled to it and shut
themselves in; and they went to the roof of the tower. 52 Abimelech
came to the tower, and fought against it, and came near to the

511

JUDGES 512

entrance of the tower to burn it with fire. 53 But a certain woman
threw an upper millstone on Abimelech's head, and crushed his skull.
54 Immediately he called to the young man who carried his armor and
said to him, "Draw your sword and kill me, so people will not say about
me, 'A woman killed him.'" So the young man thrust him through, and
he died. 55 When the Israelites saw that Abimelech was dead, they all
went home. 56 Thus God repaid Abimelech for the crime he committed
against his father in killing his seventy brothers; 57 and God also made
all the wickedness of the people of Shechem fall back on their heads,
and on them came the curse of Jotham son of Jerubbaal.
[Judges 10]
Minor judge: Tola
1 After Abimelech, Tola son of Puah son of Dodo, a man of Issachar,
who lived at Shamir in the hill country of Ephraim, rose to deliver
Israel. 2 He judged Israel twenty-three years. Then he died, and was
buried at Shamir.
Minor judge: Jair
3 After him came Jair the Gileadite, who judged Israel twenty-two
years. 4 He had thirty sons who rode on thirty donkeys; and they had
thirty towns, which are in the land of Gilead, and are called Havvothjair to this day. 5 Jair died, and was buried in Kamon.
Major judge cycle: Jephthah; the Deuteronomistic introduction
6 The Israelites again did what was evil in the sight of the LORD,
worshiping the Baals and the Astartes, the gods of Aram, the gods of
Sidon, the gods of Moab, the gods of the Ammonites, and the gods of
the Philistines. Thus they abandoned the LORD, and did not worship
him. 7 So the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and he sold
them into the hand of the Philistines and into the hand of the
Ammonites, 8 and they crushed and oppressed the Israelites that year.
For eighteen years they oppressed all the Israelites that were beyond
the Jordan in the land of the Amorites, which is in Gilead. 9 The
Ammonites also crossed the Jordan to fight against Judah and against

512

JUDGES 513

Benjamin and against the house of Ephraim; so that Israel was greatly
distressed.
10 So the Israelites cried to the LORD, saying, "We have sinned against
you, because we have abandoned our God and have worshiped the
Baals." 11 And the LORD said to the Israelites, "Did I not deliver you
from the Egyptians and from the Amorites, from the Ammonites and
from the Philistines? 12 The Sidonians also, and the Amalekites, and the
Maonites, oppressed you; and you cried to me, and I delivered you out
of their hand. 13 Yet you have abandoned me and worshiped other
gods; therefore I will deliver you no more. 14 Go and cry to the gods
whom you have chosen; let them deliver you in the time of your
distress." 15 And the Israelites said to the LORD, "We have sinned; do to
us whatever seems good to you; but deliver us this day!" 16 So they put
away the foreign gods from among them and worshiped the LORD; and
he could no longer bear to see Israel suffer.
The elders' choice of Jephthah
17 Then the Ammonites were called to arms, and they encamped in
Gilead; and the Israelites came together, and they encamped at
Mizpah. 18 The commanders of the people of Gilead said to one
another, "Who will begin the fight against the Ammonites? He shall be
head over all the inhabitants of Gilead."
[Judges 11]
1 Now Jephthah the Gileadite, the son of a prostitute, was a mighty
warrior. Gilead was the father of Jephthah. 2 Gilead's wife also bore
him sons; and when his wife's sons grew up, they drove Jephthah
away, saying to him, "You shall not inherit anything in our father's
house; for you are the son of another woman." 3 Then Jephthah fled
from his brothers and lived in the land of Tob. Outlaws collected
around Jephthah and went raiding with him.
4 After a time the Ammonites made war against Israel. 5 And when the
Ammonites made war against Israel, the elders of Gilead went to bring
Jephthah from the land of Tob. 6 They said to Jephthah, "Come and be

513

JUDGES 514

our commander, so that we may fight with the Ammonites." 7 But
Jephthah said to the elders of Gilead, "Are you not the very ones who
rejected me and drove me out of my father's house? So why do you
come to me now when you are in trouble?" 8 The elders of Gilead said
to Jephthah, "Nevertheless, we have now turned back to you, so that
you may go with us and fight with the Ammonites, and become head
over us, over all the inhabitants of Gilead." 9 Jephthah said to the
elders of Gilead, "If you bring me home again to fight with the
Ammonites, and the LORD gives them over to me, I will be your head."
10 And the elders of Gilead said to Jephthah, "The LORD will be witness
between us; we will surely do as you say." 11 So Jephthah went with
the elders of Gilead, and the people made him head and commander
over them; and Jephthah spoke all his words before the LORD at
Mizpah.
Jephthah attempts diplomacy with the Ammonite king
12 Then Jephthah sent messengers to the king of the Ammonites and
said, "What is there between you and me, that you have come to me
to fight against my land?" 13 The king of the Ammonites answered the
messengers of Jephthah, "Because Israel, on coming from Egypt, took
away my land from the Arnon to the Jabbok and to the Jordan; now
therefore restore it peaceably." 14 Once again Jephthah sent
messengers to the king of the Ammonites 15 and said to him: "Thus
says Jephthah: Israel did not take away the land of Moab or the land of
the Ammonites, 16 but when they came up from Egypt, Israel went
through the wilderness to the Red Sea and came to Kadesh. 17 Israel
then sent messengers to the king of Edom, saying, 'Let us pass through
your land'; but the king of Edom would not listen. They also sent to the
king of Moab, but he would not consent. So Israel remained at Kadesh.
18 Then they journeyed through the wilderness, went around the land
of Edom and the land of Moab, arrived on the east side of the land of
Moab, and camped on the other side of the Arnon. They did not enter
the territory of Moab, for the Arnon was the boundary of Moab. 19
Israel then sent messengers to King Sihon of the Amorites, king of
Heshbon; and Israel said to him, 'Let us pass through your land to our
country.' 20 But Sihon did not trust Israel to pass through his territory;
so Sihon gathered all his people together, and encamped at Jahaz, and

514

JUDGES 515

fought with Israel. 21 Then the LORD, the God of Israel, gave Sihon and
all his people into the hand of Israel, and they defeated them; so Israel
occupied all the land of the Amorites, who inhabited that country. 22
They occupied all the territory of the Amorites from the Arnon to the
Jabbok and from the wilderness to the Jordan. 23 So now the LORD, the
God of Israel, has conquered the Amorites for the benefit of his people
Israel. Do you intend to take their place? 24 Should you not possess
what your god Chemosh gives you to possess? And should we not be
the ones to possess everything that the LORD our God has conquered
for our benefit? 25 Now are you any better than King Balak son of
Zippor of Moab? Did he ever enter into conflict with Israel, or did he
ever go to war with them? 26 While Israel lived in Heshbon and its
villages, and in Aroer and its villages, and in all the towns that are
along the Arnon, three hundred years, why did you not recover them
within that time? 27 It is not I who have sinned against you, but you
are the one who does me wrong by making war on me. Let the LORD,
who is judge, decide today for the Israelites or for the Ammonites." 28
But the king of the Ammonites did not heed the message that
Jephthah sent him.
Jephthah's vow
29 Then the spirit of the LORD came upon Jephthah, and he passed
through Gilead and Manasseh. He passed on to Mizpah of Gilead, and
from Mizpah of Gilead he passed on to the Ammonites. 30 And
Jephthah made a vow to the LORD, and said, "If you will give the
Ammonites into my hand, 31 then whoever comes out of the doors of
my house to meet me, when I return victorious from the Ammonites,
shall be the LORD's, to be offered up by me as a burnt offering." 32 So
Jephthah crossed over to the Ammonites to fight against them; and
the LORD gave them into his hand. 33 He inflicted a massive defeat on
them from Aroer to the neighborhood of Minnith, twenty towns, and
as far as Abel-keramim. So the Ammonites were subdued before the
people of Israel.
34 Then Jephthah came to his home at Mizpah; and there was his
daughter coming out to meet him with timbrels and with dancing. She
was his only child; he had no son or daughter except her. 35 When he

515

JUDGES 516

saw her, he tore his clothes, and said, "Alas, my daughter! You have
brought me very low; you have become the cause of great trouble to
me. For I have opened my mouth to the LORD, and I cannot take back
my vow." 36 She said to him, "My father, if you have opened your
mouth to the LORD, do to me according to what has gone out of your
mouth, now that the LORD has given you vengeance against your
enemies, the Ammonites." 37 And she said to her father, "Let this thing
be done for me: Grant me two months, so that I may go and wander
on the mountains, and bewail my virginity, my companions and I." 38
"Go," he said and sent her away for two months. So she departed, she
and her companions, and bewailed her virginity on the mountains. 39
At the end of two months, she returned to her father, who did with
her according to the vow he had made. She had never slept with a
man. So there arose an Israelite custom that 40 for four days every year
the daughters of Israel would go out to lament the daughter of
Jephthah the Gileadite.
[Judges 12]
Objections of the Ephraimites
1 The men of Ephraim were called to arms, and they crossed to Zaphon
and said to Jephthah, "Why did you cross over to fight against the
Ammonites, and did not call us to go with you? We will burn your
house down over you!" 2 Jephthah said to them, "My people and I
were engaged in conflict with the Ammonites who oppressed us
severely. But when I called you, you did not deliver me from their
hand. 3 When I saw that you would not deliver me, I took my life in my
hand, and crossed over against the Ammonites, and the LORD gave
them into my hand. Why then have you come up to me this day, to
fight against me?" 4 Then Jephthah gathered all the men of Gilead
and fought with Ephraim; and the men of Gilead defeated Ephraim,
because they said, "You are fugitives from Ephraim, you Gileadites —
in the heart of Ephraim and Manasseh." 5 Then the Gileadites took the
fords of the Jordan against the Ephraimites. Whenever one of the
fugitives of Ephraim said, "Let me go over," the men of Gilead would
say to him, "Are you an Ephraimite?" When he said, "No," 6 they said
to him, "Then say Shibboleth," and he said, "Sibboleth," for he could
not pronounce it right. Then they seized him and killed him at the

516

JUDGES 517

fords of the Jordan. Forty-two thousand of the Ephraimites fell at that
time.
7 Jephthah judged Israel six years. Then Jephthah the Gileadite died,
and was buried in his town in Gilead.
Minor judge: Ibzan
8 After him Ibzan of Bethlehem judged Israel. 9 He had thirty sons. He
gave his thirty daughters in marriage outside his clan and brought in
thirty young women from outside for his sons. He judged Israel seven
years. 10 Then Ibzan died, and was buried at Bethlehem.
Minor judge: Elon
11 After him Elon the Zebulunite judged Israel; and he judged Israel ten
years. 12 Then Elon the Zebulunite died, and was buried at Aijalon in
the land of Zebulun.
Minor judge: Abdon
13 After him Abdon son of Hillel the Pirathonite judged Israel. 14 He
had forty sons and thirty grandsons, who rode on seventy donkeys; he
judged Israel eight years. 15 Then Abdon son of Hillel the Pirathonite
died, and was buried at Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the hill
country of the Amalekites.
[Judges 13]
Major judge cycle: Samson; Samson's birth
1 The Israelites again did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, and the
LORD gave them into the hand of the Philistines forty years.
2 There was a certain man of Zorah, of the tribe of the Danites, whose
name was Manoah. His wife was barren, having borne no children. 3
And the angel of the LORD appeared to the woman and said to her,
"Although you are barren, having borne no children, you shall
conceive and bear a son. 4 Now be careful not to drink wine or strong

517

JUDGES 518

drink, or to eat anything unclean, 5 for you shall conceive and bear a
son. No razor is to come on his head, for the boy shall be a nazirite to
God from birth. It is he who shall begin to deliver Israel from the hand
of the Philistines." 6 Then the woman came and told her husband, "A
man of God came to me, and his appearance was like that of an angel
of God, most awe-inspiring; I did not ask him where he came from, and
he did not tell me his name; 7 but he said to me, 'You shall conceive
and bear a son. So then drink no wine or strong drink, and eat nothing
unclean, for the boy shall be a nazirite to God from birth to the day of
his death.'"
8 Then Manoah entreated the LORD, and said, "O LORD, I pray, let the
man of God whom you sent come to us again and teach us what we
are to do concerning the boy who will be born." 9 God listened to
Manoah, and the angel of God came again to the woman as she sat in
the field; but her husband Manoah was not with her. 10 So the woman
ran quickly and told her husband, "The man who came to me the other
day has appeared to me." 11 Manoah got up and followed his wife, and
came to the man and said to him, "Are you the man who spoke to this
woman?" And he said, "I am." 12 Then Manoah said, "Now when your
words come true, what is to be the boy's rule of life; what is he to do?"
13 The angel of the LORD said to Manoah, "Let the woman give heed to
all that I said to her. 14 She may not eat of anything that comes from
the vine. She is not to drink wine or strong drink, or eat any unclean
thing. She is to observe everything that I commanded her."
15 Manoah said to the angel of the LORD, "Allow us to detain you, and
prepare a kid for you." 16 The angel of the LORD said to Manoah, "If
you detain me, I will not eat your food; but if you want to prepare a
burnt offering, then offer it to the LORD." (For Manoah did not know
that he was the angel of the LORD.) 17 Then Manoah said to the angel
of the LORD, "What is your name, so that we may honor you when your
words come true?" 18 But the angel of the LORD said to him, "Why do
you ask my name? It is too wonderful."
19 So Manoah took the kid with the grain offering, and offered it on
the rock to the LORD, to him who works wonders. 20 When the flame
went up toward heaven from the altar, the angel of the LORD ascended

518

JUDGES 519

in the flame of the altar while Manoah and his wife looked on; and
they fell on their faces to the ground. 21 The angel of the LORD did not
appear again to Manoah and his wife. Then Manoah realized that it
was the angel of the LORD. 22 And Manoah said to his wife, "We shall
surely die, for we have seen God." 23 But his wife said to him, "If the
LORD had meant to kill us, he would not have accepted a burnt offering
and a grain offering at our hands, or shown us all these things, or now
announced to us such things as these."
24 The woman bore a son, and named him Samson. The boy grew, and
the LORD blessed him. 25 The spirit of the LORD began to stir him in
Mahaneh-dan, between Zorah and Eshtaol.
[Judges 14]
Samson's wedding
1 Once Samson went down to Timnah, and at Timnah he saw a
Philistine woman. 2 Then he came up, and told his father and mother,
"I saw a Philistine woman at Timnah; now get her for me as my wife."
3 But his father and mother said to him, "Is there not a woman among
your kin, or among all our people, that you must go to take a wife
from the uncircumcised Philistines?" But Samson said to his father,
"Get her for me, because she pleases me." 4 His father and mother did
not know that this was from the LORD; for he was seeking a pretext to
act against the Philistines. At that time the Philistines had dominion
over Israel.
5 Then Samson went down with his father and mother to Timnah.
When he came to the vineyards of Timnah, suddenly a young lion
roared at him. 6 The spirit of the LORD rushed on him, and he tore the
lion apart barehanded as one might tear apart a kid. But he did not tell
his father or his mother what he had done. 7 Then he went down and
talked with the woman, and she pleased Samson. 8 After a while he
returned to marry her, and he turned aside to see the carcass of the
lion, and there was a swarm of bees in the body of the lion, and honey.
9 He scraped it out into his hands, and went on, eating as he went.
When he came to his father and mother, he gave some to them, and

519

JUDGES 520

they ate it. But he did not tell them that he had taken the honey from
the carcass of the lion.
10 His father went down to the woman, and Samson made a feast
there as the young men were accustomed to do. 11 When the people
saw him, they brought thirty companions to be with him. 12 Samson
said to them, "Let me now put a riddle to you. If you can explain it to
me within the seven days of the feast, and find it out, then I will give
you thirty linen garments and thirty festal garments. 13 But if you
cannot explain it to me, then you shall give me thirty linen garments
and thirty festal garments." So they said to him, "Ask your riddle; let us
hear it." 14 He said to them,
"Out of the eater came something to eat.
Out of the strong came something sweet."
But for three days they could not explain the riddle.
15 On the fourth day they said to Samson's wife, "Coax your husband
to explain the riddle to us, or we will burn you and your father's house
with fire. Have you invited us here to impoverish us?" 16 So Samson's
wife wept before him, saying, "You hate me; you do not really love
me. You have asked a riddle of my people, but you have not explained
it to me." He said to her, "Look, I have not told my father or my
mother. Why should I tell you?" 17 She wept before him the seven days
that their feast lasted; and because she nagged him, on the seventh
day he told her. Then she explained the riddle to her people. 18 The
men of the town said to him on the seventh day before the sun went
down,
"What is sweeter than honey?
What is stronger than a lion?"
And he said to them,
"If you had not plowed with my heifer,
you would not have found out my riddle."
19 Then the spirit of the LORD rushed on him, and he went down to
Ashkelon. He killed thirty men of the town, took their spoil, and gave
the festal garments to those who had explained the riddle. In hot
anger he went back to his father's house. 20 And Samson's wife was
given to his companion, who had been his best man.

520

JUDGES 521

[Judges 15]
Samson's revenge
1 After a while, at the time of the wheat harvest, Samson went to visit
his wife, bringing along a kid. He said, "I want to go into my wife's
room." But her father would not allow him to go in. 2 Her father said,
"I was sure that you had rejected her; so I gave her to your companion.
Is not her younger sister prettier than she? Why not take her instead?"
3 Samson said to them, "This time, when I do mischief to the Philistines,
I will be without blame." 4 So Samson went and caught three hundred
foxes, and took some torches; and he turned the foxes tail to tail, and
put a torch between each pair of tails. 5 When he had set fire to the
torches, he let the foxes go into the standing grain of the Philistines,
and burned up the shocks and the standing grain, as well as the
vineyards and olive groves. 6 Then the Philistines asked, "Who has
done this?" And they said, "Samson, the son-in-law of the Timnite,
because he has taken Samson's wife and given her to his companion."
So the Philistines came up, and burned her and her father. 7 Samson
said to them, "If this is what you do, I swear I will not stop until I have
taken revenge on you." 8 He struck them down hip and thigh with
great slaughter; and he went down and stayed in the cleft of the rock
of Etam.
9 Then the Philistines came up and encamped in Judah, and made a
raid on Lehi. 10 The men of Judah said, "Why have you come up
against us?" They said, "We have come up to bind Samson, to do to
him as he did to us." 11 Then three thousand men of Judah went down
to the cleft of the rock of Etam, and they said to Samson, "Do you not
know that the Philistines are rulers over us? What then have you done
to us?" He replied, "As they did to me, so I have done to them." 12
They said to him, "We have come down to bind you, so that we may
give you into the hands of the Philistines." Samson answered them,
"Swear to me that you yourselves will not attack me." 13 They said to
him, "No, we will only bind you and give you into their hands; we will
not kill you." So they bound him with two new ropes, and brought him
up from the rock.

521

JUDGES 522

14 When he came to Lehi, the Philistines came shouting to meet him;
and the spirit of the LORD rushed on him, and the ropes that were on
his arms became like flax that has caught fire, and his bonds melted off
his hands. 15 Then he found a fresh jawbone of a donkey, reached
down and took it, and with it he killed a thousand men. 16 And
Samson said,
"With the jawbone of an ass,
heaps upon heaps,
with the jawbone of an ass
I have slain a thousand men."
17 When he had finished speaking, he threw away the jawbone; and
that place was called Ramath-lehi.
18 By then he was very thirsty, and he called on the LORD, saying, "You
have granted this great victory by the hand of your servant. Am I now
to die of thirst, and fall into the hands of the uncircumcised?" 19 So
God split open the hollow place that is at Lehi, and water came from it.
When he drank, his spirit returned, and he revived. Therefore it was
named En-hakkore, which is at Lehi to this day. 20 And he judged Israel
in the days of the Philistines twenty years.
[Judges 16]
Samson's death
1 Once Samson went to Gaza, where he saw a prostitute and went in to
her. 2 The Gazites were told, "Samson has come here." So they circled
around and lay in wait for him all night at the city gate. They kept
quiet all night, thinking, "Let us wait until the light of the morning;
then we will kill him." 3 But Samson lay only until midnight. Then at
midnight he rose up, took hold of the doors of the city gate and the
two posts, pulled them up, bar and all, put them on his shoulders, and
carried them to the top of the hill that is in front of Hebron.
4 After this he fell in love with a woman in the valley of Sorek, whose
name was Delilah. 5 The lords of the Philistines came to her and said to
her, "Coax him, and find out what makes his strength so great, and
how we may overpower him, so that we may bind him in order to
subdue him; and we will each give you eleven hundred pieces of

522

JUDGES 523

silver." 6 So Delilah said to Samson, "Please tell me what makes your
strength so great, and how you could be bound, so that one could
subdue you." 7 Samson said to her, "If they bind me with seven fresh
bowstrings that are not dried out, then I shall become weak, and be
like anyone else." 8 Then the lords of the Philistines brought her seven
fresh bowstrings that had not dried out, and she bound him with
them. 9 While men were lying in wait in an inner chamber, she said to
him, "The Philistines are upon you, Samson!" But he snapped the
bowstrings, as a strand of fiber snaps when it touches the fire. So the
secret of his strength was not known.
10 Then Delilah said to Samson, "You have mocked me and told me
lies; please tell me how you could be bound." 11 He said to her, "If they
bind me with new ropes that have not been used, then I shall become
weak, and be like anyone else." 12 So Delilah took new ropes and
bound him with them, and said to him, "The Philistines are upon you,
Samson!" (The men lying in wait were in an inner chamber.) But he
snapped the ropes off his arms like a thread.
13 Then Delilah said to Samson, "Until now you have mocked me and
told me lies; tell me how you could be bound." He said to her, "If you
weave the seven locks of my head with the web and make it tight with
the pin, then I shall become weak, and be like anyone else." 14 So
while he slept, Delilah took the seven locks of his head and wove them
into the web, and made them tight with the pin. Then she said to him,
"The Philistines are upon you, Samson!" But he awoke from his sleep,
and pulled away the pin, the loom, and the web.
15 Then she said to him, "How can you say, 'I love you,' when your
heart is not with me? You have mocked me three times now and have
not told me what makes your strength so great." 16 Finally, after she
had nagged him with her words day after day, and pestered him, he
was tired to death. 17 So he told her his whole secret, and said to her,
"A razor has never come upon my head; for I have been a nazirite to
God from my mother's womb. If my head were shaved, then my
strength would leave me; I would become weak, and be like anyone
else."

523

JUDGES 524

18 When Delilah realized that he had told her his whole secret, she sent
and called the lords of the Philistines, saying, "This time come up, for
he has told his whole secret to me." Then the lords of the Philistines
came up to her, and brought the money in their hands. 19 She let him
fall asleep on her lap; and she called a man, and had him shave off the
seven locks of his head. He began to weaken, and his strength left him.
20 Then she said, "The Philistines are upon you, Samson!" When he
awoke from his sleep, he thought, "I will go out as at other times, and
shake myself free." But he did not know that the LORD had left him. 21
So the Philistines seized him and gouged out his eyes. They brought
him down to Gaza and bound him with bronze shackles; and he
ground at the mill in the prison. 22 But the hair of his head began to
grow again after it had been shaved.
23 Now the lords of the Philistines gathered to offer a great sacrifice to
their god Dagon, and to rejoice; for they said, "Our god has given
Samson our enemy into our hand." 24 When the people saw him, they
praised their god; for they said, "Our god has given our enemy into our
hand, the ravager of our country, who has killed many of us." 25 And
when their hearts were merry, they said, "Call Samson, and let him
entertain us." So they called Samson out of the prison, and he
performed for them. They made him stand between the pillars; 26 and
Samson said to the attendant who held him by the hand, "Let me feel
the pillars on which the house rests, so that I may lean against them."
27 Now the house was full of men and women; all the lords of the
Philistines were there, and on the roof there were about three
thousand men and women, who looked on while Samson performed.
28 Then Samson called to the LORD and said, "Lord GOD, remember me
and strengthen me only this once, O God, so that with this one act of
revenge I may pay back the Philistines for my two eyes." 29 And
Samson grasped the two middle pillars on which the house rested, and
he leaned his weight against them, his right hand on the one and his
left hand on the other. 30 Then Samson said, "Let me die with the
Philistines." He strained with all his might; and the house fell on the
lords and all the people who were in it. So those he killed at his death
were more than those he had killed during his life. 31 Then his brothers
and all his family came down and took him and brought him up and

524

JUDGES 525

buried him between Zorah and Eshtaol in the tomb of his father
Manoah. He had judged Israel twenty years.
[Judges 17]
Double conclusion; difficulties with domestic idols; the shrine of Micah
1 There was a man in the hill country of Ephraim whose name was
Micah. 2 He said to his mother, "The eleven hundred pieces of silver
that were taken from you, about which you uttered a curse, and even
spoke it in my hearing, — that silver is in my possession; I took it; but
now I will return it to you." And his mother said, "May my son be
blessed by the LORD!" 3 Then he returned the eleven hundred pieces of
silver to his mother; and his mother said, "I consecrate the silver to the
LORD from my hand for my son, to make an idol of cast metal." 4 So
when he returned the money to his mother, his mother took two
hundred pieces of silver, and gave it to the silversmith, who made it
into an idol of cast metal; and it was in the house of Micah. 5 This man
Micah had a shrine, and he made an ephod and teraphim, and installed
one of his sons, who became his priest. 6 In those days there was no
king in Israel; all the people did what was right in their own eyes.
Micah's priest
7 Now there was a young man of Bethlehem in Judah, of the clan of
Judah. He was a Levite residing there. 8 This man left the town of
Bethlehem in Judah, to live wherever he could find a place. He came to
the house of Micah in the hill country of Ephraim to carry on his work.
9 Micah said to him, "From where do you come?" He replied, "I am a
Levite of Bethlehem in Judah, and I am going to live wherever I can
find a place." 10 Then Micah said to him, "Stay with me, and be to me
a father and a priest, and I will give you ten pieces of silver a year, a set
of clothes, and your living." 11 The Levite agreed to stay with the man;
and the young man became to him like one of his sons. 12 So Micah
installed the Levite, and the young man became his priest, and was in
the house of Micah. 13 Then Micah said, "Now I know that the LORD
will prosper me, because the Levite has become my priest."

525

JUDGES 526

[Judges 18]
The migration of the tribe of Dan
1 In those days there was no king in Israel. And in those days the tribe
of the Danites was seeking for itself a territory to live in; for until then
no territory among the tribes of Israel had been allotted to them. 2 So
the Danites sent five valiant men from the whole number of their clan,
from Zorah and from Eshtaol, to spy out the land and to explore it; and
they said to them, "Go, explore the land." When they came to the hill
country of Ephraim, to the house of Micah, they stayed there. 3 While
they were at Micah's house, they recognized the voice of the young
Levite; so they went over and asked him, "Who brought you here?
What are you doing in this place? What is your business here?" 4 He
said to them, "Micah did such and such for me, and he hired me, and I
have become his priest." 5 Then they said to him, "Inquire of God that
we may know whether the mission we are undertaking will succeed." 6
The priest replied, "Go in peace. The mission you are on is under the
eye of the LORD."
7 The five men went on, and when they came to Laish, they observed
the people who were there living securely, after the manner of the
Sidonians, quiet and unsuspecting, lacking nothing on earth, and
possessing wealth. Furthermore, they were far from the Sidonians and
had no dealings with Aram. 8 When they came to their kinsfolk at
Zorah and Eshtaol, they said to them, "What do you report?" 9 They
said, "Come, let us go up against them; for we have seen the land, and
it is very good. Will you do nothing? Do not be slow to go, but enter in
and possess the land. 10 When you go, you will come to an
unsuspecting people. The land is broad — God has indeed given it into
your hands — a place where there is no lack of anything on earth."
11 Six hundred men of the Danite clan, armed with weapons of war, set
out from Zorah and Eshtaol, 12 and went up and encamped at Kiriathjearim in Judah. On this account that place is called Mahaneh-dan to
this day; it is west of Kiriath-jearim. 13 From there they passed on to
the hill country of Ephraim, and came to the house of Micah.

526

JUDGES 527

14 Then the five men who had gone to spy out the land (that is, Laish)
said to their comrades, "Do you know that in these buildings there are
an ephod, teraphim, and an idol of cast metal? Now therefore consider
what you will do." 15 So they turned in that direction and came to the
house of the young Levite, at the home of Micah, and greeted him. 16
While the six hundred men of the Danites, armed with their weapons
of war, stood by the entrance of the gate, 17 the five men who had
gone to spy out the land proceeded to enter and take the idol of cast
metal, the ephod, and the teraphim. The priest was standing by the
entrance of the gate with the six hundred men armed with weapons of
war. 18 When the men went into Micah's house and took the idol of
cast metal, the ephod, and the teraphim, the priest said to them,
"What are you doing?" 19 They said to him, "Keep quiet! Put your
hand over your mouth, and come with us, and be to us a father and a
priest. Is it better for you to be priest to the house of one person, or to
be priest to a tribe and clan in Israel?" 20 Then the priest accepted the
offer. He took the ephod, the teraphim, and the idol, and went along
with the people.
21 So they resumed their journey, putting the little ones, the livestock,
and the goods in front of them. 22 When they were some distance
from the home of Micah, the men who were in the houses near
Micah's house were called out, and they overtook the Danites. 23 They
shouted to the Danites, who turned around and said to Micah, "What
is the matter that you come with such a company?" 24 He replied,
"You take my gods that I made, and the priest, and go away, and what
have I left? How then can you ask me, 'What is the matter?'" 25 And
the Danites said to him, "You had better not let your voice be heard
among us or else hot-tempered fellows will attack you, and you will
lose your life and the lives of your household." 26 Then the Danites
went their way. When Micah saw that they were too strong for him, he
turned and went back to his home.
27 The Danites, having taken what Micah had made, and the priest
who belonged to him, came to Laish, to a people quiet and
unsuspecting, put them to the sword, and burned down the city. 28
There was no deliverer, because it was far from Sidon and they had no
dealings with Aram. It was in the valley that belongs to Beth-rehob.

527

JUDGES 528

They rebuilt the city, and lived in it. 29 They named the city Dan, after
their ancestor Dan, who was born to Israel; but the name of the city
was formerly Laish. 30 Then the Danites set up the idol for themselves.
Jonathan son of Gershom, son of Moses, and his sons were priests to
the tribe of the Danites until the time the land went into captivity. 31
So they maintained as their own Micah's idol that he had made, as
long as the house of God was at Shiloh.
[Judges 19]
The Benjaminite war; domestic wars with the "herem" being applied;
the rape of the concubine
1 In those days, when there was no king in Israel, a certain Levite,
residing in the remote parts of the hill country of Ephraim, took to
himself a concubine from Bethlehem in Judah. 2 But his concubine
became angry with him, and she went away from him to her father's
house at Bethlehem in Judah, and was there some four months. 3 Then
her husband set out after her, to speak tenderly to her and bring her
back. He had with him his servant and a couple of donkeys. When he
reached her father's house, the girl's father saw him and came with joy
to meet him. 4 His father-in-law, the girl's father, made him stay, and
he remained with him three days; so they ate and drank, and he stayed
there. 5 On the fourth day they got up early in the morning, and he
prepared to go; but the girl's father said to his son-in-law, "Fortify
yourself with a bit of food, and after that you may go." 6 So the two
men sat and ate and drank together; and the girl's father said to the
man, "Why not spend the night and enjoy yourself?" 7 When the man
got up to go, his father-in-law kept urging him until he spent the night
there again. 8 On the fifth day he got up early in the morning to leave;
and the girl's father said, "Fortify yourself." So they lingered until the
day declined, and the two of them ate and drank. 9 When the man
with his concubine and his servant got up to leave, his father-in-law,
the girl's father, said to him, "Look, the day has worn on until it is
almost evening. Spend the night. See, the day has drawn to a close.
Spend the night here and enjoy yourself. Tomorrow you can get up
early in the morning for your journey, and go home."

528

JUDGES 529

10 But the man would not spend the night; he got up and departed,
and arrived opposite Jebus (that is, Jerusalem). He had with him a
couple of saddled donkeys, and his concubine was with him. 11 When
they were near Jebus, the day was far spent, and the servant said to his
master, "Come now, let us turn aside to this city of the Jebusites, and
spend the night in it." 12 But his master said to him, "We will not turn
aside into a city of foreigners, who do not belong to the people of
Israel; but we will continue on to Gibeah." 13 Then he said to his
servant, "Come, let us try to reach one of these places, and spend the
night at Gibeah or at Ramah." 14 So they passed on and went their
way; and the sun went down on them near Gibeah, which belongs to
Benjamin. 15 They turned aside there, to go in and spend the night at
Gibeah. He went in and sat down in the open square of the city, but no
one took them in to spend the night.
16 Then at evening there was an old man coming from his work in the
field. The man was from the hill country of Ephraim, and he was
residing in Gibeah. (The people of the place were Benjaminites.) 17
When the old man looked up and saw the wayfarer in the open square
of the city, he said, "Where are you going and where do you come
from?" 18 He answered him, "We are passing from Bethlehem in Judah
to the remote parts of the hill country of Ephraim, from which I come. I
went to Bethlehem in Judah; and I am going to my home. Nobody has
offered to take me in. 19 We your servants have straw and fodder for
our donkeys, with bread and wine for me and the woman and the
young man along with us. We need nothing more." 20 The old man
said, "Peace be to you. I will care for all your wants; only do not spend
the night in the square." 21 So he brought him into his house, and fed
the donkeys; they washed their feet, and ate and drank.
22 While they were enjoying themselves, the men of the city, a
perverse lot, surrounded the house, and started pounding on the door.
They said to the old man, the master of the house, "Bring out the man
who came into your house, so that we may have intercourse with him."
23 And the man, the master of the house, went out to them and said to
them, "No, my brothers, do not act so wickedly. Since this man is my
guest, do not do this vile thing. 24 Here are my virgin daughter and his
concubine; let me bring them out now. Ravish them and do whatever

529

JUDGES 530

you want to them; but against this man do not do such a vile thing." 25
But the men would not listen to him. So the man seized his concubine,
and put her out to them. They wantonly raped her, and abused her all
through the night until the morning. And as the dawn began to break,
they let her go. 26 As morning appeared, the woman came and fell
down at the door of the man's house where her master was, until it
was light.
27 In the morning her master got up, opened the doors of the house,
and when he went out to go on his way, there was his concubine lying
at the door of the house, with her hands on the threshold. 28 "Get
up," he said to her, "we are going." But there was no answer. Then he
put her on the donkey; and the man set out for his home. 29 When he
had entered his house, he took a knife, and grasping his concubine he
cut her into twelve pieces, limb by limb, and sent her throughout all
the territory of Israel. 30 Then he commanded the men whom he sent,
saying, "Thus shall you say to all the Israelites, 'Has such a thing ever
happened since the day that the Israelites came up from the land of
Egypt until this day? Consider it, take counsel, and speak out.'"
[Judges 20]
The "herem" of Benjamin
1 Then all the Israelites came out, from Dan to Beer-sheba, including
the land of Gilead, and the congregation assembled in one body
before the LORD at Mizpah. 2 The chiefs of all the people, of all the
tribes of Israel, presented themselves in the assembly of the people of
God, four hundred thousand foot-soldiers bearing arms. 3 (Now the
Benjaminites heard that the people of Israel had gone up to Mizpah.)
And the Israelites said, "Tell us, how did this criminal act come about?"
4 The Levite, the husband of the woman who was murdered,
answered, "I came to Gibeah that belongs to Benjamin, I and my
concubine, to spend the night. 5 The lords of Gibeah rose up against
me, and surrounded the house at night. They intended to kill me, and
they raped my concubine until she died. 6 Then I took my concubine
and cut her into pieces, and sent her throughout the whole extent of
Israel's territory; for they have committed a vile outrage in Israel. 7 So
now, you Israelites, all of you, give your advice and counsel here."

530

JUDGES 531

8 All the people got up as one, saying, "We will not any of us go to our
tents, nor will any of us return to our houses. 9 But now this is what we
will do to Gibeah: we will go up against it by lot. 10 We will take ten
men of a hundred throughout all the tribes of Israel, and a hundred of
a thousand, and a thousand of ten thousand, to bring provisions for
the troops, who are going to repay Gibeah of Benjamin for all the
disgrace that they have done in Israel." 11 So all the men of Israel
gathered against the city, united as one.
12 The tribes of Israel sent men through all the tribe of Benjamin,
saying, "What crime is this that has been committed among you? 13
Now then, hand over those scoundrels in Gibeah, so that we may put
them to death, and purge the evil from Israel." But the Benjaminites
would not listen to their kinsfolk, the Israelites. 14 The Benjaminites
came together out of the towns to Gibeah, to go out to battle against
the Israelites. 15 On that day the Benjaminites mustered twenty-six
thousand armed men from their towns, besides the inhabitants of
Gibeah. 16 Of all this force, there were seven hundred picked men who
were left-handed; every one could sling a stone at a hair, and not miss.
17 And the Israelites, apart from Benjamin, mustered four hundred
thousand armed men, all of them warriors.
18 The Israelites proceeded to go up to Bethel, where they inquired of
God, "Which of us shall go up first to battle against the Benjaminites?"
And the LORD answered, "Judah shall go up first."
19 Then the Israelites got up in the morning, and encamped against
Gibeah. 20 The Israelites went out to battle against Benjamin; and the
Israelites drew up the battle line against them at Gibeah. 21 The
Benjaminites came out of Gibeah, and struck down on that day twentytwo thousand of the Israelites. 23 The Israelites went up and wept
before the LORD until the evening; and they inquired of the LORD,
"Shall we again draw near to battle against our kinsfolk the
Benjaminites?" And the LORD said, "Go up against them." 22 The
Israelites took courage, and again formed the battle line in the same
place where they had formed it on the first day.

531

JUDGES 532

24 So the Israelites advanced against the Benjaminites the second day.
25 Benjamin moved out against them from Gibeah the second day, and
struck down eighteen thousand of the Israelites, all of them armed
men. 26 Then all the Israelites, the whole army, went back to Bethel
and wept, sitting there before the LORD; they fasted that day until
evening. Then they offered burnt offerings and sacrifices of well-being
before the LORD. 27 And the Israelites inquired of the LORD (for the ark
of the covenant of God was there in those days, 28 and Phinehas son of
Eleazar, son of Aaron, ministered before it in those days), saying, "Shall
we go out once more to battle against our kinsfolk the Benjaminites,
or shall we desist?" The LORD answered, "Go up, for tomorrow I will
give them into your hand."
29 So Israel stationed men in ambush around Gibeah. 30 Then the
Israelites went up against the Benjaminites on the third day, and set
themselves in array against Gibeah, as before. 31 When the
Benjaminites went out against the army, they were drawn away from
the city. As before they began to inflict casualties on the troops, along
the main roads, one of which goes up to Bethel and the other to
Gibeah, as well as in the open country, killing about thirty men of
Israel. 32 The Benjaminites thought, "They are being routed before us,
as previously." But the Israelites said, "Let us retreat and draw them
away from the city toward the roads." 33 The main body of the
Israelites drew back its battle line to Baal-tamar, while those Israelites
who were in ambush rushed out of their place west of Geba. 34 There
came against Gibeah ten thousand picked men out of all Israel, and the
battle was fierce. But the Benjaminites did not realize that disaster was
close upon them.
35 The LORD defeated Benjamin before Israel; and the Israelites
destroyed twenty-five thousand one hundred men of Benjamin that
day, all of them armed.
36 Then the Benjaminites saw that they were defeated.
The Israelites gave ground to Benjamin, because they trusted to the
troops in ambush that they had stationed against Gibeah. 37 The
troops in ambush rushed quickly upon Gibeah. Then they put the

532

JUDGES 533

whole city to the sword. 38 Now the agreement between the main
body of Israel and the men in ambush was that when they sent up a
cloud of smoke out of the city 39 the main body of Israel should turn in
battle. But Benjamin had begun to inflict casualties on the Israelites,
killing about thirty of them; so they thought, "Surely they are defeated
before us, as in the first battle." 40 But when the cloud, a column of
smoke, began to rise out of the city, the Benjaminites looked behind
them — and there was the whole city going up in smoke toward the
sky! 41 Then the main body of Israel turned, and the Benjaminites were
dismayed, for they saw that disaster was close upon them. 42 Therefore
they turned away from the Israelites in the direction of the wilderness;
but the battle overtook them, and those who came out of the city
were slaughtering them in between. 43 Cutting down the
Benjaminites, they pursued them from Nohah and trod them down as
far as a place east of Gibeah. 44 Eighteen thousand Benjaminites fell,
all of them courageous fighters. 45 When they turned and fled toward
the wilderness to the rock of Rimmon, five thousand of them were cut
down on the main roads, and they were pursued as far as Gidom, and
two thousand of them were slain. 46 So all who fell that day of
Benjamin were twenty-five thousand arms-bearing men, all of them
courageous fighters. 47 But six hundred turned and fled toward the
wilderness to the rock of Rimmon, and remained at the rock of
Rimmon for four months. 48 Meanwhile, the Israelites turned back
against the Benjaminites, and put them to the sword — the city, the
people, the animals, and all that remained. Also the remaining towns
they set on fire.
[Judges 21]
The oaths: Benjamin threatened with extinction; the "herem" of
Jabesh-gilead
1 Now the Israelites had sworn at Mizpah, "No one of us shall give his
daughter in marriage to Benjamin." 2 And the people came to Bethel,
and sat there until evening before God, and they lifted up their voices
and wept bitterly. 3 They said, "O LORD, the God of Israel, why has it
come to pass that today there should be one tribe lacking in Israel?" 4
On the next day, the people got up early, and built an altar there, and
offered burnt offerings and sacrifices of well-being. 5 Then the

533

JUDGES 534

Israelites said, "Which of all the tribes of Israel did not come up in the
assembly to the LORD?" For a solemn oath had been taken concerning
whoever did not come up to the LORD to Mizpah, saying, "That one
shall be put to death." 6 But the Israelites had compassion for
Benjamin their kin, and said, "One tribe is cut off from Israel this day. 7
What shall we do for wives for those who are left, since we have sworn
by the LORD that we will not give them any of our daughters as wives?"
8 Then they said, "Is there anyone from the tribes of Israel who did not
come up to the LORD to Mizpah?" It turned out that no one from
Jabesh-gilead had come to the camp, to the assembly. 9 For when the
roll was called among the people, not one of the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead was there. 10 So the congregation sent twelve thousand soldiers
there and commanded them, "Go, put the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead
to the sword, including the women and the little ones. 11 This is what
you shall do; every male and every woman that has lain with a male
you shall devote to destruction." 12 And they found among the
inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead four hundred young virgins who had
never slept with a man and brought them to the camp at Shiloh, which
is in the land of Canaan.
13 Then the whole congregation sent word to the Benjaminites who
were at the rock of Rimmon, and proclaimed peace to them. 14
Benjamin returned at that time; and they gave them the women whom
they had saved alive of the women of Jabesh-gilead; but they did not
suffice for them.
The rape of the daughters of Shiloh
15 The people had compassion on Benjamin because the LORD had
made a breach in the tribes of Israel. 16 So the elders of the
congregation said, "What shall we do for wives for those who are left,
since there are no women left in Benjamin?" 17 And they said, "There
must be heirs for the survivors of Benjamin, in order that a tribe may
not be blotted out from Israel. 18 Yet we cannot give any of our
daughters to them as wives." For the Israelites had sworn, "Cursed be
anyone who gives a wife to Benjamin." 19 So they said, "Look, the
yearly festival of the LORD is taking place at Shiloh, which is north of

534

JUDGES 535

Bethel, on the east of the highway that goes up from Bethel to
Shechem, and south of Lebonah." 20 And they instructed the
Benjaminites, saying, "Go and lie in wait in the vineyards, 21 and
watch; when the young women of Shiloh come out to dance in the
dances, then come out of the vineyards and each of you carry off a
wife for himself from the young women of Shiloh, and go to the land
of Benjamin. 22 Then if their fathers or their brothers come to
complain to us, we will say to them, 'Be generous and allow us to have
them; because we did not capture in battle a wife for each man. But
neither did you incur guilt by giving your daughters to them.'" 23 The
Benjaminites did so; they took wives for each of them from the dancers
whom they abducted. Then they went and returned to their territory,
and rebuilt the towns, and lived in them. 24 So the Israelites departed
from there at that time by tribes and families, and they went out from
there to their own territories.
25 In those days there was no king in Israel; all the people did what
was right in their own eyes.

535

RUTH 536

RUTH
Introduction
Ruth is an exquisite short story that instructs and delights. The three
main characters — Naomi, Ruth, and Boaz — and the pastoral
landscape in which they move come to life with the deftest of verbal
strokes. Four chapters of elegant Hebrew prose transport Ruth and
Naomi from sorrow to triumphant joy by means of dramatic dialogues,
suspense, extended word play, and intricate compositional symmetries.
The book's verbal sophistication suggests that its author was a literate
member of the upper classes — a court scribe, perhaps. At the same
time, the folktale patterns and motifs provide evidence of the story's
origins in the oral tales enjoyed and embellished by ordinary Israelites
as they raised their families and worked the fields.
The dilemmas faced by two women left destitute and isolate by the
deaths of their husbands and sons are the focus of the plot. The
turning point in their fortunes occurs when Ruth takes advantage of an
Israelite legal tradition that allowed foreigners, widows, and the poor
to gather grain during the harvest (Lev 19.9-10; 23.22; Deut 24.19-22). In
the fields of rural Israel, which demanded the labor of men and
women alike, the socially mandated boundaries separating the worlds
of mean and women lost their rigidity. In that context Ruth encounters
Boaz, her future husband. The themes of life and fertility evoked so
richly by the harvest scenes carry over to the final chapter of the book
when Naomi embraces the newborn son of Ruth and Boaz.
The book ends with a genealogy and the delightful revelation that
Ruth of Moab is the great-grandmother of King David himself. Early
Christian tradition concerning the ancestry of Jesus names only four
women (three of them non-Israelite): Mary, Tamar, Rahab, and Ruth
(Mt 1.5). Rabbinic tradition celebrates Ruth the Moabite as the model
proselyte (convert). Christian Bibles place the book of Ruth between
536

RUTH 537

Judges and Samuel, reflecting the historical context of the story. In
Jewish tradition, however, Ruth is the liturgical reading for the harvest
festival of Shabuot/Weeks, reflecting the book's agricultural setting.
Consequently, it is grouped with the other festival scrolls (the
Megillot), including Esther, Song of Solomon, Ecclesiastes, and
Lamentations.
Although the story is set "in the days when the judges ruled" (ca. 12001025 BCE), the date of Ruth's composition remains unresolved. On the
one hand, a date during the monarchy is suggested by the book's
obvious interest in celebrating the ancestry of King David, whose
descendants continued to rule until the Babylonian capture of
Jerusalem in 586 BCE. Equally pronounced, however, are the story's
frequent reminders that its heroine is not an Israelite. Indeed, the
storyteller suggests that Boaz's gracious treatment of Ruth the Moabite
is unusual as well as exemplary. This insistence on an inclusive attitude
toward foreigners suggests to many scholars a date of composition in
the fifth century BCE when the issue of intermarriage between the
Israelites and non-Israelites had become extremely controversial (see
Neh 13.1; Ezra 9.1). Whatever its date, however, Ruth is not a polemical
book. The values it proclaims — loyalty, love of family, and generosity
toward strangers — are universal and timeless.
[Ruth 1]
Naomi and Ruth
1 In the days when the judges ruled, there was a famine in the land,
and a certain man of Bethlehem in Judah went to live in the country of
Moab, he and his wife and two sons. 2 The name of the man was
Elimelech and the name of his wife Naomi, and the names of his two
sons were Mahlon and Chilion; they were Ephrathites from Bethlehem
in Judah. They went into the country of Moab and remained there. 3
But Elimelech, the husband of Naomi, died, and she was left with her
two sons. 4 These took Moabite wives; the name of the one was Orpah
and the name of the other Ruth. When they had lived there about ten
years, 5 both Mahlon and Chilion also died, so that the woman was left
without her two sons and her husband.

537

RUTH 538

6 Then she started to return with her daughters-in-law from the
country of Moab, for she had heard in the country of Moab that the
LORD had considered his people and given them food. 7 So she set out
from the place where she had been living, she and her two daughtersin-law, and they went on their way to go back to the land of Judah. 8
But Naomi said to her two daughters-in-law, "Go back each of you to
your mother's house. May the LORD deal kindly with you, as you have
dealt with the dead and with me. 9 The LORD grant that you may find
security, each of you in the house of your husband." Then she kissed
them, and they wept aloud. 10 They said to her, "No, we will return
with you to your people." 11 But Naomi said, "Turn back, my
daughters, why will you go with me? Do I still have sons in my womb
that they may become your husbands? 12 Turn back, my daughters, go
your way, for I am too old to have a husband. Even if I thought there
was hope for me, even if I should have a husband tonight and bear
sons, 13 would you then wait until they were grown? Would you then
refrain from marrying? No, my daughters, it has been far more bitter
for me than for you, because the hand of the LORD has turned against
me." 14 Then they wept aloud again. Orpah kissed her mother-in-law,
but Ruth clung to her.
15 So she said, "See, your sister-in-law has gone back to her people and
to her gods; return after your sister-in-law." 16 But Ruth said,
"Do not press me to leave you
or to turn back from following you!
Where you go, I will go;
where you lodge, I will lodge;
your people shall be my people,
and your God my God.
17 Where you die, I will die—
there will I be buried.
May the LORD do thus and so to me,
and more as well,
if even death parts me from you!"
18 When Naomi saw that she was determined to go with her, she said
no more to her.

538

RUTH 539

19 So the two of them went on until they came to Bethlehem. When
they came to Bethlehem, the whole town was stirred because of them;
and the women said, "Is this Naomi?" 20 She said to them,
"Call me no longer Naomi,
call me Mara,
for the Almighty has dealt bitterly with me.
21 I went away full,
but the LORD has brought me back empty;
why call me Naomi
when the LORD has dealt harshly with me,
and the Almighty has brought calamity upon me?"
22 So Naomi returned together with Ruth the Moabite, her daughterin-law, who came back with her from the country of Moab. They came
to Bethlehem at the beginning of the barley harvest.
[Ruth 2]
Ruth and Boaz
1 Now Naomi had a kinsman on her husband's side, a prominent rich
man, of the family of Elimelech, whose name was Boaz. 2 And Ruth the
Moabite said to Naomi, "Let me go to the field and glean among the
ears of grain, behind someone in whose sight I may find favor." She
said to her, "Go, my daughter." 3 So she went. She came and gleaned
in the field behind the reapers. As it happened, she came to the part of
the field belonging to Boaz, who was of the family of Elimelech. 4 Just
then Boaz came from Bethlehem. He said to the reapers, "The LORD be
with you." They answered, "The LORD bless you." 5 Then Boaz said to
his servant who was in charge of the reapers, "To whom does this
young woman belong?" 6 The servant who was in charge of the
reapers answered, "She is the Moabite who came back with Naomi
from the country of Moab. 7 She said, 'Please, let me glean and gather
among the sheaves behind the reapers.' So she came, and she has been
on her feet from early this morning until now, without resting even for
a moment."
8 Then Boaz said to Ruth, "Now listen, my daughter, do not go to
glean in another field or leave this one, but keep close to my young

539

RUTH 540

women. 9 Keep your eyes on the field that is being reaped, and follow
behind them. I have ordered the young men not to bother you. If you
get thirsty, go to the vessels and drink from what the young men have
drawn." 10 Then she fell prostrate, with her face to the ground, and
said to him, "Why have I found favor in your sight, that you should
take notice of me, when I am a foreigner?" 11 But Boaz answered her,
"All that you have done for your mother-in-law since the death of your
husband has been fully told me, and how you left your father and
mother and your native land and came to a people that you did not
know before. 12 May the LORD reward you for your deeds, and may you
have a full reward from the LORD, the God of Israel, under whose wings
you have come for refuge!" 13 Then she said, "May I continue to find
favor in your sight, my lord, for you have comforted me and spoken
kindly to your servant, even though I am not one of your servants."
14 At mealtime Boaz said to her, "Come here, and eat some of this
bread, and dip your morsel in the sour wine." So she sat beside the
reapers, and he heaped up for her some parched grain. She ate until
she was satisfied, and she had some left over. 15 When she got up to
glean, Boaz instructed his young men, "Let her glean even among the
standing sheaves, and do not reproach her. 16 You must also pull out
some handfuls for her from the bundles, and leave them for her to
glean, and do not rebuke her."
17 So she gleaned in the field until evening. Then she beat out what
she had gleaned, and it was about an ephah of barley. 18 She picked it
up and came into the town, and her mother-in-law saw how much she
had gleaned. Then she took out and gave her what was left over after
she herself had been satisfied. 19 Her mother-in-law said to her,
"Where did you glean today? And where have you worked? Blessed be
the man who took notice of you." So she told her mother-in-law with
whom she had worked, and said, "The name of the man with whom I
worked today is Boaz." 20 Then Naomi said to her daughter-in-law,
"Blessed be he by the LORD, whose kindness has not forsaken the living
or the dead!" Naomi also said to her, "The man is a relative of ours,
one of our nearest kin." 21 Then Ruth the Moabite said, "He even said
to me, 'Stay close by my servants, until they have finished all my
harvest.'" 22 Naomi said to Ruth, her daughter-in-law, "It is better, my

540

RUTH 541

daughter, that you go out with his young women, otherwise you might
be bothered in another field." 23 So she stayed close to the young
women of Boaz, gleaning until the end of the barley and wheat
harvests; and she lived with her mother-in-law.
[Ruth 3]
Naomi instructs, Ruth acts, and Boaz makes a promise
1 Naomi her mother-in-law said to her, "My daughter, I need to seek
some security for you, so that it may be well with you. 2 Now here is
our kinsman Boaz, with whose young women you have been working.
See, he is winnowing barley tonight at the threshing floor. 3 Now wash
and anoint yourself, and put on your best clothes and go down to the
threshing floor; but do not make yourself known to the man until he
has finished eating and drinking. 4 When he lies down, observe the
place where he lies; then, go and uncover his feet and lie down; and he
will tell you what to do." 5 She said to her, "All that you tell me I will
do."
6 So she went down to the threshing floor and did just as her motherin-law had instructed her. 7 When Boaz had eaten and drunk, and he
was in a contented mood, he went to lie down at the end of the heap
of grain. Then she came stealthily and uncovered his feet, and lay
down. 8 At midnight the man was startled, and turned over, and there,
lying at his feet, was a woman! 9 He said, "Who are you?" And she
answered, "I am Ruth, your servant; spread your cloak over your
servant, for you are next-of-kin." 10 He said, "May you be blessed by
the LORD, my daughter; this last instance of your loyalty is better than
the first; you have not gone after young men, whether poor or rich. 11
And now, my daughter, do not be afraid, I will do for you all that you
ask, for all the assembly of my people know that you are a worthy
woman. 12 But now, though it is true that I am a near kinsman, there is
another kinsman more closely related than I. 13 Remain this night, and
in the morning, if he will act as next-of-kin for you, good; let him do it.
If he is not willing to act as next-of-kin for you, then, as the LORD lives, I
will act as next-of-kin for you. Lie down until the morning."

541

RUTH 542

14 So she lay at his feet until morning, but got up before one person
could recognize another; for he said, "It must not be known that the
woman came to the threshing floor." 15 Then he said, "Bring the cloak
you are wearing and hold it out." So she held it, and he measured out
six measures of barley, and put it on her back; then he went into the
city. 16 She came to her mother-in-law, who said, "How did things go
with you, my daughter?" Then she told her all that the man had done
for her, 17 saying, "He gave me these six measures of barley, for he
said, 'Do not go back to your mother-in-law empty-handed.'" 18 She
replied, "Wait, my daughter, until you learn how the matter turns out,
for the man will not rest, but will settle the matter today."
[Ruth 4]
Boaz acquires Ruth as a wife and redeems the family property
1 No sooner had Boaz gone up to the gate and sat down there than the
next-of-kin, of whom Boaz had spoken, came passing by. So Boaz said,
"Come over, friend; sit down here." And he went over and sat down. 2
Then Boaz took ten men of the elders of the city, and said, "Sit down
here"; so they sat down. 3 He then said to the next-of-kin, "Naomi,
who has come back from the country of Moab, is selling the parcel of
land that belonged to our kinsman Elimelech. 4 So I thought I would
tell you of it, and say: Buy it in the presence of those sitting here, and
in the presence of the elders of my people. If you will redeem it,
redeem it; but if you will not, tell me, so that I may know; for there is
no one prior to you to redeem it, and I come after you." So he said, "I
will redeem it." 5 Then Boaz said, "The day you acquire the field from
the hand of Naomi, you are also acquiring Ruth the Moabite, the
widow of the dead man, to maintain the dead man's name on his
inheritance." 6 At this, the next-of-kin said, "I cannot redeem it for
myself without damaging my own inheritance. Take my right of
redemption yourself, for I cannot redeem it."
7 Now this was the custom in former times in Israel concerning
redeeming and exchanging: to confirm a transaction, the one took off
a sandal and gave it to the other; this was the manner of attesting in
Israel. 8 So when the next-of-kin said to Boaz, "Acquire it for yourself,"
he took off his sandal. 9 Then Boaz said to the elders and all the

542

RUTH 543

people, "Today you are witnesses that I have acquired from the hand
of Naomi all that belonged to Elimelech and all that belonged to
Chilion and Mahlon. 10 I have also acquired Ruth the Moabite, the wife
of Mahlon, to be my wife, to maintain the dead man's name on his
inheritance, in order that the name of the dead may not be cut off
from his kindred and from the gate of his native place; today you are
witnesses." 11 Then all the people who were at the gate, along with
the elders, said, "We are witnesses. May the LORD make the woman
who is coming into your house like Rachel and Leah, who together
built up the house of Israel. May you produce children in Ephrathah
and bestow a name in Bethlehem; 12 and, through the children that
the LORD will give you by this young woman, may your house be like
the house of Perez, whom Tamar bore to Judah."
Naomi embraces Ruth's newborn son
13 So Boaz took Ruth and she became his wife. When they came
together, the LORD made her conceive, and she bore a son. 14 Then the
women said to Naomi, "Blessed be the LORD, who has not left you this
day without next-of-kin; and may his name be renowned in Israel! 15
He shall be to you a restorer of life and a nourisher of your old age; for
your daughter-in-law who loves you, who is more to you than seven
sons, has borne him." 16 Then Naomi took the child and laid him in her
bosom, and became his nurse. 17 The women of the neighborhood
gave him a name, saying, "A son has been born to Naomi." They
named him Obed; he became the father of Jesse, the father of David.
The ancestors of King David
18 Now these are the descendants of Perez: Perez became the father of
Hezron, 19 Hezron of Ram, Ram of Amminadab, 20 Amminadab of
Nahshon, Nahshon of Salmon, 21 Salmon of Boaz, Boaz of Obed, 22
Obed of Jesse, and Jesse of David.

543

1 SAMUEL 544

1 SAMUEL
Introduction
First and Second Samuel were originally a single work recounting the
beginning of the monarchy and the reigns of its first two kings, Saul
and David. They were divided into two books in the Greek translation
(the Septuagint) of the Hebrew Bible and were named after Samuel,
who plays a prominent role in its beginning section, which was even
attributed to his authorship. The name is not entirely appropriate,
however, since Samuel dies before 1 Samuel ends (25.1).
First Samuel has three sections built around its principal characters,
Samuel (chs 1-7), Saul (chs 8-15), and David (chs 16-31). Samuel is a
transitional figure — the last of the judges and the prophet who
anoints Saul and then announces his rejection by the Lord and anoints
David in his place. Saul is a tragic figure — plucked from obscurity and
thrust into a position of power for which he ultimately proves unfit.
David is the focal figure of 1 Samuel, for whom both Samuel and Saul
pave the way. Like Saul, he is presented as humble and without
personal ambition for kingship. But although Saul was initially the
divinely designated ruler, in the end he fell out of divine favor and
"the Lord was with David" — a major theme of the book.
Most scholars view 1-2 Samuel as part of a larger original composition
called the Deuteronomistic History, which encompasses the books of
Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, 1-2 Samuel, and 1-2 Kings and relates
Israel's history from the conquest under Joshua to the end of the
kingdoms of Israel and Judah. The Deuteronomistic History is a
theological history; it evaluates Israel's past according to the principles
of the book of Deuteronomy, with which it begins. It stresses such
matters as obedience to the law and God's choice of Jerusalem as the
central place of worship for Israel and of David as its king.

544

1 SAMUEL 545

The Deuteronomistic History was composed by one or more nameless
"Deuteronomists," probably in the exile (586 BCE), though some
scholars date its initial edition to the reign of Josiah. Deuteronomist(s),
edited various traditions into a single, running historical account. They
occasionally inserted speeches or commentary in their own distinctive
Deuteronomistic style into the narrative. Examples of Deuteronomistic
style are 8.8 (the Exodus), 8.12 (the people crying out), and 12.14-15 (the
review of Israel's history and the command to "heed the voice of the
Lord").
First and Second Samuel are a literary masterpiece, but they may also
contain genuine history. While they were written hundreds of years
after the events they describe, they seem to contain older source
material. Some scholars have suggested that an old "Ark Narrative"
underlies 4.1-7.1, that a cycle of stories about Saul and his reign is
behind chs 8-15, and that chs 16-31 are based on a "History of David's
Rise." Still, these documents are theoretical reconstructions, and the
exact nature of the sources used by the Deuteronomist(s) remains
uncertain.
The central character of the Deuteronomistic History is David. The
Deuteronomist(s) explained the long duration of the Davidic dynasty
theologically as the reward for David's faithfulness to God (see 2 Sam
7). David may also have been viewed as the model for the restoration
of the monarchy after the crisis of the exile. The pro-Davidic tone of 1
Samuel is evident. While Saul falters at every step, David can do no
wrong. God abandons Saul but is constantly with David. At some stage
in its development the section dealing with David's rise seems to have
been designed as an apology or defense of David and his kingship. The
charge that David usurped the throne to which he had no hereditary
right and did so through multiple assassinations is subtly and
effectively addressed in 1 Samuel and the beginning of 2 Samuel. The
reader, who may draw closer to actual history by asking whether Saul
was really as bad and David as innocent as their portraits in 1 Samuel
indicate, is aided in answering such questions by materials presented in
the Deuteronomistic History.

545

1 SAMUEL 546

[1 Samuel 1]
The birth and consecration of Samuel
1 There was a certain man of Ramathaim, a Zuphite from the hill
country of Ephraim, whose name was Elkanah son of Jeroham son of
Elihu son of Tohu son of Zuph, an Ephraimite. 2 He had two wives; the
name of the one was Hannah, and the name of the other Peninnah.
Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no children.
3 Now this man used to go up year by year from his town to worship
and to sacrifice to the LORD of hosts at Shiloh, where the two sons of
Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were priests of the LORD. 4 On the day when
Elkanah sacrificed, he would give portions to his wife Peninnah and to
all her sons and daughters; 5 but to Hannah he gave a double portion,
because he loved her, though the LORD had closed her womb. 6 Her
rival used to provoke her severely, to irritate her, because the LORD had
closed her womb. 7 So it went on year by year; as often as she went up
to the house of the LORD, she used to provoke her. Therefore Hannah
wept and would not eat. 8 Her husband Elkanah said to her, "Hannah,
why do you weep? Why do you not eat? Why is your heart sad? Am I
not more to you than ten sons?"
9 After they had eaten and drunk at Shiloh, Hannah rose and
presented herself before the LORD. Now Eli the priest was sitting on the
seat beside the doorpost of the temple of the LORD. 10 She was deeply
distressed and prayed to the LORD, and wept bitterly. 11 She made this
vow: "O LORD of hosts, if only you will look on the misery of your
servant, and remember me, and not forget your servant, but will give
to your servant a male child, then I will set him before you as a nazirite
until the day of his death. He shall drink neither wine nor intoxicants,
and no razor shall touch his head."
12 As she continued praying before the LORD, Eli observed her mouth.
13 Hannah was praying silently; only her lips moved, but her voice was
not heard; therefore Eli thought she was drunk. 14 So Eli said to her,
"How long will you make a drunken spectacle of yourself? Put away
your wine." 15 But Hannah answered, "No, my lord, I am a woman
deeply troubled; I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but I have

546

1 SAMUEL 547

been pouring out my soul before the LORD. 16 Do not regard your
servant as a worthless woman, for I have been speaking out of my
great anxiety and vexation all this time." 17 Then Eli answered, "Go in
peace; the God of Israel grant the petition you have made to him." 18
And she said, "Let your servant find favor in your sight." Then the
woman went to her quarters, ate and drank with her husband, and her
countenance was sad no longer.
19 They rose early in the morning and worshiped before the LORD; then
they went back to their house at Ramah. Elkanah knew his wife
Hannah, and the LORD remembered her. 20 In due time Hannah
conceived and bore a son. She named him Samuel, for she said, "I have
asked him of the LORD."
21 The man Elkanah and all his household went up to offer to the LORD
the yearly sacrifice, and to pay his vow. 22 But Hannah did not go up,
for she said to her husband, "As soon as the child is weaned, I will
bring him, that he may appear in the presence of the LORD, and remain
there forever; I will offer him as a nazirite for all time." 23 Her husband
Elkanah said to her, "Do what seems best to you, wait until you have
weaned him; only — may the LORD establish his word." So the woman
remained and nursed her son, until she weaned him. 24 When she had
weaned him, she took him up with her, along with a three-year-old
bull, an ephah of flour, and a skin of wine. She brought him to the
house of the LORD at Shiloh; and the child was young. 25 Then they
slaughtered the bull, and they brought the child to Eli. 26 And she said,
"Oh, my lord! As you live, my lord, I am the woman who was standing
here in your presence, praying to the LORD. 27 For this child I prayed;
and the LORD has granted me the petition that I made to him. 28
Therefore I have lent him to the LORD; as long as he lives, he is given to
the LORD."
She left him there for the LORD.

547

1 SAMUEL 548

[1 Samuel 2]
The Song of Hannah
1 Hannah prayed and said,
"My heart exults in the LORD;
my strength is exalted in my God.
My mouth derides my enemies,
because I rejoice in my victory.
2 "There is no Holy One like the LORD,
no one besides you;
there is no Rock like our God.
3 Talk no more so very proudly,
let not arrogance come from your mouth;
for the LORD is a God of knowledge,
and by him actions are weighed.
4 The bows of the mighty are broken,
but the feeble gird on strength.
5 Those who were full have hired themselves out for bread,
but those who were hungry are fat with spoil.
The barren has borne seven,
but she who has many children is forlorn.
6 The LORD kills and brings to life;
he brings down to Sheol and raises up.
7 The LORD makes poor and makes rich;
he brings low, he also exalts.
8 He raises up the poor from the dust;
he lifts the needy from the ash heap,
to make them sit with princes
and inherit a seat of honor.
For the pillars of the earth are the LORD's,
and on them he has set the world.
9 "He will guard the feet of his faithful ones,
but the wicked shall be cut off in darkness;
for not by might does one prevail.

548

1 SAMUEL 549

10 The LORD! His adversaries shall be shattered;
the Most High will thunder in heaven.
The LORD will judge the ends of the earth;
he will give strength to his king,
and exalt the power of his anointed."
11 Then Elkanah went home to Ramah, while the boy remained to
minister to the LORD, in the presence of the priest Eli.
The wicked sons of Eli
12 Now the sons of Eli were scoundrels; they had no regard for the LORD
13 or for the duties of the priests to the people. When anyone offered
sacrifice, the priest's servant would come, while the meat was boiling,
with a three-pronged fork in his hand, 14 and he would thrust it into
the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot; all that the fork brought up the
priest would take for himself. This is what they did at Shiloh to all the
Israelites who came there. 15 Moreover, before the fat was burned, the
priest's servant would come and say to the one who was sacrificing,
"Give meat for the priest to roast; for he will not accept boiled meat
from you, but only raw." 16 And if the man said to him, "Let them burn
the fat first, and then take whatever you wish," he would say, "No, you
must give it now; if not, I will take it by force." 17 Thus the sin of the
young men was very great in the sight of the LORD; for they treated the
offerings of the LORD with contempt.
18 Samuel was ministering before the LORD, a boy wearing a linen
ephod. 19 His mother used to make for him a little robe and take it to
him each year, when she went up with her husband to offer the yearly
sacrifice. 20 Then Eli would bless Elkanah and his wife, and say, "May
the LORD repay you with children by this woman for the gift that she
made to the LORD"; and then they would return to their home.
21 And the LORD took note of Hannah; she conceived and bore three
sons and two daughters. And the boy Samuel grew up in the presence
of the LORD.

549

1 SAMUEL 550

22 Now Eli was very old. He heard all that his sons were doing to all
Israel, and how they lay with the women who served at the entrance to
the tent of meeting. 23 He said to them, "Why do you do such things?
For I hear of your evil dealings from all these people. 24 No, my sons; it
is not a good report that I hear the people of the LORD spreading
abroad. 25 If one person sins against another, someone can intercede
for the sinner with the LORD; but if someone sins against the LORD, who
can make intercession?" But they would not listen to the voice of their
father; for it was the will of the LORD to kill them.
26 Now the boy Samuel continued to grow both in stature and in favor
with the LORD and with the people.
The oracle against Eli
27 A man of God came to Eli and said to him, "Thus the LORD has said, 'I
revealed myself to the family of your ancestor in Egypt when they were
slaves to the house of Pharaoh. 28 I chose him out of all the tribes of
Israel to be my priest, to go up to my altar, to offer incense, to wear an
ephod before me; and I gave to the family of your ancestor all my
offerings by fire from the people of Israel. 29 Why then look with
greedy eye at my sacrifices and my offerings that I commanded, and
honor your sons more than me by fattening yourselves on the choicest
parts of every offering of my people Israel?' 30 Therefore the LORD the
God of Israel declares: 'I promised that your family and the family of
your ancestor should go in and out before me forever'; but now the
LORD declares: 'Far be it from me; for those who honor me I will honor,
and those who despise me shall be treated with contempt. 31 See, a
time is coming when I will cut off your strength and the strength of
your ancestor's family, so that no one in your family will live to old age.
32 Then in distress you will look with greedy eye on all the prosperity
that shall be bestowed upon Israel; and no one in your family shall ever
live to old age. 33 The only one of you whom I shall not cut off from
my altar shall be spared to weep out his eyes and grieve his heart; all
the members of your household shall die by the sword. 34 The fate of
your two sons, Hophni and Phinehas, shall be the sign to you — both
of them shall die on the same day. 35 I will raise up for myself a faithful
priest, who shall do according to what is in my heart and in my mind. I

550

1 SAMUEL 551

will build him a sure house, and he shall go in and out before my
anointed one forever. 36 Everyone who is left in your family shall come
to implore him for a piece of silver or a loaf of bread, and shall say,
Please put me in one of the priest's places, that I may eat a morsel of
bread.'"
[1 Samuel 3]
Samuel's call
1 Now the boy Samuel was ministering to the LORD under Eli. The word
of the LORD was rare in those days; visions were not widespread.
2 At that time Eli, whose eyesight had begun to grow dim so that he
could not see, was lying down in his room; 3 the lamp of God had not
yet gone out, and Samuel was lying down in the temple of the LORD,
where the ark of God was. 4 Then the LORD called, "Samuel! Samuel!"
and he said, "Here I am!" 5 and ran to Eli, and said, "Here I am, for you
called me." But he said, "I did not call; lie down again." So he went
and lay down. 6 The LORD called again, "Samuel!" Samuel got up and
went to Eli, and said, "Here I am, for you called me." But he said, "I did
not call, my son; lie down again." 7 Now Samuel did not yet know the
LORD, and the word of the LORD had not yet been revealed to him. 8
The LORD called Samuel again, a third time. And he got up and went to
Eli, and said, "Here I am, for you called me." Then Eli perceived that
the LORD was calling the boy. 9 Therefore Eli said to Samuel, "Go, lie
down; and if he calls you, you shall say, 'Speak, LORD, for your servant is
listening.'" So Samuel went and lay down in his place.
10 Now the LORD came and stood there, calling as before, "Samuel!
Samuel!" And Samuel said, "Speak, for your servant is listening." 11
Then the LORD said to Samuel, "See, I am about to do something in
Israel that will make both ears of anyone who hears of it tingle. 12 On
that day I will fulfill against Eli all that I have spoken concerning his
house, from beginning to end. 13 For I have told him that I am about to
punish his house forever, for the iniquity that he knew, because his
sons were blaspheming God, and he did not restrain them. 14
Therefore I swear to the house of Eli that the iniquity of Eli's house
shall not be expiated by sacrifice or offering forever."

551

1 SAMUEL 552

15 Samuel lay there until morning; then he opened the doors of the
house of the LORD. Samuel was afraid to tell the vision to Eli. 16 But Eli
called Samuel and said, "Samuel, my son." He said, "Here I am." 17 Eli
said, "What was it that he told you? Do not hide it from me. May God
do so to you and more also, if you hide anything from me of all that he
told you." 18 So Samuel told him everything and hid nothing from him.
Then he said, "It is the LORD; let him do what seems good to him."
19 As Samuel grew up, the LORD was with him and let none of his words
fall to the ground. 20 And all Israel from Dan to Beer-sheba knew that
Samuel was a trustworthy prophet of the LORD. 21 The LORD continued
to appear at Shiloh, for the LORD revealed himself to Samuel at Shiloh
by the word of the LORD. [1 Samuel 4] 1a And the word of Samuel came
to all Israel.
[1 Samuel 4]
The capture of the ark
1b In those days the Philistines mustered for war against Israel, and
Israel went out to battle against them; they encamped at Ebenezer,
and the Philistines encamped at Aphek. 2 The Philistines drew up in
line against Israel, and when the battle was joined, Israel was defeated
by the Philistines, who killed about four thousand men on the field of
battle. 3 When the troops came to the camp, the elders of Israel said,
"Why has the LORD put us to rout today before the Philistines? Let us
bring the ark of the covenant of the LORD here from Shiloh, so that he
may come among us and save us from the power of our enemies." 4 So
the people sent to Shiloh, and brought from there the ark of the
covenant of the LORD of hosts, who is enthroned on the cherubim. The
two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were there with the ark of the
covenant of God.
5 When the ark of the covenant of the LORD came into the camp, all
Israel gave a mighty shout, so that the earth resounded. 6 When the
Philistines heard the noise of the shouting, they said, "What does this
great shouting in the camp of the Hebrews mean?" When they learned
that the ark of the LORD had come to the camp, 7 the Philistines were
afraid; for they said, "Gods have come into the camp." They also said,

552

1 SAMUEL 553

"Woe to us! For nothing like this has happened before. 8 Woe to us!
Who can deliver us from the power of these mighty gods? These are
the gods who struck the Egyptians with every sort of plague in the
wilderness. 9 Take courage, and be men, O Philistines, in order not to
become slaves to the Hebrews as they have been to you; be men and
fight."
10 So the Philistines fought; Israel was defeated, and they fled,
everyone to his home. There was a very great slaughter, for there fell
of Israel thirty thousand foot soldiers. 11 The ark of God was captured;
and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, died.
12 A man of Benjamin ran from the battle line, and came to Shiloh the
same day, with his clothes torn and with earth upon his head. 13 When
he arrived, Eli was sitting upon his seat by the road watching, for his
heart trembled for the ark of God. When the man came into the city
and told the news, all the city cried out. 14 When Eli heard the sound
of the outcry, he said, "What is this uproar?" Then the man came
quickly and told Eli. 15 Now Eli was ninety-eight years old and his eyes
were set, so that he could not see. 16 The man said to Eli, "I have just
come from the battle; I fled from the battle today." He said, "How did
it go, my son?" 17 The messenger replied, "Israel has fled before the
Philistines, and there has also been a great slaughter among the
troops; your two sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the ark
of God has been captured." 18 When he mentioned the ark of God, Eli
fell over backward from his seat by the side of the gate; and his neck
was broken and he died, for he was an old man, and heavy. He had
judged Israel forty years.
19 Now his daughter-in-law, the wife of Phinehas, was pregnant, about
to give birth. When she heard the news that the ark of God was
captured, and that her father-in-law and her husband were dead, she
bowed and gave birth; for her labor pains overwhelmed her. 20 As she
was about to die, the women attending her said to her, "Do not be
afraid, for you have borne a son." But she did not answer or give heed.
21 She named the child Ichabod, meaning, "The glory has departed
from Israel," because the ark of God had been captured and because of

553

1 SAMUEL 554

her father-in-law and her husband. 22 She said, "The glory has
departed from Israel, for the ark of God has been captured."
[1 Samuel 5]
The ark troubles the Philistines
1 When the Philistines captured the ark of God, they brought it from
Ebenezer to Ashdod; 2 then the Philistines took the ark of God and
brought it into the house of Dagon and placed it beside Dagon. 3
When the people of Ashdod rose early the next day, there was Dagon,
fallen on his face to the ground before the ark of the LORD. So they
took Dagon and put him back in his place. 4 But when they rose early
on the next morning, Dagon had fallen on his face to the ground
before the ark of the LORD, and the head of Dagon and both his hands
were lying cut off upon the threshold; only the trunk of Dagon was left
to him. 5 This is why the priests of Dagon and all who enter the house
of Dagon do not step on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod to this day.
6 The hand of the LORD was heavy upon the people of Ashdod, and he
terrified and struck them with tumors, both in Ashdod and in its
territory. 7 And when the inhabitants of Ashdod saw how things were,
they said, "The ark of the God of Israel must not remain with us; for his
hand is heavy on us and on our god Dagon." 8 So they sent and
gathered together all the lords of the Philistines, and said, "What shall
we do with the ark of the God of Israel?" The inhabitants of Gath
replied, "Let the ark of God be moved on to us." So they moved the
ark of the God of Israel to Gath. 9 But after they had brought it to
Gath, the hand of the LORD was against the city, causing a very great
panic; he struck the inhabitants of the city, both young and old, so that
tumors broke out on them. 10 So they sent the ark of the God of Israel
to Ekron. But when the ark of God came to Ekron, the people of Ekron
cried out, "Why have they brought around to us the ark of the God of
Israel to kill us and our people?" 11 They sent therefore and gathered
together all the lords of the Philistines, and said, "Send away the ark of
the God of Israel, and let it return to its own place, that it may not kill
us and our people." For there was a deathly panic throughout the
whole city. The hand of God was very heavy there; 12 those who did

554

1 SAMUEL 555

not die were stricken with tumors, and the cry of the city went up to
heaven.
[1 Samuel 6]
The return of the ark
1 The ark of the LORD was in the country of the Philistines seven
months. 2 Then the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners
and said, "What shall we do with the ark of the LORD? Tell us what we
should send with it to its place." 3 They said, "If you send away the ark
of the God of Israel, do not send it empty, but by all means return him
a guilt offering. Then you will be healed and will be ransomed; will not
his hand then turn from you?" 4 And they said, "What is the guilt
offering that we shall return to him?" They answered, "Five gold
tumors and five gold mice, according to the number of the lords of the
Philistines; for the same plague was upon all of you and upon your
lords. 5 So you must make images of your tumors and images of your
mice that ravage the land, and give glory to the God of Israel; perhaps
he will lighten his hand on you and your gods and your land. 6 Why
should you harden your hearts as the Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened
their hearts? After he had made fools of them, did they not let the
people go, and they departed? 7 Now then, get ready a new cart and
two milch cows that have never borne a yoke, and yoke the cows to
the cart, but take their calves home, away from them. 8 Take the ark of
the LORD and place it on the cart, and put in a box at its side the figures
of gold, which you are returning to him as a guilt offering. Then send
it off, and let it go its way. 9 And watch; if it goes up on the way to its
own land, to Beth-shemesh, then it is he who has done us this great
harm; but if not, then we shall know that it is not his hand that struck
us; it happened to us by chance."
10 The men did so; they took two milch cows and yoked them to the
cart, and shut up their calves at home. 11 They put the ark of the LORD
on the cart, and the box with the gold mice and the images of their
tumors. 12 The cows went straight in the direction of Beth-shemesh
along one highway, lowing as they went; they turned neither to the
right nor to the left, and the lords of the Philistines went after them as
far as the border of Beth-shemesh.

555

1 SAMUEL 556

13 Now the people of Beth-shemesh were reaping their wheat harvest
in the valley. When they looked up and saw the ark, they went with
rejoicing to meet it. 14 The cart came into the field of Joshua of Bethshemesh, and stopped there. A large stone was there; so they split up
the wood of the cart and offered the cows as a burnt offering to the
LORD. 15 The Levites took down the ark of the LORD and the box that
was beside it, in which were the gold objects, and set them upon the
large stone. Then the people of Beth-shemesh offered burnt offerings
and presented sacrifices on that day to the LORD. 16 When the five lords
of the Philistines saw it, they returned that day to Ekron.
17 These are the gold tumors, which the Philistines returned as a guilt
offering to the LORD: one for Ashdod, one for Gaza, one for Ashkelon,
one for Gath, one for Ekron; 18 also the gold mice, according to the
number of all the cities of the Philistines belonging to the five lords,
both fortified cities and unwalled villages. The great stone, beside
which they set down the ark of the LORD, is a witness to this day in the
field of Joshua of Beth-shemesh.
19 The descendants of Jeconiah did not rejoice with the people of Bethshemesh when they greeted the ark of the LORD; and he killed seventy
men of them. The people mourned because the LORD had made a great
slaughter among the people. 20 Then the people of Beth-shemesh said,
"Who is able to stand before the LORD, this holy God? To whom shall
he go so that we may be rid of him?" 21 So they sent messengers to the
inhabitants of Kiriath-jearim, saying, "The Philistines have returned the
ark of the LORD. Come down and take it up to you." [1 Samuel 7] 1 And
the people of Kiriath-jearim came and took up the ark of the LORD, and
brought it to the house of Abinadab on the hill. They consecrated his
son, Eleazar, to have charge of the ark of the LORD.
[1 Samuel 7]
Samuel judges Israel
2 From the day that the ark was lodged at Kiriath-jearim, a long time
passed, some twenty years, and all the house of Israel lamented after
the LORD.

556

1 SAMUEL 557

3 Then Samuel said to all the house of Israel, "If you are returning to
the LORD with all your heart, then put away the foreign gods and the
Astartes from among you. Direct your heart to the LORD, and serve him
only, and he will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines." 4 So
Israel put away the Baals and the Astartes, and they served the LORD
only.
5 Then Samuel said, "Gather all Israel at Mizpah, and I will pray to the
LORD for you." 6 So they gathered at Mizpah, and drew water and
poured it out before the LORD. They fasted that day, and said, "We
have sinned against the LORD." And Samuel judged the people of Israel
at Mizpah.
7 When the Philistines heard that the people of Israel had gathered at
Mizpah, the lords of the Philistines went up against Israel. And when
the people of Israel heard of it they were afraid of the Philistines. 8
The people of Israel said to Samuel, "Do not cease to cry out to the
LORD our God for us, and pray that he may save us from the hand of
the Philistines." 9 So Samuel took a sucking lamb and offered it as a
whole burnt offering to the LORD; Samuel cried out to the LORD for
Israel, and the LORD answered him. 10 As Samuel was offering up the
burnt offering, the Philistines drew near to attack Israel; but the LORD
thundered with a mighty voice that day against the Philistines and
threw them into confusion; and they were routed before Israel. 11 And
the men of Israel went out of Mizpah and pursued the Philistines, and
struck them down as far as beyond Beth-car.
12 Then Samuel took a stone and set it up between Mizpah and
Jeshanah, and named it Ebenezer; for he said, "Thus far the LORD has
helped us." 13 So the Philistines were subdued and did not again enter
the territory of Israel; the hand of the LORD was against the Philistines
all the days of Samuel. 14 The towns that the Philistines had taken from
Israel were restored to Israel, from Ekron to Gath; and Israel recovered
their territory from the hand of the Philistines. There was peace also
between Israel and the Amorites.

557

1 SAMUEL 558

15 Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life. 16 He went on a circuit
year by year to Bethel, Gilgal, and Mizpah; and he judged Israel in all
these places. 17 Then he would come back to Ramah, for his home was
there; he administered justice there to Israel, and built there an altar to
the LORD.
[1 Samuel 8]
The beginning of kingship in Israel; the people request a king
1 When Samuel became old, he made his sons judges over Israel. 2 The
name of his firstborn son was Joel, and the name of his second, Abijah;
they were judges in Beer-sheba. 3 Yet his sons did not follow in his
ways, but turned aside after gain; they took bribes and perverted
justice.
4 Then all the elders of Israel gathered together and came to Samuel at
Ramah, 5 and said to him, "You are old and your sons do not follow in
your ways; appoint for us, then, a king to govern us, like other
nations." 6 But the thing displeased Samuel when they said, "Give us a
king to govern us." Samuel prayed to the LORD, 7 and the LORD said to
Samuel, "Listen to the voice of the people in all that they say to you;
for they have not rejected you, but they have rejected me from being
king over them. 8 Just as they have done to me, from the day I brought
them up out of Egypt to this day, forsaking me and serving other gods,
so also they are doing to you. 9 Now then, listen to their voice; only —
you shall solemnly warn them, and show them the ways of the king
who shall reign over them."
10 So Samuel reported all the words of the LORD to the people who
were asking him for a king. 11 He said,
"These will be the ways of the king who will reign over you: he will
take your sons and appoint them to his chariots and to be his
horsemen, and to run before his chariots; 12 and he will appoint for
himself commanders of thousands and commanders of fifties, and
some to plow his ground and to reap his harvest, and to make his
implements of war and the equipment of his chariots. 13 He will take
your daughters to be perfumers and cooks and bakers. 14 He will take

558

1 SAMUEL 559

the best of your fields and vineyards and olive orchards and give them
to his courtiers. 15 He will take one-tenth of your grain and of your
vineyards and give it to his officers and his courtiers. 16 He will take
your male and female slaves, and the best of your cattle and donkeys,
and put them to his work. 17 He will take one-tenth of your flocks, and
you shall be his slaves. 18 And in that day you will cry out because of
your king, whom you have chosen for yourselves; but the LORD will not
answer you in that day."
19 But the people refused to listen to the voice of Samuel; they said,
"No! but we are determined to have a king over us, 20 so that we also
may be like other nations, and that our king may govern us and go out
before us and fight our battles." 21 When Samuel had heard all the
words of the people, he repeated them in the ears of the LORD. 22 The
LORD said to Samuel, "Listen to their voice and set a king over them."
Samuel then said to the people of Israel, "Each of you return home."
[1 Samuel 9]
Saul's anointing
1 There was a man of Benjamin whose name was Kish son of Abiel son
of Zeror son of Becorath son of Aphiah, a Benjaminite, a man of
wealth. 2 He had a son whose name was Saul, a handsome young man.
There was not a man among the people of Israel more handsome than
he; he stood head and shoulders above everyone else.
3 Now the donkeys of Kish, Saul's father, had strayed. So Kish said to
his son Saul, "Take one of the boys with you; go and look for the
donkeys." 4 He passed through the hill country of Ephraim and passed
through the land of Shalishah, but they did not find them. And they
passed through the land of Shaalim, but they were not there. Then he
passed through the land of Benjamin, but they did not find them.
5 When they came to the land of Zuph, Saul said to the boy who was
with him, "Let us turn back, or my father will stop worrying about the
donkeys and worry about us." 6 But he said to him, "There is a man of
God in this town; he is a man held in honor. Whatever he says always
comes true. Let us go there now; perhaps he will tell us about the

559

1 SAMUEL 560

journey on which we have set out." 7 Then Saul replied to the boy,
"But if we go, what can we bring the man? For the bread in our sacks
is gone, and there is no present to bring to the man of God. What have
we?" 8 The boy answered Saul again, "Here, I have with me a quarter
shekel of silver; I will give it to the man of God, to tell us our way." 9
(Formerly in Israel, anyone who went to inquire of God would say,
"Come, let us go to the seer"; for the one who is now called a prophet
was formerly called a seer.) 10 Saul said to the boy, "Good; come, let us
go." So they went to the town where the man of God was.
11 As they went up the hill to the town, they met some girls coming out
to draw water, and said to them, "Is the seer here?" 12 They answered,
"Yes, there he is just ahead of you. Hurry; he has come just now to the
town, because the people have a sacrifice today at the shrine. 13 As
soon as you enter the town, you will find him, before he goes up to the
shrine to eat. For the people will not eat until he comes, since he must
bless the sacrifice; afterward those eat who are invited. Now go up, for
you will meet him immediately." 14 So they went up to the town. As
they were entering the town, they saw Samuel coming out toward
them on his way up to the shrine.
15 Now the day before Saul came, the LORD had revealed to Samuel: 16
"Tomorrow about this time I will send to you a man from the land of
Benjamin, and you shall anoint him to be ruler over my people Israel.
He shall save my people from the hand of the Philistines; for I have
seen the suffering of my people, because their outcry has come to me."
17 When Samuel saw Saul, the LORD told him, "Here is the man of
whom I spoke to you. He it is who shall rule over my people." 18 Then
Saul approached Samuel inside the gate, and said, "Tell me, please,
where is the house of the seer?" 19 Samuel answered Saul, "I am the
seer; go up before me to the shrine, for today you shall eat with me,
and in the morning I will let you go and will tell you all that is on your
mind. 20 As for your donkeys that were lost three days ago, give no
further thought to them, for they have been found. And on whom is
all Israel's desire fixed, if not on you and on all your ancestral house?"
21 Saul answered, "I am only a Benjaminite, from the least of the tribes
of Israel, and my family is the humblest of all the families of the tribe
of Benjamin. Why then have you spoken to me in this way?"

560

1 SAMUEL 561

22 Then Samuel took Saul and his servant-boy and brought them into
the hall, and gave them a place at the head of those who had been
invited, of whom there were about thirty. 23 And Samuel said to the
cook, "Bring the portion I gave you, the one I asked you to put aside."
24 The cook took up the thigh and what went with it and set them
before Saul. Samuel said, "See, what was kept is set before you. Eat;
for it is set before you at the appointed time, so that you might eat
with the guests."
So Saul ate with Samuel that day. 25 When they came down from the
shrine into the town, a bed was spread for Saul on the roof, and he lay
down to sleep. 26 Then at the break of dawn Samuel called to Saul
upon the roof, "Get up, so that I may send you on your way." Saul got
up, and both he and Samuel went out into the street.
27 As they were going down to the outskirts of the town, Samuel said
to Saul, "Tell the boy to go on before us, and when he has passed on,
stop here yourself for a while, that I may make known to you the word
of God." [1 Samuel 10] 1 Samuel took a vial of oil and poured it on his
head, and kissed him; he said, "The LORD has anointed you ruler over
his people Israel. You shall reign over the people of the LORD and you
will save them from the hand of their enemies all around. Now this
shall be the sign to you that the LORD has anointed you ruler over his
heritage: 2 When you depart from me today you will meet two men by
Rachel's tomb in the territory of Benjamin at Zelzah; they will say to
you, 'The donkeys that you went to seek are found, and now your
father has stopped worrying about them and is worrying about you,
saying: What shall I do about my son?' 3 Then you shall go on from
there further and come to the oak of Tabor; three men going up to
God at Bethel will meet you there, one carrying three kids, another
carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a skin of wine. 4
They will greet you and give you two loaves of bread, which you shall
accept from them. 5 After that you shall come to Gibeath-elohim, at
the place where the Philistine garrison is; there, as you come to the
town, you will meet a band of prophets coming down from the shrine
with harp, tambourine, flute, and lyre playing in front of them; they
will be in a prophetic frenzy. 6 Then the spirit of the LORD will possess
you, and you will be in a prophetic frenzy along with them and be

561

1 SAMUEL 562

turned into a different person. 7 Now when these signs meet you, do
whatever you see fit to do, for God is with you. 8 And you shall go
down to Gilgal ahead of me; then I will come down to you to present
burnt offerings and offer sacrifices of well-being. Seven days you shall
wait, until I come to you and show you what you shall do."
9 As he turned away to leave Samuel, God gave him another heart; and
all these signs were fulfilled that day. 10 When they were going from
there to Gibeah, a band of prophets met him; and the spirit of God
possessed him, and he fell into a prophetic frenzy along with them. 11
When all who knew him before saw how he prophesied with the
prophets, the people said to one another, "What has come over the
son of Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets?" 12 A man of the place
answered, "And who is their father?" Therefore it became a proverb,
"Is Saul also among the prophets?" 13 When his prophetic frenzy had
ended, he went home.
14 Saul's uncle said to him and to the boy, "Where did you go?" And
he replied, "To seek the donkeys; and when we saw they were not to
be found, we went to Samuel." 15 Saul's uncle said, "Tell me what
Samuel said to you." 16 Saul said to his uncle, "He told us that the
donkeys had been found." But about the matter of the kingship, of
which Samuel had spoken, he did not tell him anything.
Saul chosen by lot; Saul proves himself able to lead in battle and is
publicly made king
17 Samuel summoned the people to the LORD at Mizpah 18 and said to
them, "Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, 'I brought up Israel out of
Egypt, and I rescued you from the hand of the Egyptians and from the
hand of all the kingdoms that were oppressing you.' 19 But today you
have rejected your God, who saves you from all your calamities and
your distresses; and you have said, 'No! but set a king over us.' Now
therefore present yourselves before the LORD by your tribes and by
your clans."

562

1 SAMUEL 563

20 Then Samuel brought all the tribes of Israel near, and the tribe of
Benjamin was taken by lot. 21 He brought the tribe of Benjamin near
by its families, and the family of the Matrites was taken by lot. Finally
he brought the family of the Matrites near man by man, and Saul the
son of Kish was taken by lot. But when they sought him, he could not
be found. 22 So they inquired again of the LORD, "Did the man come
here?" and the LORD said, "See, he has hidden himself among the
baggage." 23 Then they ran and brought him from there. When he
took his stand among the people, he was head and shoulders taller
than any of them. 24 Samuel said to all the people, "Do you see the
one whom the LORD has chosen? There is no one like him among all the
people." And all the people shouted, "Long live the king!"
25 Samuel told the people the rights and duties of the kingship; and he
wrote them in a book and laid it up before the LORD. Then Samuel sent
all the people back to their homes. 26 Saul also went to his home at
Gibeah, and with him went warriors whose hearts God had touched. 27
But some worthless fellows said, "How can this man save us?" They
despised him and brought him no present. But he held his peace.
Now Nahash, king of the Ammonites, had been grievously oppressing
the Gadites and the Reubenites. He would gouge out the right eye of
each of them and would not grant Israel a deliverer. No one was left of
the Israelites across the Jordan whose right eye Nahash, king of the
Ammonites, had not gouged out. But there were seven thousand men
who had escaped from the Ammonites and had entered Jabesh-gilead.
[1 Samuel 11]
1 About a month later, Nahash the Ammonite went up and besieged
Jabesh-gilead; and all the men of Jabesh said to Nahash, "Make a
treaty with us, and we will serve you." 2 But Nahash the Ammonite
said to them, "On this condition I will make a treaty with you, namely
that I gouge out everyone's right eye, and thus put disgrace upon all
Israel." 3 The elders of Jabesh said to him, "Give us seven days' respite
that we may send messengers through all the territory of Israel. Then,
if there is no one to save us, we will give ourselves up to you." 4 When

563

1 SAMUEL 564

the messengers came to Gibeah of Saul, they reported the matter in
the hearing of the people; and all the people wept aloud.
5 Now Saul was coming from the field behind the oxen; and Saul said,
"What is the matter with the people, that they are weeping?" So they
told him the message from the inhabitants of Jabesh. 6 And the spirit
of God came upon Saul in power when he heard these words, and his
anger was greatly kindled. 7 He took a yoke of oxen, and cut them in
pieces and sent them throughout all the territory of Israel by
messengers, saying, "Whoever does not come out after Saul and
Samuel, so shall it be done to his oxen!" Then the dread of the LORD
fell upon the people, and they came out as one. 8 When he mustered
them at Bezek, those from Israel were three hundred thousand, and
those from Judah seventy thousand. 9 They said to the messengers who
had come, "Thus shall you say to the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead:
'Tomorrow, by the time the sun is hot, you shall have deliverance.'"
When the messengers came and told the inhabitants of Jabesh, they
rejoiced. 10 So the inhabitants of Jabesh said, "Tomorrow we will give
ourselves up to you, and you may do to us whatever seems good to
you." 11 The next day Saul put the people in three companies. At the
morning watch they came into the camp and cut down the Ammonites
until the heat of the day; and those who survived were scattered, so
that no two of them were left together.
12 The people said to Samuel, "Who is it that said, 'Shall Saul reign over
us?' Give them to us so that we may put them to death." 13 But Saul
said, "No one shall be put to death this day, for today the LORD has
brought deliverance to Israel."
14 Samuel said to the people, "Come, let us go to Gilgal and there
renew the kingship." 15 So all the people went to Gilgal, and there
they made Saul king before the LORD in Gilgal. There they sacrificed
offerings of well-being before the LORD, and there Saul and all the
Israelites rejoiced greatly.

564

1 SAMUEL 565

[1 Samuel 12]
Samuel's address
1 Samuel said to all Israel, "I have listened to you in all that you have
said to me, and have set a king over you. 2 See, it is the king who leads
you now; I am old and gray, but my sons are with you. I have led you
from my youth until this day. 3 Here I am; testify against me before the
LORD and before his anointed. Whose ox have I taken? Or whose
donkey have I taken? Or whom have I defrauded? Whom have I
oppressed? Or from whose hand have I taken a bribe to blind my eyes
with it? Testify against me and I will restore it to you." 4 They said,
"You have not defrauded us or oppressed us or taken anything from
the hand of anyone." 5 He said to them, "The LORD is witness against
you, and his anointed is witness this day, that you have not found
anything in my hand." And they said, "He is witness."
6 Samuel said to the people, "The LORD is witness, who appointed
Moses and Aaron and brought your ancestors up out of the land of
Egypt. 7 Now therefore take your stand, so that I may enter into
judgment with you before the LORD, and I will declare to you all the
saving deeds of the LORD that he performed for you and for your
ancestors. 8 When Jacob went into Egypt and the Egyptians oppressed
them, then your ancestors cried to the LORD and the LORD sent Moses
and Aaron, who brought forth your ancestors out of Egypt, and settled
them in this place. 9 But they forgot the LORD their God; and he sold
them into the hand of Sisera, commander of the army of King Jabin of
Hazor, and into the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand of the
king of Moab; and they fought against them. 10 Then they cried to the
LORD, and said, 'We have sinned, because we have forsaken the LORD,
and have served the Baals and the Astartes; but now rescue us out of
the hand of our enemies, and we will serve you.' 11 And the LORD sent
Jerubbaal and Barak, and Jephthah, and Samson, and rescued you out
of the hand of your enemies on every side; and you lived in safety. 12
But when you saw that King Nahash of the Ammonites came against
you, you said to me, 'No, but a king shall reign over us,' though the
LORD your God was your king. 13 See, here is the king whom you have
chosen, for whom you have asked; see, the LORD has set a king over
you. 14 If you will fear the LORD and serve him and heed his voice and

565

1 SAMUEL 566

not rebel against the commandment of the LORD, and if both you and
the king who reigns over you will follow the LORD your God, it will be
well; 15 but if you will not heed the voice of the LORD, but rebel against
the commandment of the LORD, then the hand of the LORD will be
against you and your king. 16 Now therefore take your stand and see
this great thing that the LORD will do before your eyes. 17 Is it not the
wheat harvest today? I will call upon the LORD, that he may send
thunder and rain; and you shall know and see that the wickedness that
you have done in the sight of the LORD is great in demanding a king for
yourselves." 18 So Samuel called upon the LORD, and the LORD sent
thunder and rain that day; and all the people greatly feared the LORD
and Samuel.
19 All the people said to Samuel, "Pray to the LORD your God for your
servants, so that we may not die; for we have added to all our sins the
evil of demanding a king for ourselves." 20 And Samuel said to the
people, "Do not be afraid; you have done all this evil, yet do not turn
aside from following the LORD, but serve the LORD with all your heart;
21 and do not turn aside after useless things that cannot profit or save,
for they are useless. 22 For the LORD will not cast away his people, for
his great name's sake, because it has pleased the LORD to make you a
people for himself. 23 Moreover as for me, far be it from me that I
should sin against the LORD by ceasing to pray for you; and I will
instruct you in the good and the right way. 24 Only fear the LORD, and
serve him faithfully with all your heart; for consider what great things
he has done for you. 25 But if you still do wickedly, you shall be swept
away, both you and your king."
[1 Samuel 13]
Saul begins the war with the Philistines
1 Saul was years old when he began to reign; and he reigned and two
years over Israel.
2 Saul chose three thousand out of Israel; two thousand were with Saul
in Michmash and the hill country of Bethel, and a thousand were with
Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin; the rest of the people he sent home
to their tents. 3 Jonathan defeated the garrison of the Philistines that

566

1 SAMUEL 567

was at Geba; and the Philistines heard of it. And Saul blew the trumpet
throughout all the land, saying, "Let the Hebrews hear!" 4 When all
Israel heard that Saul had defeated the garrison of the Philistines, and
also that Israel had become odious to the Philistines, the people were
called out to join Saul at Gilgal.
5 The Philistines mustered to fight with Israel, thirty thousand chariots,
and six thousand horsemen, and troops like the sand on the seashore
in multitude; they came up and encamped at Michmash, to the east of
Beth-aven. 6 When the Israelites saw that they were in distress (for the
troops were hard pressed), the people hid themselves in caves and in
holes and in rocks and in tombs and in cisterns. 7 Some Hebrews
crossed the Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilead. Saul was still at
Gilgal, and all the people followed him trembling.
Saul's sin and rejection by God
8 He waited seven days, the time appointed by Samuel; but Samuel did
not come to Gilgal, and the people began to slip away from Saul. 9 So
Saul said, "Bring the burnt offering here to me, and the offerings of
well-being." And he offered the burnt offering. 10 As soon as he had
finished offering the burnt offering, Samuel arrived; and Saul went out
to meet him and salute him. 11 Samuel said, "What have you done?"
Saul replied, "When I saw that the people were slipping away from me,
and that you did not come within the days appointed, and that the
Philistines were mustering at Michmash, 12 I said, 'Now the Philistines
will come down upon me at Gilgal, and I have not entreated the favor
of the LORD'; so I forced myself, and offered the burnt offering." 13
Samuel said to Saul, "You have done foolishly; you have not kept the
commandment of the LORD your God, which he commanded you. The
LORD would have established your kingdom over Israel forever, 14 but
now your kingdom will not continue; the LORD has sought out a man
after his own heart; and the LORD has appointed him to be ruler over
his people, because you have not kept what the LORD commanded
you." 15 And Samuel left and went on his way from Gilgal. The rest of
the people followed Saul to join the army; they went up from Gilgal
toward Gibeah of Benjamin.

567

1 SAMUEL 568

Continuation of the Philistine war
Saul counted the people who were present with him, about six
hundred men. 16 Saul, his son Jonathan, and the people who were
present with them stayed in Geba of Benjamin; but the Philistines
encamped at Michmash. 17 And raiders came out of the camp of the
Philistines in three companies; one company turned toward Ophrah, to
the land of Shual, 18 another company turned toward Beth-horon, and
another company turned toward the mountain that looks down upon
the valley of Zeboim toward the wilderness.
19 Now there was no smith to be found throughout all the land of
Israel; for the Philistines said, "The Hebrews must not make swords or
spears for themselves"; 20 so all the Israelites went down to the
Philistines to sharpen their plowshares, mattocks, axes, or sickles; 21 The
charge was two-thirds of a shekel for the plowshares and for the
mattocks, and one-third of a shekel for sharpening the axes and for
setting the goads. 22 So on the day of the battle neither sword nor
spear was to be found in the possession of any of the people with Saul
and Jonathan; but Saul and his son Jonathan had them.
23 Now a garrison of the Philistines had gone out to the pass of
Michmash. [1 Samuel 14] 1 One day Jonathan son of Saul said to the
young man who carried his armor, "Come, let us go over to the
Philistine garrison on the other side." But he did not tell his father. 2
Saul was staying in the outskirts of Gibeah under the pomegranate
tree that is at Migron; the troops that were with him were about six
hundred men, 3 along with Ahijah son of Ahitub, Ichabod's brother,
son of Phinehas son of Eli, the priest of the LORD in Shiloh, carrying an
ephod. Now the people did not know that Jonathan had gone. 4 In the
pass, by which Jonathan tried to go over to the Philistine garrison,
there was a rocky crag on one side and a rocky crag on the other; the
name of the one was Bozez, and the name of the other Seneh. 5 One
crag rose on the north in front of Michmash, and the other on the
south in front of Geba.

568

1 SAMUEL 569

6 Jonathan said to the young man who carried his armor, "Come, let us
go over to the garrison of these uncircumcised; it may be that the LORD
will act for us; for nothing can hinder the LORD from saving by many or
by few." 7 His armor-bearer said to him, "Do all that your mind inclines
to. I am with you; as your mind is, so is mine." 8 Then Jonathan said,
"Now we will cross over to those men and will show ourselves to them.
9 If they say to us, 'Wait until we come to you,' then we will stand still
in our place, and we will not go up to them. 10 But if they say, 'Come
up to us,' then we will go up; for the LORD has given them into our
hand. That will be the sign for us." 11 So both of them showed
themselves to the garrison of the Philistines; and the Philistines said,
"Look, Hebrews are coming out of the holes where they have hidden
themselves." 12 The men of the garrison hailed Jonathan and his
armor-bearer, saying, "Come up to us, and we will show you
something." Jonathan said to his armor-bearer, "Come up after me; for
the LORD has given them into the hand of Israel." 13 Then Jonathan
climbed up on his hands and feet, with his armor-bearer following
after him. The Philistines fell before Jonathan, and his armor-bearer,
coming after him, killed them. 14 In that first slaughter Jonathan and
his armor-bearer killed about twenty men within an area about half a
furrow long in an acre of land. 15 There was a panic in the camp, in the
field, and among all the people; the garrison and even the raiders
trembled; the earth quaked; and it became a very great panic.
16 Saul's lookouts in Gibeah of Benjamin were watching as the
multitude was surging back and forth. 17 Then Saul said to the troops
that were with him, "Call the roll and see who has gone from us."
When they had called the roll, Jonathan and his armor-bearer were not
there. 18 Saul said to Ahijah, "Bring the ark of God here." For at that
time the ark of God went with the Israelites. 19 While Saul was talking
to the priest, the tumult in the camp of the Philistines increased more
and more; and Saul said to the priest, "Withdraw your hand." 20 Then
Saul and all the people who were with him rallied and went into the
battle; and every sword was against the other, so that there was very
great confusion. 21 Now the Hebrews who previously had been with
the Philistines and had gone up with them into the camp turned and
joined the Israelites who were with Saul and Jonathan. 22 Likewise,
when all the Israelites who had gone into hiding in the hill country of

569

1 SAMUEL 570

Ephraim heard that the Philistines were fleeing, they too followed
closely after them in the battle. 23 So the LORD gave Israel the victory
that day.
The battle passed beyond Beth-aven, and the troops with Saul
numbered altogether about ten thousand men. The battle spread out
over the hill country of Ephraim.
24 Now Saul committed a very rash act on that day. He had laid an
oath on the troops, saying, "Cursed be anyone who eats food before it
is evening and I have been avenged on my enemies." So none of the
troops tasted food. 25 All the troops came upon a honeycomb; and
there was honey on the ground. 26 When the troops came upon the
honeycomb, the honey was dripping out; but they did not put their
hands to their mouths, for they feared the oath. 27 But Jonathan had
not heard his father charge the troops with the oath; so he extended
the staff that was in his hand, and dipped the tip of it in the
honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth; and his eyes brightened.
28 Then one of the soldiers said, "Your father strictly charged the
troops with an oath, saying, 'Cursed be anyone who eats food this day.'
And so the troops are faint." 29 Then Jonathan said, "My father has
troubled the land; see how my eyes have brightened because I tasted a
little of this honey. 30 How much better if today the troops had eaten
freely of the spoil taken from their enemies; for now the slaughter
among the Philistines has not been great."
31 After they had struck down the Philistines that day from Michmash
to Aijalon, the troops were very faint; 32 so the troops flew upon the
spoil, and took sheep and oxen and calves, and slaughtered them on
the ground; and the troops ate them with the blood. 33 Then it was
reported to Saul, "Look, the troops are sinning against the LORD by
eating with the blood." And he said, "You have dealt treacherously;
roll a large stone before me here." 34 Saul said, "Disperse yourselves
among the troops, and say to them, 'Let all bring their oxen or their
sheep, and slaughter them here, and eat; and do not sin against the
LORD by eating with the blood.'" So all of the troops brought their
oxen with them that night, and slaughtered them there. 35 And Saul
built an altar to the LORD; it was the first altar that he built to the LORD.

570

1 SAMUEL 571

36 Then Saul said, "Let us go down after the Philistines by night and
despoil them until the morning light; let us not leave one of them."
They said, "Do whatever seems good to you." But the priest said, "Let
us draw near to God here." 37 So Saul inquired of God, "Shall I go
down after the Philistines? Will you give them into the hand of Israel?"
But he did not answer him that day. 38 Saul said, "Come here, all you
leaders of the people; and let us find out how this sin has arisen today.
39 For as the LORD lives who saves Israel, even if it is in my son
Jonathan, he shall surely die!" But there was no one among all the
people who answered him. 40 He said to all Israel, "You shall be on
one side, and I and my son Jonathan will be on the other side." The
people said to Saul, "Do what seems good to you." 41 Then Saul said,
"O LORD God of Israel, why have you not answered your servant today?
If this guilt is in me or in my son Jonathan, O LORD God of Israel, give
Urim; but if this guilt is in your people Israel, give Thummim." And
Jonathan and Saul were indicated by the lot, but the people were
cleared. 42 Then Saul said, "Cast the lot between me and my son
Jonathan." And Jonathan was taken.
43 Then Saul said to Jonathan, "Tell me what you have done."
Jonathan told him, "I tasted a little honey with the tip of the staff that
was in my hand; here I am, I will die." 44 Saul said, "God do so to me
and more also; you shall surely die, Jonathan!" 45 Then the people said
to Saul, "Shall Jonathan die, who has accomplished this great victory in
Israel? Far from it! As the LORD lives, not one hair of his head shall fall
to the ground; for he has worked with God today." So the people
ransomed Jonathan, and he did not die. 46 Then Saul withdrew from
pursuing the Philistines; and the Philistines went to their own place.
47 When Saul had taken the kingship over Israel, he fought against all
his enemies on every side — against Moab, against the Ammonites,
against Edom, against the kings of Zobah, and against the Philistines;
wherever he turned he routed them. 48 He did valiantly, and struck
down the Amalekites, and rescued Israel out of the hands of those who
plundered them.

571

1 SAMUEL 572

49 Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan, Ishvi, and Malchishua; and the
names of his two daughters were these: the name of the firstborn was
Merab, and the name of the younger, Michal. 50 The name of Saul's
wife was Ahinoam daughter of Ahimaaz. And the name of the
commander of his army was Abner son of Ner, Saul's uncle; 51 Kish was
the father of Saul, and Ner the father of Abner was the son of Abiel.
52 There was hard fighting against the Philistines all the days of Saul;
and when Saul saw any strong or valiant warrior, he took him into his
service.
[1 Samuel 15]
Another story of Saul's rejection
1 Samuel said to Saul, "The LORD sent me to anoint you king over his
people Israel; now therefore listen to the words of the LORD. 2 Thus
says the LORD of hosts, 'I will punish the Amalekites for what they did in
opposing the Israelites when they came up out of Egypt. 3 Now go and
attack Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have; do not spare
them, but kill both man and woman, child and infant, ox and sheep,
camel and donkey.'"
4 So Saul summoned the people, and numbered them in Telaim, two
hundred thousand foot soldiers, and ten thousand soldiers of Judah. 5
Saul came to the city of the Amalekites and lay in wait in the valley. 6
Saul said to the Kenites, "Go! Leave! Withdraw from among the
Amalekites, or I will destroy you with them; for you showed kindness
to all the people of Israel when they came up out of Egypt." So the
Kenites withdrew from the Amalekites. 7 Saul defeated the Amalekites,
from Havilah as far as Shur, which is east of Egypt. 8 He took King
Agag of the Amalekites alive, but utterly destroyed all the people with
the edge of the sword. 9 Saul and the people spared Agag, and the
best of the sheep and of the cattle and of the fatlings, and the lambs,
and all that was valuable, and would not utterly destroy them; all that
was despised and worthless they utterly destroyed.

572

1 SAMUEL 573

10 The word of the LORD came to Samuel: 11 "I regret that I made Saul
king, for he has turned back from following me, and has not carried
out my commands." Samuel was angry; and he cried out to the LORD all
night. 12 Samuel rose early in the morning to meet Saul, and Samuel
was told, "Saul went to Carmel, where he set up a monument for
himself, and on returning he passed on down to Gilgal." 13 When
Samuel came to Saul, Saul said to him, "May you be blessed by the
LORD; I have carried out the command of the LORD." 14 But Samuel said,
"What then is this bleating of sheep in my ears, and the lowing of
cattle that I hear?" 15 Saul said, "They have brought them from the
Amalekites; for the people spared the best of the sheep and the cattle,
to sacrifice to the LORD your God; but the rest we have utterly
destroyed." 16 Then Samuel said to Saul, "Stop! I will tell you what the
LORD said to me last night." He replied, "Speak."
17 Samuel said, "Though you are little in your own eyes, are you not
the head of the tribes of Israel? The LORD anointed you king over Israel.
18 And the LORD sent you on a mission, and said, 'Go, utterly destroy
the sinners, the Amalekites, and fight against them until they are
consumed.' 19 Why then did you not obey the voice of the LORD? Why
did you swoop down on the spoil, and do what was evil in the sight of
the LORD?" 20 Saul said to Samuel, "I have obeyed the voice of the
LORD, I have gone on the mission on which the LORD sent me, I have
brought Agag the king of Amalek, and I have utterly destroyed the
Amalekites. 21 But from the spoil the people took sheep and cattle, the
best of the things devoted to destruction, to sacrifice to the LORD your
God in Gilgal." 22 And Samuel said,
"Has the LORD as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices,
as in obedience to the voice of the LORD?
Surely, to obey is better than sacrifice,
and to heed than the fat of rams.
23 For rebellion is no less a sin than divination,
and stubbornness is like iniquity and idolatry.
Because you have rejected the word of the LORD,
he has also rejected you from being king."

573

1 SAMUEL 574

24 Saul said to Samuel, "I have sinned; for I have transgressed the
commandment of the LORD and your words, because I feared the
people and obeyed their voice. 25 Now therefore, I pray, pardon my
sin, and return with me, so that I may worship the LORD." 26 Samuel
said to Saul, "I will not return with you; for you have rejected the word
of the LORD, and the LORD has rejected you from being king over
Israel." 27 As Samuel turned to go away, Saul caught hold of the hem
of his robe, and it tore. 28 And Samuel said to him, "The LORD has torn
the kingdom of Israel from you this very day, and has given it to a
neighbor of yours, who is better than you. 29 Moreover the Glory of
Israel will not recant or change his mind; for he is not a mortal, that he
should change his mind." 30 Then Saul said, "I have sinned; yet honor
me now before the elders of my people and before Israel, and return
with me, so that I may worship the LORD your God." 31 So Samuel
turned back after Saul; and Saul worshiped the LORD.
32 Then Samuel said, "Bring Agag king of the Amalekites here to me."
And Agag came to him haltingly. Agag said, "Surely this is the
bitterness of death." 33 But Samuel said,
"As your sword has made women childless,
so your mother shall be childless among women."
And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before the LORD in Gilgal.
34 Then Samuel went to Ramah; and Saul went up to his house in
Gibeah of Saul. 35 Samuel did not see Saul again until the day of his
death, but Samuel grieved over Saul. And the LORD was sorry that he
had made Saul king over Israel.
[1 Samuel 16]
The anointing of David
1 The LORD said to Samuel, "How long will you grieve over Saul? I have
rejected him from being king over Israel. Fill your horn with oil and set
out; I will send you to Jesse the Bethlehemite, for I have provided for
myself a king among his sons." 2 Samuel said, "How can I go? If Saul
hears of it, he will kill me." And the LORD said, "Take a heifer with you,
and say, 'I have come to sacrifice to the LORD.' 3 Invite Jesse to the
sacrifice, and I will show you what you shall do; and you shall anoint

574

1 SAMUEL 575

for me the one whom I name to you." 4 Samuel did what the LORD
commanded, and came to Bethlehem. The elders of the city came to
meet him trembling, and said, "Do you come peaceably?" 5 He said,
"Peaceably; I have come to sacrifice to the LORD; sanctify yourselves and
come with me to the sacrifice." And he sanctified Jesse and his sons
and invited them to the sacrifice.
6 When they came, he looked on Eliab and thought, "Surely the LORD's
anointed is now before the LORD." 7 But the LORD said to Samuel, "Do
not look on his appearance or on the height of his stature, because I
have rejected him; for the LORD does not see as mortals see; they look
on the outward appearance, but the LORD looks on the heart." 8 Then
Jesse called Abinadab, and made him pass before Samuel. He said,
"Neither has the LORD chosen this one." 9 Then Jesse made Shammah
pass by. And he said, "Neither has the LORD chosen this one." 10 Jesse
made seven of his sons pass before Samuel, and Samuel said to Jesse,
"The LORD has not chosen any of these." 11 Samuel said to Jesse, "Are
all your sons here?" And he said, "There remains yet the youngest, but
he is keeping the sheep." And Samuel said to Jesse, "Send and bring
him; for we will not sit down until he comes here." 12 He sent and
brought him in. Now he was ruddy, and had beautiful eyes, and was
handsome. The LORD said, "Rise and anoint him; for this is the one." 13
Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the presence of
his brothers; and the spirit of the LORD came mightily upon David from
that day forward. Samuel then set out and went to Ramah.
David wins a position at Saul's court
14 Now the spirit of the LORD departed from Saul, and an evil spirit
from the LORD tormented him. 15 And Saul's servants said to him, "See
now, an evil spirit from God is tormenting you. 16 Let our lord now
command the servants who attend you to look for someone who is
skillful in playing the lyre; and when the evil spirit from God is upon
you, he will play it, and you will feel better." 17 So Saul said to his
servants, "Provide for me someone who can play well, and bring him to
me." 18 One of the young men answered, "I have seen a son of Jesse
the Bethlehemite who is skillful in playing, a man of valor, a warrior,
prudent in speech, and a man of good presence; and the LORD is with

575

1 SAMUEL 576

him." 19 So Saul sent messengers to Jesse, and said, "Send me your son
David who is with the sheep." 20 Jesse took a donkey loaded with
bread, a skin of wine, and a kid, and sent them by his son David to
Saul. 21 And David came to Saul, and entered his service. Saul loved him
greatly, and he became his armor-bearer. 22 Saul sent to Jesse, saying,
"Let David remain in my service, for he has found favor in my sight." 23
And whenever the evil spirit from God came upon Saul, David took the
lyre and played it with his hand, and Saul would be relieved and feel
better, and the evil spirit would depart from him.
[1 Samuel 17]
David defeats the Philistine champion
1 Now the Philistines gathered their armies for battle; they were
gathered at Socoh, which belongs to Judah, and encamped between
Socoh and Azekah, in Ephes-dammim. 2 Saul and the Israelites
gathered and encamped in the valley of Elah, and formed ranks
against the Philistines. 3 The Philistines stood on the mountain on the
one side, and Israel stood on the mountain on the other side, with a
valley between them. 4 And there came out from the camp of the
Philistines a champion named Goliath, of Gath, whose height was six
cubits and a span. 5 He had a helmet of bronze on his head, and he
was armed with a coat of mail; the weight of the coat was five
thousand shekels of bronze. 6 He had greaves of bronze on his legs
and a javelin of bronze slung between his shoulders. 7 The shaft of his
spear was like a weaver's beam, and his spear's head weighed six
hundred shekels of iron; and his shield-bearer went before him. 8 He
stood and shouted to the ranks of Israel, "Why have you come out to
draw up for battle? Am I not a Philistine, and are you not servants of
Saul? Choose a man for yourselves, and let him come down to me. 9 If
he is able to fight with me and kill me, then we will be your servants;
but if I prevail against him and kill him, then you shall be our servants
and serve us." 10 And the Philistine said, "Today I defy the ranks of
Israel! Give me a man, that we may fight together." 11 When Saul and
all Israel heard these words of the Philistine, they were dismayed and
greatly afraid.

576

1 SAMUEL 577

12 Now David was the son of an Ephrathite of Bethlehem in Judah,
named Jesse, who had eight sons. In the days of Saul the man was
already old and advanced in years. 13 The three eldest sons of Jesse had
followed Saul to the battle; the names of his three sons who went to
the battle were Eliab the firstborn, and next to him Abinadab, and the
third Shammah. 14 David was the youngest; the three eldest followed
Saul, 15 but David went back and forth from Saul to feed his father's
sheep at Bethlehem. 16 For forty days the Philistine came forward and
took his stand, morning and evening.
17 Jesse said to his son David, "Take for your brothers an ephah of this
parched grain and these ten loaves, and carry them quickly to the camp
to your brothers; 18 also take these ten cheeses to the commander of
their thousand. See how your brothers fare, and bring some token
from them."
19 Now Saul, and they, and all the men of Israel, were in the valley of
Elah, fighting with the Philistines. 20 David rose early in the morning,
left the sheep with a keeper, took the provisions, and went as Jesse
had commanded him. He came to the encampment as the army was
going forth to the battle line, shouting the war cry. 21 Israel and the
Philistines drew up for battle, army against army. 22 David left the
things in charge of the keeper of the baggage, ran to the ranks, and
went and greeted his brothers. 23 As he talked with them, the
champion, the Philistine of Gath, Goliath by name, came up out of the
ranks of the Philistines, and spoke the same words as before. And
David heard him.
24 All the Israelites, when they saw the man, fled from him and were
very much afraid. 25 The Israelites said, "Have you seen this man who
has come up? Surely he has come up to defy Israel. The king will
greatly enrich the man who kills him, and will give him his daughter
and make his family free in Israel." 26 David said to the men who stood
by him, "What shall be done for the man who kills this Philistine, and
takes away the reproach from Israel? For who is this uncircumcised
Philistine that he should defy the armies of the living God?" 27 The
people answered him in the same way, "So shall it be done for the man
who kills him."

577

1 SAMUEL 578

28 His eldest brother Eliab heard him talking to the men; and Eliab's
anger was kindled against David. He said, "Why have you come down?
With whom have you left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know
your presumption and the evil of your heart; for you have come down
just to see the battle." 29 David said, "What have I done now? It was
only a question." 30 He turned away from him toward another and
spoke in the same way; and the people answered him again as before.
31 When the words that David spoke were heard, they repeated them
before Saul; and he sent for him. 32 David said to Saul, "Let no one's
heart fail because of him; your servant will go and fight with this
Philistine." 33 Saul said to David, "You are not able to go against this
Philistine to fight with him; for you are just a boy, and he has been a
warrior from his youth." 34 But David said to Saul, "Your servant used
to keep sheep for his father; and whenever a lion or a bear came, and
took a lamb from the flock, 35 I went after it and struck it down,
rescuing the lamb from its mouth; and if it turned against me, I would
catch it by the jaw, strike it down, and kill it. 36 Your servant has killed
both lions and bears; and this uncircumcised Philistine shall be like one
of them, since he has defied the armies of the living God." 37 David
said, "The LORD, who saved me from the paw of the lion and from the
paw of the bear, will save me from the hand of this Philistine." So Saul
said to David, "Go, and may the LORD be with you!"
38 Saul clothed David with his armor; he put a bronze helmet on his
head and clothed him with a coat of mail. 39 David strapped Saul's
sword over the armor, and he tried in vain to walk, for he was not used
to them. Then David said to Saul, "I cannot walk with these; for I am
not used to them." So David removed them. 40 Then he took his staff
in his hand, and chose five smooth stones from the wadi, and put them
in his shepherd's bag, in the pouch; his sling was in his hand, and he
drew near to the Philistine.
41 The Philistine came on and drew near to David, with his shieldbearer in front of him. 42 When the Philistine looked and saw David,
he disdained him, for he was only a youth, ruddy and handsome in
appearance. 43 The Philistine said to David, "Am I a dog, that you come
to me with sticks?" And the Philistine cursed David by his gods. 44 The

578

1 SAMUEL 579

Philistine said to David, "Come to me, and I will give your flesh to the
birds of the air and to the wild animals of the field." 45 But David said
to the Philistine, "You come to me with sword and spear and javelin;
but I come to you in the name of the LORD of hosts, the God of the
armies of Israel, whom you have defied. 46 This very day the LORD will
deliver you into my hand, and I will strike you down and cut off your
head; and I will give the dead bodies of the Philistine army this very
day to the birds of the air and to the wild animals of the earth, so that
all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel, 47 and that all this
assembly may know that the LORD does not save by sword and spear;
for the battle is the LORD's and he will give you into our hand."
48 When the Philistine drew nearer to meet David, David ran quickly
toward the battle line to meet the Philistine. 49 David put his hand in
his bag, took out a stone, slung it, and struck the Philistine on his
forehead; the stone sank into his forehead, and he fell face down on
the ground.
50 So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and a stone,
striking down the Philistine and killing him; there was no sword in
David's hand. 51 Then David ran and stood over the Philistine; he
grasped his sword, drew it out of its sheath, and killed him; then he cut
off his head with it.
When the Philistines saw that their champion was dead, they fled. 52
The troops of Israel and Judah rose up with a shout and pursued the
Philistines as far as Gath and the gates of Ekron, so that the wounded
Philistines fell on the way from Shaaraim as far as Gath and Ekron. 53
The Israelites came back from chasing the Philistines, and they
plundered their camp. 54 David took the head of the Philistine and
brought it to Jerusalem; but he put his armor in his tent.
55 When Saul saw David go out against the Philistine, he said to Abner,
the commander of the army, "Abner, whose son is this young man?"
Abner said, "As your soul lives, O king, I do not know." 56 The king
said, "Inquire whose son the stripling is." 57 On David's return from
killing the Philistine, Abner took him and brought him before Saul,
with the head of the Philistine in his hand. 58 Saul said to him, "Whose

579

1 SAMUEL 580

son are you, young man?" And David answered, "I am the son of your
servant Jesse the Bethlehemite."
[1 Samuel 18]
Saul becomes jealous of David
1 When David had finished speaking to Saul, the soul of Jonathan was
bound to the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul. 2
Saul took him that day and would not let him return to his father's
house. 3 Then Jonathan made a covenant with David, because he loved
him as his own soul. 4 Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that he
was wearing, and gave it to David, and his armor, and even his sword
and his bow and his belt. 5 David went out and was successful
wherever Saul sent him; as a result, Saul set him over the army. And all
the people, even the servants of Saul, approved.
6 As they were coming home, when David returned from killing the
Philistine, the women came out of all the towns of Israel, singing and
dancing, to meet King Saul, with tambourines, with songs of joy, and
with musical instruments. 7 And the women sang to one another as
they made merry,
"Saul has killed his thousands,
and David his ten thousands."
8 Saul was very angry, for this saying displeased him. He said, "They
have ascribed to David ten thousands, and to me they have ascribed
thousands; what more can he have but the kingdom?" 9 So Saul eyed
David from that day on.
10 The next day an evil spirit from God rushed upon Saul, and he raved
within his house, while David was playing the lyre, as he did day by
day. Saul had his spear in his hand; 11 and Saul threw the spear, for he
thought, "I will pin David to the wall." But David eluded him twice.
12 Saul was afraid of David, because the LORD was with him but had
departed from Saul. 13 So Saul removed him from his presence, and
made him a commander of a thousand; and David marched out and
came in, leading the army. 14 David had success in all his undertakings;
for the LORD was with him. 15 When Saul saw that he had great success,

580

1 SAMUEL 581

he stood in awe of him. 16 But all Israel and Judah loved David; for it
was he who marched out and came in leading them.
17 Then Saul said to David, "Here is my elder daughter Merab; I will
give her to you as a wife; only be valiant for me and fight the LORD's
battles." For Saul thought, "I will not raise a hand against him; let the
Philistines deal with him." 18 David said to Saul, "Who am I and who
are my kinsfolk, my father's family in Israel, that I should be son-in-law
to the king?" 19 But at the time when Saul's daughter Merab should
have been given to David, she was given to Adriel the Meholathite as a
wife.
20 Now Saul's daughter Michal loved David. Saul was told, and the
thing pleased him. 21 Saul thought, "Let me give her to him that she
may be a snare for him and that the hand of the Philistines may be
against him." Therefore Saul said to David a second time, "You shall
now be my son-in-law." 22 Saul commanded his servants, "Speak to
David in private and say, 'See, the king is delighted with you, and all
his servants love you; now then, become the king's son-in-law.'" 23 So
Saul's servants reported these words to David in private. And David
said, "Does it seem to you a little thing to become the king's son-inlaw, seeing that I am a poor man and of no repute?" 24 The servants of
Saul told him, "This is what David said." 25 Then Saul said, "Thus shall
you say to David, 'The king desires no marriage present except a
hundred foreskins of the Philistines, that he may be avenged on the
king's enemies.'" Now Saul planned to make David fall by the hand of
the Philistines. 26 When his servants told David these words, David was
well pleased to be the king's son-in-law. Before the time had expired,
27 David rose and went, along with his men, and killed one hundred of
the Philistines; and David brought their foreskins, which were given in
full number to the king, that he might become the king's son-in-law.
Saul gave him his daughter Michal as a wife. 28 But when Saul realized
that the LORD was with David, and that Saul's daughter Michal loved
him, 29 Saul was still more afraid of David. So Saul was David's enemy
from that time forward.

581

1 SAMUEL 582

30 Then the commanders of the Philistines came out to battle; and as
often as they came out, David had more success than all the servants of
Saul, so that his fame became very great.
[1 Samuel 19]
Saul actively seeks David's life
1 Saul spoke with his son Jonathan and with all his servants about
killing David. But Saul's son Jonathan took great delight in David. 2
Jonathan told David, "My father Saul is trying to kill you; therefore be
on guard tomorrow morning; stay in a secret place and hide yourself. 3
I will go out and stand beside my father in the field where you are, and
I will speak to my father about you; if I learn anything I will tell you." 4
Jonathan spoke well of David to his father Saul, saying to him, "The
king should not sin against his servant David, because he has not
sinned against you, and because his deeds have been of good service to
you; 5 for he took his life in his hand when he attacked the Philistine,
and the LORD brought about a great victory for all Israel. You saw it,
and rejoiced; why then will you sin against an innocent person by
killing David without cause?" 6 Saul heeded the voice of Jonathan;
Saul swore, "As the LORD lives, he shall not be put to death." 7 So
Jonathan called David and related all these things to him. Jonathan
then brought David to Saul, and he was in his presence as before.
8 Again there was war, and David went out to fight the Philistines. He
launched a heavy attack on them, so that they fled before him. 9 Then
an evil spirit from the LORD came upon Saul, as he sat in his house with
his spear in his hand, while David was playing music. 10 Saul sought to
pin David to the wall with the spear; but he eluded Saul, so that he
struck the spear into the wall. David fled and escaped that night.
11 Saul sent messengers to David's house to keep watch over him,
planning to kill him in the morning. David's wife Michal told him, "If
you do not save your life tonight, tomorrow you will be killed." 12 So
Michal let David down through the window; he fled away and escaped.
13 Michal took an idol and laid it on the bed; she put a net of goats'
hair on its head, and covered it with the clothes. 14 When Saul sent
messengers to take David, she said, "He is sick." 15 Then Saul sent the

582

1 SAMUEL 583

messengers to see David for themselves. He said, "Bring him up to me
in the bed, that I may kill him." 16 When the messengers came in, the
idol was in the bed, with the covering of goats' hair on its head. 17 Saul
said to Michal, "Why have you deceived me like this, and let my enemy
go, so that he has escaped?" Michal answered Saul, "He said to me,
'Let me go; why should I kill you?'"
18 Now David fled and escaped; he came to Samuel at Ramah, and told
him all that Saul had done to him. He and Samuel went and settled at
Naioth. 19 Saul was told, "David is at Naioth in Ramah." 20 Then Saul
sent messengers to take David. When they saw the company of the
prophets in a frenzy, with Samuel standing in charge of them, the spirit
of God came upon the messengers of Saul, and they also fell into a
prophetic frenzy. 21 When Saul was told, he sent other messengers, and
they also fell into a frenzy. Saul sent messengers again the third time,
and they also fell into a frenzy. 22 Then he himself went to Ramah. He
came to the great well that is in Secu; he asked, "Where are Samuel
and David?" And someone said, "They are at Naioth in Ramah." 23 He
went there, toward Naioth in Ramah; and the spirit of God came upon
him. As he was going, he fell into a prophetic frenzy, until he came to
Naioth in Ramah. 24 He too stripped off his clothes, and he too fell into
a frenzy before Samuel. He lay naked all that day and all that night.
Therefore it is said, "Is Saul also among the prophets?"
[1 Samuel 20]
The covenant of David and Jonathan
1 David fled from Naioth in Ramah. He came before Jonathan and said,
"What have I done? What is my guilt? And what is my sin against your
father that he is trying to take my life?" 2 He said to him, "Far from it!
You shall not die. My father does nothing either great or small without
disclosing it to me; and why should my father hide this from me?
Never!" 3 But David also swore, "Your father knows well that you like
me; and he thinks, 'Do not let Jonathan know this, or he will be
grieved.' But truly, as the LORD lives and as you yourself live, there is
but a step between me and death." 4 Then Jonathan said to David,
"Whatever you say, I will do for you." 5 David said to Jonathan,
"Tomorrow is the new moon, and I should not fail to sit with the king

583

1 SAMUEL 584

at the meal; but let me go, so that I may hide in the field until the third
evening. 6 If your father misses me at all, then say, 'David earnestly
asked leave of me to run to Bethlehem his city; for there is a yearly
sacrifice there for all the family.' 7 If he says, 'Good!' it will be well with
your servant; but if he is angry, then know that evil has been
determined by him. 8 Therefore deal kindly with your servant, for you
have brought your servant into a sacred covenant with you. But if
there is guilt in me, kill me yourself; why should you bring me to your
father?" 9 Jonathan said, "Far be it from you! If I knew that it was
decided by my father that evil should come upon you, would I not tell
you?" 10 Then David said to Jonathan, "Who will tell me if your father
answers you harshly?" 11 Jonathan replied to David, "Come, let us go
out into the field." So they both went out into the field.
12 Jonathan said to David, "By the LORD, the God of Israel! When I have
sounded out my father, about this time tomorrow, or on the third day,
if he is well disposed toward David, shall I not then send and disclose it
to you? 13 But if my father intends to do you harm, the LORD do so to
Jonathan, and more also, if I do not disclose it to you, and send you
away, so that you may go in safety. May the LORD be with you, as he
has been with my father. 14 If I am still alive, show me the faithful love
of the LORD; but if I die, 15 never cut off your faithful love from my
house, even if the LORD were to cut off every one of the enemies of
David from the face of the earth." 16 Thus Jonathan made a covenant
with the house of David, saying, "May the LORD seek out the enemies
of David." 17 Jonathan made David swear again by his love for him; for
he loved him as he loved his own life.
18 Jonathan said to him, "Tomorrow is the new moon; you will be
missed, because your place will be empty. 19 On the day after
tomorrow, you shall go a long way down; go to the place where you
hid yourself earlier, and remain beside the stone there. 20 I will shoot
three arrows to the side of it, as though I shot at a mark. 21 Then I will
send the boy, saying, 'Go, find the arrows.' If I say to the boy, 'Look,
the arrows are on this side of you, collect them,' then you are to come,
for, as the LORD lives, it is safe for you and there is no danger. 22 But if I
say to the young man, 'Look, the arrows are beyond you,' then go; for
the LORD has sent you away. 23 As for the matter about which you and I

584

1 SAMUEL 585

have spoken, the LORD is witness between you and me forever."
24 So David hid himself in the field. When the new moon came, the
king sat at the feast to eat. 25 The king sat upon his seat, as at other
times, upon the seat by the wall. Jonathan stood, while Abner sat by
Saul's side; but David's place was empty.
26 Saul did not say anything that day; for he thought, "Something has
befallen him; he is not clean, surely he is not clean." 27 But on the
second day, the day after the new moon, David's place was empty. And
Saul said to his son Jonathan, "Why has the son of Jesse not come to
the feast, either yesterday or today?" 28 Jonathan answered Saul,
"David earnestly asked leave of me to go to Bethlehem; 29 he said, 'Let
me go; for our family is holding a sacrifice in the city, and my brother
has commanded me to be there. So now, if I have found favor in your
sight, let me get away, and see my brothers.' For this reason he has not
come to the king's table."
30 Then Saul's anger was kindled against Jonathan. He said to him,
"You son of a perverse, rebellious woman! Do I not know that you
have chosen the son of Jesse to your own shame, and to the shame of
your mother's nakedness? 31 For as long as the son of Jesse lives upon
the earth, neither you nor your kingdom shall be established. Now
send and bring him to me, for he shall surely die." 32 Then Jonathan
answered his father Saul, "Why should he be put to death? What has
he done?" 33 But Saul threw his spear at him to strike him; so Jonathan
knew that it was the decision of his father to put David to death. 34
Jonathan rose from the table in fierce anger and ate no food on the
second day of the month, for he was grieved for David, and because his
father had disgraced him.
35 In the morning Jonathan went out into the field to the appointment
with David, and with him was a little boy. 36 He said to the boy, "Run
and find the arrows that I shoot." As the boy ran, he shot an arrow
beyond him. 37 When the boy came to the place where Jonathan's
arrow had fallen, Jonathan called after the boy and said, "Is the arrow
not beyond you?" 38 Jonathan called after the boy, "Hurry, be quick,
do not linger." So Jonathan's boy gathered up the arrows and came to

585

1 SAMUEL 586

his master. 39 But the boy knew nothing; only Jonathan and David
knew the arrangement. 40 Jonathan gave his weapons to the boy and
said to him, "Go and carry them to the city." 41 As soon as the boy had
gone, David rose from beside the stone heap and prostrated himself
with his face to the ground. He bowed three times, and they kissed
each other, and wept with each other; David wept the more. 42 Then
Jonathan said to David, "Go in peace, since both of us have sworn in
the name of the LORD, saying, 'The LORD shall be between me and you,
and between my descendants and your descendants, forever.'" He got
up and left; and Jonathan went into the city.
[1 Samuel 21]
David escapes to Nob
1 David came to Nob to the priest Ahimelech. Ahimelech came
trembling to meet David, and said to him, "Why are you alone, and no
one with you?" 2 David said to the priest Ahimelech, "The king has
charged me with a matter, and said to me, 'No one must know
anything of the matter about which I send you, and with which I have
charged you.' I have made an appointment with the young men for
such and such a place. 3 Now then, what have you at hand? Give me
five loaves of bread, or whatever is here." 4 The priest answered David,
"I have no ordinary bread at hand, only holy bread — provided that
the young men have kept themselves from women." 5 David answered
the priest, "Indeed women have been kept from us as always when I
go on an expedition; the vessels of the young men are holy even when
it is a common journey; how much more today will their vessels be
holy?" 6 So the priest gave him the holy bread; for there was no bread
there except the bread of the Presence, which is removed from before
the LORD, to be replaced by hot bread on the day it is taken away.
7 Now a certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day,
detained before the LORD; his name was Doeg the Edomite, the chief of
Saul's shepherds.
8 David said to Ahimelech, "Is there no spear or sword here with you? I
did not bring my sword or my weapons with me, because the king's
business required haste." 9 The priest said, "The sword of Goliath the

586

1 SAMUEL 587

Philistine, whom you killed in the valley of Elah, is here wrapped in a
cloth behind the ephod; if you will take that, take it, for there is none
here except that one." David said, "There is none like it; give it to me."
10 David rose and fled that day from Saul; he went to King Achish of
Gath. 11 The servants of Achish said to him, "Is this not David the king
of the land? Did they not sing to one another of him in dances,
'Saul has killed his thousands,
and David his ten thousands'?"
12 David took these words to heart and was very much afraid of King
Achish of Gath. 13 So he changed his behavior before them; he
pretended to be mad when in their presence. He scratched marks on
the doors of the gate, and let his spittle run down his beard. 14 Achish
said to his servants, "Look, you see the man is mad; why then have you
brought him to me? 15 Do I lack madmen, that you have brought this
fellow to play the madman in my presence? Shall this fellow come into
my house?"
[1 Samuel 22]
David at Adullam; massacre of the priests of Nob
1 David left there and escaped to the cave of Adullam; when his
brothers and all his father's house heard of it, they went down there to
him. 2 Everyone who was in distress, and everyone who was in debt,
and everyone who was discontented gathered to him; and he became
captain over them. Those who were with him numbered about four
hundred.
3 David went from there to Mizpeh of Moab. He said to the king of
Moab, "Please let my father and mother come to you, until I know
what God will do for me." 4 He left them with the king of Moab, and
they stayed with him all the time that David was in the stronghold. 5
Then the prophet Gad said to David, "Do not remain in the stronghold;
leave, and go into the land of Judah." So David left, and went into the
forest of Hereth.

587

1 SAMUEL 588

6 Saul heard that David and those who were with him had been
located. Saul was sitting at Gibeah, under the tamarisk tree on the
height, with his spear in his hand, and all his servants were standing
around him. 7 Saul said to his servants who stood around him, "Hear
now, you Benjaminites; will the son of Jesse give every one of you
fields and vineyards, will he make you all commanders of thousands
and commanders of hundreds? 8 Is that why all of you have conspired
against me? No one discloses to me when my son makes a league with
the son of Jesse, none of you is sorry for me or discloses to me that my
son has stirred up my servant against me, to lie in wait, as he is doing
today." 9 Doeg the Edomite, who was in charge of Saul's servants,
answered, "I saw the son of Jesse coming to Nob, to Ahimelech son of
Ahitub; 10 he inquired of the LORD for him, gave him provisions, and
gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine."
11 The king sent for the priest Ahimelech son of Ahitub and for all his
father's house, the priests who were at Nob; and all of them came to
the king. 12 Saul said, "Listen now, son of Ahitub." He answered, "Here
I am, my lord." 13 Saul said to him, "Why have you conspired against
me, you and the son of Jesse, by giving him bread and a sword, and by
inquiring of God for him, so that he has risen against me, to lie in wait,
as he is doing today?"
14 Then Ahimelech answered the king, "Who among all your servants is
so faithful as David? He is the king's son-in-law, and is quick to do your
bidding, and is honored in your house. 15 Is today the first time that I
have inquired of God for him? By no means! Do not let the king
impute anything to his servant or to any member of my father's house;
for your servant has known nothing of all this, much or little." 16 The
king said, "You shall surely die, Ahimelech, you and all your father's
house." 17 The king said to the guard who stood around him, "Turn
and kill the priests of the LORD, because their hand also is with David;
they knew that he fled, and did not disclose it to me." But the servants
of the king would not raise their hand to attack the priests of the LORD.
18 Then the king said to Doeg, "You, Doeg, turn and attack the
priests." Doeg the Edomite turned and attacked the priests; on that
day he killed eighty-five who wore the linen ephod. 19 Nob, the city of

588

1 SAMUEL 589

the priests, he put to the sword; men and women, children and infants,
oxen, donkeys, and sheep, he put to the sword.
20 But one of the sons of Ahimelech son of Ahitub, named Abiathar,
escaped and fled after David. 21 Abiathar told David that Saul had
killed the priests of the LORD. 22 David said to Abiathar, "I knew on
that day, when Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would surely tell
Saul. I am responsible for the lives of all your father's house. 23 Stay
with me, and do not be afraid; for the one who seeks my life seeks
your life; you will be safe with me."
[1 Samuel 23]
David's relief of Keilah
1 Now they told David, "The Philistines are fighting against Keilah, and
are robbing the threshing floors." 2 David inquired of the LORD, "Shall I
go and attack these Philistines?" The LORD said to David, "Go and
attack the Philistines and save Keilah." 3 But David's men said to him,
"Look, we are afraid here in Judah; how much more then if we go to
Keilah against the armies of the Philistines?" 4 Then David inquired of
the LORD again. The LORD answered him, "Yes, go down to Keilah; for I
will give the Philistines into your hand." 5 So David and his men went
to Keilah, fought with the Philistines, brought away their livestock, and
dealt them a heavy defeat. Thus David rescued the inhabitants of
Keilah.
6 When Abiathar son of Ahimelech fled to David at Keilah, he came
down with an ephod in his hand. 7 Now it was told Saul that David had
come to Keilah. And Saul said, "God has given him into my hand; for
he has shut himself in by entering a town that has gates and bars." 8
Saul summoned all the people to war, to go down to Keilah, to besiege
David and his men. 9 When David learned that Saul was plotting evil
against him, he said to the priest Abiathar, "Bring the ephod here." 10
David said, "O LORD, the God of Israel, your servant has heard that Saul
seeks to come to Keilah, to destroy the city on my account. 11 And now,
will Saul come down as your servant has heard? O LORD, the God of
Israel, I beseech you, tell your servant." The LORD said, "He will come
down." 12 Then David said, "Will the men of Keilah surrender me and

589

1 SAMUEL 590

my men into the hand of Saul?" The LORD said, "They will surrender
you." 13 Then David and his men, who were about six hundred, set out
and left Keilah; they wandered wherever they could go. When Saul
was told that David had escaped from Keilah, he gave up the
expedition. 14 David remained in the strongholds in the wilderness, in
the hill country of the Wilderness of Ziph. Saul sought him every day,
but the LORD did not give him into his hand.
15 David was in the Wilderness of Ziph at Horesh when he learned that
Saul had come out to seek his life. 16 Saul's son Jonathan set out and
came to David at Horesh; there he strengthened his hand through the
LORD. 17 He said to him, "Do not be afraid; for the hand of my father
Saul shall not find you; you shall be king over Israel, and I shall be
second to you; my father Saul also knows that this is so." 18 Then the
two of them made a covenant before the LORD; David remained at
Horesh, and Jonathan went home.
19 Then some Ziphites went up to Saul at Gibeah and said, "David is
hiding among us in the strongholds of Horesh, on the hill of Hachilah,
which is south of Jeshimon. 20 Now, O king, whenever you wish to
come down, do so; and our part will be to surrender him into the
king's hand." 21 Saul said, "May you be blessed by the LORD for
showing me compassion! 22 Go and make sure once more; find out
exactly where he is, and who has seen him there; for I am told that he
is very cunning. 23 Look around and learn all the hiding places where
he lurks, and come back to me with sure information. Then I will go
with you; and if he is in the land, I will search him out among all the
thousands of Judah." 24 So they set out and went to Ziph ahead of
Saul.
David and his men were in the wilderness of Maon, in the Arabah to
the south of Jeshimon. 25 Saul and his men went to search for him.
When David was told, he went down to the rock and stayed in the
wilderness of Maon. When Saul heard that, he pursued David into the
wilderness of Maon. 26 Saul went on one side of the mountain, and
David and his men on the other side of the mountain. David was
hurrying to get away from Saul, while Saul and his men were closing in
on David and his men to capture them. 27 Then a messenger came to

590

1 SAMUEL 591

Saul, saying, "Hurry and come; for the Philistines have made a raid on
the land." 28 So Saul stopped pursuing David, and went against the
Philistines; therefore that place was called the Rock of Escape. 29 David
then went up from there, and lived in the strongholds of En-gedi.
[1 Samuel 24]
David spares Saul's life
1 When Saul returned from following the Philistines, he was told,
"David is in the wilderness of En-gedi." 2 Then Saul took three
thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and went to look for David and
his men in the direction of the Rocks of the Wild Goats. 3 He came to
the sheepfolds beside the road, where there was a cave; and Saul went
in to relieve himself. Now David and his men were sitting in the
innermost parts of the cave. 4 The men of David said to him, "Here is
the day of which the LORD said to you, 'I will give your enemy into your
hand, and you shall do to him as it seems good to you.'" Then David
went and stealthily cut off a corner of Saul's cloak. 5 Afterward David
was stricken to the heart because he had cut off a corner of Saul's
cloak. 6 He said to his men, "The LORD forbid that I should do this thing
to my lord, the LORD's anointed, to raise my hand against him; for he is
the LORD's anointed." 7 So David scolded his men severely and did not
permit them to attack Saul. Then Saul got up and left the cave, and
went on his way.
8 Afterwards David also rose up and went out of the cave and called
after Saul, "My lord the king!" When Saul looked behind him, David
bowed with his face to the ground, and did obeisance. 9 David said to
Saul, "Why do you listen to the words of those who say, 'David seeks to
do you harm'? 10 This very day your eyes have seen how the LORD gave
you into my hand in the cave; and some urged me to kill you, but I
spared you. I said, 'I will not raise my hand against my lord; for he is
the LORD's anointed.' 11 See, my father, see the corner of your cloak in
my hand; for by the fact that I cut off the corner of your cloak, and did
not kill you, you may know for certain that there is no wrong or
treason in my hands. I have not sinned against you, though you are
hunting me to take my life. 12 May the LORD judge between me and
you! May the LORD avenge me on you; but my hand shall not be

591

1 SAMUEL 592

against you. 13 As the ancient proverb says, 'Out of the wicked comes
forth wickedness'; but my hand shall not be against you. 14 Against
whom has the king of Israel come out? Whom do you pursue? A dead
dog? A single flea? 15 May the LORD therefore be judge, and give
sentence between me and you. May he see to it, and plead my cause,
and vindicate me against you."
16 When David had finished speaking these words to Saul, Saul said, "Is
this your voice, my son David?" Saul lifted up his voice and wept. 17 He
said to David, "You are more righteous than I; for you have repaid me
good, whereas I have repaid you evil. 18 Today you have explained
how you have dealt well with me, in that you did not kill me when the
LORD put me into your hands. 19 For who has ever found an enemy, and
sent the enemy safely away? So may the LORD reward you with good
for what you have done to me this day. 20 Now I know that you shall
surely be king, and that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in
your hand. 21 Swear to me therefore by the LORD that you will not cut
off my descendants after me, and that you will not wipe out my name
from my father's house." 22 So David swore this to Saul. Then Saul
went home; but David and his men went up to the stronghold.
[1 Samuel 25]
The death of Samuel
1 Now Samuel died; and all Israel assembled and mourned for him.
They buried him at his home in Ramah.
Nabal and Abigail
Then David got up and went down to the wilderness of Paran.
2 There was a man in Maon, whose property was in Carmel. The man
was very rich; he had three thousand sheep and a thousand goats. He
was shearing his sheep in Carmel. 3 Now the name of the man was
Nabal, and the name of his wife Abigail. The woman was clever and
beautiful, but the man was surly and mean; he was a Calebite. 4 David
heard in the wilderness that Nabal was shearing his sheep. 5 So David
sent ten young men; and David said to the young men, "Go up to

592

1 SAMUEL 593

Carmel, and go to Nabal, and greet him in my name. 6 Thus you shall
salute him: 'Peace be to you, and peace be to your house, and peace be
to all that you have. 7 I hear that you have shearers; now your
shepherds have been with us, and we did them no harm, and they
missed nothing, all the time they were in Carmel. 8 Ask your young
men, and they will tell you. Therefore let my young men find favor in
your sight; for we have come on a feast day. Please give whatever you
have at hand to your servants and to your son David.'"
9 When David's young men came, they said all this to Nabal in the
name of David; and then they waited. 10 But Nabal answered David's
servants, "Who is David? Who is the son of Jesse? There are many
servants today who are breaking away from their masters. 11 Shall I
take my bread and my water and the meat that I have butchered for
my shearers, and give it to men who come from I do not know where?"
12 So David's young men turned away, and came back and told him all
this. 13 David said to his men, "Every man strap on his sword!" And
every one of them strapped on his sword; David also strapped on his
sword; and about four hundred men went up after David, while two
hundred remained with the baggage.
14 But one of the young men told Abigail, Nabal's wife, "David sent
messengers out of the wilderness to salute our master; and he shouted
insults at them. 15 Yet the men were very good to us, and we suffered
no harm, and we never missed anything when we were in the fields, as
long as we were with them; 16 they were a wall to us both by night
and by day, all the while we were with them keeping the sheep. 17
Now therefore know this and consider what you should do; for evil has
been decided against our master and against all his house; he is so illnatured that no one can speak to him."
18 Then Abigail hurried and took two hundred loaves, two skins of
wine, five sheep ready dressed, five measures of parched grain, one
hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred cakes of figs. She loaded
them on donkeys 19 and said to her young men, "Go on ahead of me; I
am coming after you." But she did not tell her husband Nabal. 20 As
she rode on the donkey and came down under cover of the mountain,
David and his men came down toward her; and she met them. 21 Now

593

1 SAMUEL 594

David had said, "Surely it was in vain that I protected all that this
fellow has in the wilderness, so that nothing was missed of all that
belonged to him; but he has returned me evil for good. 22 God do so
to David and more also, if by morning I leave so much as one male of
all who belong to him."
23 When Abigail saw David, she hurried and alighted from the donkey,
and fell before David on her face, bowing to the ground. 24 She fell at
his feet and said, "Upon me alone, my lord, be the guilt; please let your
servant speak in your ears, and hear the words of your servant. 25 My
lord, do not take seriously this ill-natured fellow, Nabal; for as his name
is, so is he; Nabal is his name, and folly is with him; but I, your servant,
did not see the young men of my lord, whom you sent.
26 "Now then, my lord, as the LORD lives, and as you yourself live, since
the LORD has restrained you from bloodguilt and from taking
vengeance with your own hand, now let your enemies and those who
seek to do evil to my lord be like Nabal. 27 And now let this present
that your servant has brought to my lord be given to the young men
who follow my lord. 28 Please forgive the trespass of your servant; for
the LORD will certainly make my lord a sure house, because my lord is
fighting the battles of the LORD; and evil shall not be found in you so
long as you live. 29 If anyone should rise up to pursue you and to seek
your life, the life of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of the living
under the care of the LORD your God; but the lives of your enemies he
shall sling out as from the hollow of a sling. 30 When the LORD has
done to my lord according to all the good that he has spoken
concerning you, and has appointed you prince over Israel, 31 my lord
shall have no cause of grief, or pangs of conscience, for having shed
blood without cause or for having saved himself. And when the LORD
has dealt well with my lord, then remember your servant."
32 David said to Abigail, "Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, who
sent you to meet me today! 33 Blessed be your good sense, and blessed
be you, who have kept me today from bloodguilt and from avenging
myself by my own hand! 34 For as surely as the LORD the God of Israel
lives, who has restrained me from hurting you, unless you had hurried
and come to meet me, truly by morning there would not have been

594

1 SAMUEL 595

left to Nabal so much as one male." 35 Then David received from her
hand what she had brought him; he said to her, "Go up to your house
in peace; see, I have heeded your voice, and I have granted your
petition."
36 Abigail came to Nabal; he was holding a feast in his house, like the
feast of a king. Nabal's heart was merry within him, for he was very
drunk; so she told him nothing at all until the morning light. 37 In the
morning, when the wine had gone out of Nabal, his wife told him
these things, and his heart died within him; he became like a stone. 38
About ten days later the LORD struck Nabal, and he died.
39 When David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, "Blessed be the
LORD who has judged the case of Nabal's insult to me, and has kept
back his servant from evil; the LORD has returned the evildoing of Nabal
upon his own head." Then David sent and wooed Abigail, to make her
his wife. 40 When David's servants came to Abigail at Carmel, they said
to her, "David has sent us to you to take you to him as his wife." 41 She
rose and bowed down, with her face to the ground, and said, "Your
servant is a slave to wash the feet of the servants of my lord." 42
Abigail got up hurriedly and rode away on a donkey; her five maids
attended her. She went after the messengers of David and became his
wife.
43 David also married Ahinoam of Jezreel; both of them became his
wives. 44 Saul had given his daughter Michal, David's wife, to Palti son
of Laish, who was from Gallim.
[1 Samuel 26]
David spares Saul's life again
1 Then the Ziphites came to Saul at Gibeah, saying, "David is in hiding
on the hill of Hachilah, which is opposite Jeshimon." 2 So Saul rose and
went down to the Wilderness of Ziph, with three thousand chosen men
of Israel, to seek David in the Wilderness of Ziph. 3 Saul encamped on
the hill of Hachilah, which is opposite Jeshimon beside the road. But
David remained in the wilderness. When he learned that Saul had
come after him into the wilderness, 4 David sent out spies, and learned

595

1 SAMUEL 596

that Saul had indeed arrived. 5 Then David set out and came to the
place where Saul had encamped; and David saw the place where Saul
lay, with Abner son of Ner, the commander of his army. Saul was lying
within the encampment, while the army was encamped around him.
6 Then David said to Ahimelech the Hittite, and to Joab's brother
Abishai son of Zeruiah, "Who will go down with me into the camp to
Saul?" Abishai said, "I will go down with you." 7 So David and Abishai
went to the army by night; there Saul lay sleeping within the
encampment, with his spear stuck in the ground at his head; and Abner
and the army lay around him. 8 Abishai said to David, "God has given
your enemy into your hand today; now therefore let me pin him to the
ground with one stroke of the spear; I will not strike him twice." 9 But
David said to Abishai, "Do not destroy him; for who can raise his hand
against the LORD's anointed, and be guiltless?" 10 David said, "As the
LORD lives, the LORD will strike him down; or his day will come to die; or
he will go down into battle and perish. 11 The LORD forbid that I should
raise my hand against the LORD's anointed; but now take the spear that
is at his head, and the water jar, and let us go." 12 So David took the
spear that was at Saul's head and the water jar, and they went away.
No one saw it, or knew it, nor did anyone awake; for they were all
asleep, because a deep sleep from the LORD had fallen upon them.
13 Then David went over to the other side, and stood on top of a hill
far away, with a great distance between them. 14 David called to the
army and to Abner son of Ner, saying, "Abner! Will you not answer?"
Then Abner replied, "Who are you that calls to the king?" 15 David said
to Abner, "Are you not a man? Who is like you in Israel? Why then
have you not kept watch over your lord the king? For one of the
people came in to destroy your lord the king. 16 This thing that you
have done is not good. As the LORD lives, you deserve to die, because
you have not kept watch over your lord, the LORD's anointed. See now,
where is the king's spear, or the water jar that was at his head?"
17 Saul recognized David's voice, and said, "Is this your voice, my son
David?" David said, "It is my voice, my lord, O king." 18 And he added,
"Why does my lord pursue his servant? For what have I done? What
guilt is on my hands? 19 Now therefore let my lord the king hear the

596

1 SAMUEL 597

words of his servant. If it is the LORD who has stirred you up against me,
may he accept an offering; but if it is mortals, may they be cursed
before the LORD, for they have driven me out today from my share in
the heritage of the LORD, saying, 'Go, serve other gods.' 20 Now
therefore, do not let my blood fall to the ground, away from the
presence of the LORD; for the king of Israel has come out to seek a
single flea, like one who hunts a partridge in the mountains."
21 Then Saul said, "I have done wrong; come back, my son David, for I
will never harm you again, because my life was precious in your sight
today; I have been a fool, and have made a great mistake." 22 David
replied, "Here is the spear, O king! Let one of the young men come
over and get it. 23 The LORD rewards everyone for his righteousness and
his faithfulness; for the LORD gave you into my hand today, but I would
not raise my hand against the LORD's anointed. 24 As your life was
precious today in my sight, so may my life be precious in the sight of
the LORD, and may he rescue me from all tribulation." 25 Then Saul said
to David, "Blessed be you, my son David! You will do many things and
will succeed in them." So David went his way, and Saul returned to his
place.
[1 Samuel 27]
David becomes a vassal of the Philistines
1 David said in his heart, "I shall now perish one day by the hand of
Saul; there is nothing better for me than to escape to the land of the
Philistines; then Saul will despair of seeking me any longer within the
borders of Israel, and I shall escape out of his hand." 2 So David set out
and went over, he and the six hundred men who were with him, to
King Achish son of Maoch of Gath. 3 David stayed with Achish at Gath,
he and his troops, every man with his household, and David with his
two wives, Ahinoam of Jezreel, and Abigail of Carmel, Nabal's widow.
4 When Saul was told that David had fled to Gath, he no longer sought
for him.
5 Then David said to Achish, "If I have found favor in your sight, let a
place be given me in one of the country towns, so that I may live there;
for why should your servant live in the royal city with you?" 6 So that

597

1 SAMUEL 598

day Achish gave him Ziklag; therefore Ziklag has belonged to the kings
of Judah to this day. 7 The length of time that David lived in the
country of the Philistines was one year and four months.
8 Now David and his men went up and made raids on the Geshurites,
the Girzites, and the Amalekites; for these were the landed settlements
from Telam on the way to Shur and on to the land of Egypt. 9 David
struck the land, leaving neither man nor woman alive, but took away
the sheep, the oxen, the donkeys, the camels, and the clothing, and
came back to Achish. 10 When Achish asked, "Against whom have you
made a raid today?" David would say, "Against the Negeb of Judah,"
or "Against the Negeb of the Jerahmeelites," or, "Against the Negeb
of the Kenites." 11 David left neither man nor woman alive to be
brought back to Gath, thinking, "They might tell about us, and say,
'David has done so and so.'" Such was his practice all the time he lived
in the country of the Philistines. 12 Achish trusted David, thinking, "He
has made himself utterly abhorrent to his people Israel; therefore he
shall always be my servant."
[1 Samuel 28]
1 In those days the Philistines gathered their forces for war, to fight
against Israel. Achish said to David, "You know, of course, that you and
your men are to go out with me in the army." 2 David said to Achish,
"Very well, then you shall know what your servant can do." Achish said
to David, "Very well, I will make you my bodyguard for life."
Saul consults a spirit
3 Now Samuel had died, and all Israel had mourned for him and buried
him in Ramah, his own city. Saul had expelled the mediums and the
wizards from the land. 4 The Philistines assembled, and came and
encamped at Shunem. Saul gathered all Israel, and they encamped at
Gilboa. 5 When Saul saw the army of the Philistines, he was afraid, and
his heart trembled greatly. 6 When Saul inquired of the LORD, the LORD
did not answer him, not by dreams, or by Urim, or by prophets. 7 Then
Saul said to his servants, "Seek out for me a woman who is a medium,

598

1 SAMUEL 599

so that I may go to her and inquire of her." His servants said to him,
"There is a medium at Endor."
8 So Saul disguised himself and put on other clothes and went there,
he and two men with him. They came to the woman by night. And he
said, "Consult a spirit for me, and bring up for me the one whom I
name to you." 9 The woman said to him, "Surely you know what Saul
has done, how he has cut off the mediums and the wizards from the
land. Why then are you laying a snare for my life to bring about my
death?" 10 But Saul swore to her by the LORD, "As the LORD lives, no
punishment shall come upon you for this thing." 11 Then the woman
said, "Whom shall I bring up for you?" He answered, "Bring up Samuel
for me." 12 When the woman saw Samuel, she cried out with a loud
voice; and the woman said to Saul, "Why have you deceived me? You
are Saul!" 13 The king said to her, "Have no fear; what do you see?"
The woman said to Saul, "I see a divine being coming up out of the
ground." 14 He said to her, "What is his appearance?" She said, "An
old man is coming up; he is wrapped in a robe." So Saul knew that it
was Samuel, and he bowed with his face to the ground, and did
obeisance.
15 Then Samuel said to Saul, "Why have you disturbed me by bringing
me up?" Saul answered, "I am in great distress, for the Philistines are
warring against me, and God has turned away from me and answers
me no more, either by prophets or by dreams; so I have summoned you
to tell me what I should do." 16 Samuel said, "Why then do you ask me,
since the LORD has turned from you and become your enemy? 17 The
LORD has done to you just as he spoke by me; for the LORD has torn the
kingdom out of your hand, and given it to your neighbor, David. 18
Because you did not obey the voice of the LORD, and did not carry out
his fierce wrath against Amalek, therefore the LORD has done this thing
to you today. 19 Moreover the LORD will give Israel along with you into
the hands of the Philistines; and tomorrow you and your sons shall be
with me; the LORD will also give the army of Israel into the hands of the
Philistines."

599

1 SAMUEL 600

20 Immediately Saul fell full length on the ground, filled with fear
because of the words of Samuel; and there was no strength in him, for
he had eaten nothing all day and all night. 21 The woman came to
Saul, and when she saw that he was terrified, she said to him, "Your
servant has listened to you; I have taken my life in my hand, and have
listened to what you have said to me. 22 Now therefore, you also listen
to your servant; let me set a morsel of bread before you. Eat, that you
may have strength when you go on your way." 23 He refused, and said,
"I will not eat." But his servants, together with the woman, urged him;
and he listened to their words. So he got up from the ground and sat
on the bed. 24 Now the woman had a fatted calf in the house. She
quickly slaughtered it, and she took flour, kneaded it, and baked
unleavened cakes. 25 She put them before Saul and his servants, and
they ate. Then they rose and went away that night.
[1 Samuel 29]
The Philistines reject David
1 Now the Philistines gathered all their forces at Aphek, while the
Israelites were encamped by the fountain that is in Jezreel. 2 As the
lords of the Philistines were passing on by hundreds and by thousands,
and David and his men were passing on in the rear with Achish, 3 the
commanders of the Philistines said, "What are these Hebrews doing
here?" Achish said to the commanders of the Philistines, "Is this not
David, the servant of King Saul of Israel, who has been with me now
for days and years? Since he deserted to me I have found no fault in
him to this day." 4 But the commanders of the Philistines were angry
with him; and the commanders of the Philistines said to him, "Send the
man back, so that he may return to the place that you have assigned to
him; he shall not go down with us to battle, or else he may become an
adversary to us in the battle. For how could this fellow reconcile
himself to his lord? Would it not be with the heads of the men here? 5
Is this not David, of whom they sing to one another in dances,
'Saul has killed his thousands,
and David his ten thousands'?"

600

1 SAMUEL 601

6 Then Achish called David and said to him, "As the LORD lives, you
have been honest, and to me it seems right that you should march out
and in with me in the campaign; for I have found nothing wrong in
you from the day of your coming to me until today. Nevertheless the
lords do not approve of you. 7 So go back now; and go peaceably; do
nothing to displease the lords of the Philistines." 8 David said to
Achish, "But what have I done? What have you found in your servant
from the day I entered your service until now, that I should not go and
fight against the enemies of my lord the king?" 9 Achish replied to
David, "I know that you are as blameless in my sight as an angel of
God; nevertheless, the commanders of the Philistines have said, 'He
shall not go up with us to the battle.' 10 Now then rise early in the
morning, you and the servants of your lord who came with you, and go
to the place that I appointed for you. As for the evil report, do not take
it to heart, for you have done well before me. Start early in the
morning, and leave as soon as you have light." 11 So David set out with
his men early in the morning, to return to the land of the Philistines.
But the Philistines went up to Jezreel.
[1 Samuel 30]
The burning of Ziklag and David's pursuit of the Amalekites
1 Now when David and his men came to Ziklag on the third day, the
Amalekites had made a raid on the Negeb and on Ziklag. They had
attacked Ziklag, burned it down, 2 and taken captive the women and
all who were in it, both small and great; they killed none of them, but
carried them off, and went their way. 3 When David and his men came
to the city, they found it burned down, and their wives and sons and
daughters taken captive. 4 Then David and the people who were with
him raised their voices and wept, until they had no more strength to
weep. 5 David's two wives also had been taken captive, Ahinoam of
Jezreel, and Abigail the widow of Nabal of Carmel. 6 David was in
great danger; for the people spoke of stoning him, because all the
people were bitter in spirit for their sons and daughters. But David
strengthened himself in the LORD his God.

601

1 SAMUEL 602

7 David said to the priest Abiathar son of Ahimelech, "Bring me the
ephod." So Abiathar brought the ephod to David. 8 David inquired of
the LORD, "Shall I pursue this band? Shall I overtake them?" He
answered him, "Pursue; for you shall surely overtake and shall surely
rescue." 9 So David set out, he and the six hundred men who were
with him. They came to the Wadi Besor, where those stayed who were
left behind. 10 But David went on with the pursuit, he and four
hundred men; two hundred stayed behind, too exhausted to cross the
Wadi Besor.
11 In the open country they found an Egyptian, and brought him to
David. They gave him bread and he ate; they gave him water to drink;
12 they also gave him a piece of fig cake and two clusters of raisins.
When he had eaten, his spirit revived; for he had not eaten bread or
drunk water for three days and three nights. 13 Then David said to him,
"To whom do you belong? Where are you from?" He said, "I am a
young man of Egypt, servant to an Amalekite. My master left me
behind because I fell sick three days ago. 14 We had made a raid on the
Negeb of the Cherethites and on that which belongs to Judah and on
the Negeb of Caleb; and we burned Ziklag down." 15 David said to
him, "Will you take me down to this raiding party?" He said, "Swear to
me by God that you will not kill me, or hand me over to my master,
and I will take you down to them."
16 When he had taken him down, they were spread out all over the
ground, eating and drinking and dancing, because of the great
amount of spoil they had taken from the land of the Philistines and
from the land of Judah. 17 David attacked them from twilight until the
evening of the next day. Not one of them escaped, except four
hundred young men, who mounted camels and fled. 18 David
recovered all that the Amalekites had taken; and David rescued his two
wives. 19 Nothing was missing, whether small or great, sons or
daughters, spoil or anything that had been taken; David brought back
everything. 20 David also captured all the flocks and herds, which were
driven ahead of the other cattle; people said, "This is David's spoil."

602

1 SAMUEL 603

21 Then David came to the two hundred men who had been too
exhausted to follow David, and who had been left at the Wadi Besor.
They went out to meet David and to meet the people who were with
him. When David drew near to the people he saluted them. 22 Then all
the corrupt and worthless fellows among the men who had gone with
David said, "Because they did not go with us, we will not give them
any of the spoil that we have recovered, except that each man may
take his wife and children, and leave." 23 But David said, "You shall
not do so, my brothers, with what the LORD has given us; he has
preserved us and handed over to us the raiding party that attacked us.
24 Who would listen to you in this matter? For the share of the one
who goes down into the battle shall be the same as the share of the
one who stays by the baggage; they shall share alike." 25 From that
day forward he made it a statute and an ordinance for Israel; it
continues to the present day.
26 When David came to Ziklag, he sent part of the spoil to his friends,
the elders of Judah, saying, "Here is a present for you from the spoil of
the enemies of the LORD"; 27 it was for those in Bethel, in Ramoth of
the Negeb, in Jattir, 28 in Aroer, in Siphmoth, in Eshtemoa, 29 in Racal,
in the towns of the Jerahmeelites, in the towns of the Kenites, 30 in
Hormah, in Bor-ashan, in Athach, 31 in Hebron, all the places where
David and his men had roamed.
[1 Samuel 31]
Saul's death
1 Now the Philistines fought against Israel; and the men of Israel fled
before the Philistines, and many fell on Mount Gilboa. 2 The Philistines
overtook Saul and his sons; and the Philistines killed Jonathan and
Abinadab and Malchishua, the sons of Saul. 3 The battle pressed hard
upon Saul; the archers found him, and he was badly wounded by them.
4 Then Saul said to his armor-bearer, "Draw your sword and thrust me
through with it, so that these uncircumcised may not come and thrust
me through, and make sport of me." But his armor-bearer was
unwilling; for he was terrified. So Saul took his own sword and fell
upon it. 5 When his armor-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he also fell
upon his sword and died with him. 6 So Saul and his three sons and his

603

1 SAMUEL 604

armor-bearer and all his men died together on the same day. 7 When
the men of Israel who were on the other side of the valley and those
beyond the Jordan saw that the men of Israel had fled and that Saul
and his sons were dead, they forsook their towns and fled; and the
Philistines came and occupied them.
8 The next day, when the Philistines came to strip the dead, they found
Saul and his three sons fallen on Mount Gilboa. 9 They cut off his head,
stripped off his armor, and sent messengers throughout the land of the
Philistines to carry the good news to the houses of their idols and to
the people. 10 They put his armor in the temple of Astarte; and they
fastened his body to the wall of Beth-shan. 11 But when the inhabitants
of Jabesh-gilead heard what the Philistines had done to Saul, 12 all the
valiant men set out, traveled all night long, and took the body of Saul
and the bodies of his sons from the wall of Beth-shan. They came to
Jabesh and burned them there. 13 Then they took their bones and
buried them under the tamarisk tree in Jabesh, and fasted seven days.

604

2 SAMUEL 605

2 SAMUEL
Introduction
Second Samuel and First Samuel were originally a single work, so that
the information about date and composition in the Introduction to 1
Samuel pertains to 2 Samuel as well. Second Samuel continues the
focus on David that began in 1 Sam 16. But David's situation changes
radically from what it was in 1 Samuel. He rises quickly to fill the power
vacuum left by Saul's death (1.1-5.5), becoming king first over Judah
and then over Israel. The pro-Davidic, apologetic character of 1 Samuel
continues in these chapters as those who stand in David's way perish,
though never by David's hand or order. David then conquers
Jerusalem, establishing it as his capital, and moves the ark there (chs 56). He proposes building a temple and is rewarded with the promise of
an enduring dynasty (ch 7). Further wars, however, delay the temple
building until the reign of Solomon (7.13; chs 8 and 10; 1 Kings 5.3).
HT

TH

The annihilation of Saul's line secures David's hold on the throne. (The
story in 21.1-14 may once have preceded ch 9.) Only Mephibosheth,
Jonathan's crippled son, remains alive, and David keeps a watchful eye
on him by bringing him to the royal court (ch 9). The real dangers to
David's kingship, however, spring from his own weaknesses and his
own family. Chapters 11-12 narrate David's adultery with Bathsheba and
the resulting condemnation by Nathan. Chapters 13-19 present
Absalom's revolt as punishment for David's sin. Another revolt, led by
Sheba, follows in ch 20. The book then ends with a miscellaneous
collection of stories and poems in chs 21-24.
The major critical issues in 2 Samuel revolve around chs 9-20. These
chapters (or in some views ch 13-20) and 1 Kings 1-2 have been dubbed
the "Court History" or "Succession Narrative" (after its perceived
intention of dealing with the question of who David's successor would
be). Although many scholars have viewed it as almost
605

2 SAMUEL 606

contemporaneous with the events it narrates, the dimensions and early
date of this material have been questioned recently. It is impossible to
extract these chapters cleanly from the surrounding narrative and to
see them as a separate source; there are, for example, ties between chs
9-20 and chs 2-4, such as the description of Mephibosheth's injury in 4.4
and 9.3 and the imports of the "sons of Zeruiah," Joab and his
brothers.
Scholars also disagree about the perspective on David in these
chapters. Some point to his adultery and his inability to control his
children and argue that the Court History paints both David and the
monarchy in a very negative light. Others contend that the pro-Davidic,
apologetic flavor of 1 Samuel continues in that Joab and the "sons of
Zeruiah" are blamed for the murders of David's enemies — Abner
(3.26-30), Absalom (18.1-15), Amasa (20.4-10) — while David is too
tender for such deeds (3.39; 16.10; 19.22) and is deeply grieved by these
deaths (3.31-37; 18.22-19.8). Even when he commits adultery, it has been
argued, David's repentance is exemplary, and is immediately accepted
(12.13). Perhaps it is best to that 2 Samuel in its current form depicts
David as a complex, ambiguous character.

[2 Samuel 1]
David learns of the death of Saul and Jonathan
1 After the death of Saul, when David had returned from defeating the
Amalekites, David remained two days in Ziklag. 2 On the third day, a
man came from Saul's camp, with his clothes torn and dirt on his head.
When he came to David, he fell to the ground and did obeisance. 3
David said to him, "Where have you come from?" He said to him, "I
have escaped from the camp of Israel." 4 David said to him, "How did
things go? Tell me!" He answered, "The army fled from the battle, but
also many of the army fell and died; and Saul and his son Jonathan also
died." 5 Then David asked the young man who was reporting to him,
"How do you know that Saul and his son Jonathan died?" 6 The young
man reporting to him said, "I happened to be on Mount Gilboa; and
there was Saul leaning on his spear, while the chariots and the

606

2 SAMUEL 607

horsemen drew close to him. 7 When he looked behind him, he saw
me, and called to me. I answered, 'Here sir.' 8 And he said to me, 'Who
are you?' I answered him, 'I am an Amalekite.' 9 He said to me, 'Come,
stand over me and kill me; for convulsions have seized me, and yet my
life still lingers.' 10 So I stood over him, and killed him, for I knew that
he could not live after he had fallen. I took the crown that was on his
head and the armlet that was on his arm, and I have brought them
here to my lord."
11 Then David took hold of his clothes and tore them; and all the men
who were with him did the same. 12 They mourned and wept, and
fasted until evening for Saul and for his son Jonathan, and for the
army of the LORD and for the house of Israel, because they had fallen
by the sword. 13 David said to the young man who had reported to
him, "Where do you come from?" He answered, "I am the son of a
resident alien, an Amalekite." 14 David said to him, "Were you not
afraid to lift your hand to destroy the LORD's anointed?" 15 Then David
called one of the young men and said, "Come here and strike him
down." So he struck him down and he died. 16 David said to him,
"Your blood be on your head; for your own mouth has testified
against you, saying, 'I have killed the LORD's anointed.'"
David's elegy over Saul and Jonathan
17 David intoned this lamentation over Saul and his son Jonathan. 18
(He ordered that The Song of the Bow be taught to the people of
Judah; it is written in the Book of Jashar.) He said:
19 Your glory, O Israel, lies slain upon your high places!
How the mighty have fallen!
20 Tell it not in Gath,
proclaim it not in the streets of Ashkelon;
or the daughters of the Philistines will rejoice,
the daughters of the uncircumcised will exult.

607

2 SAMUEL 608

21 You mountains of Gilboa,
let there be no dew or rain upon you,
nor bounteous fields!
For there the shield of the mighty was defiled,
the shield of Saul, anointed with oil no more.
22 From the blood of the slain,
from the fat of the mighty,
the bow of Jonathan did not turn back,
nor the sword of Saul return empty.
23 Saul and Jonathan, beloved and lovely!
In life and in death they were not divided;
they were swifter than eagles,
they were stronger than lions.
24 O daughters of Israel, weep over Saul,
who clothed you with crimson, in luxury,
who put ornaments of gold on your apparel.
25 How the mighty have fallen
in the midst of the battle!
Jonathan lies slain upon your high places.
26

I am distressed for you, my brother Jonathan;
greatly beloved were you to me;
your love to me was wonderful,
passing the love of women.

27 How the mighty have fallen,
and the weapons of war perished!

608

2 SAMUEL 609

[2 Samuel 2]
David becomes king of Judah
1 After this David inquired of the LORD, "Shall I go up into any of the
cities of Judah?" The LORD said to him, "Go up." David said, "To which
shall I go up?" He said, "To Hebron." 2 So David went up there, along
with his two wives, Ahinoam of Jezreel, and Abigail the widow of
Nabal of Carmel. 3 David brought up the men who were with him,
every one with his household; and they settled in the towns of Hebron.
4 Then the people of Judah came, and there they anointed David king
over the house of Judah.
When they told David, "It was the people of Jabesh-gilead who buried
Saul," 5 David sent messengers to the people of Jabesh-gilead, and said
to them, "May you be blessed by the LORD, because you showed this
loyalty to Saul your lord, and buried him! 6 Now may the LORD show
steadfast love and faithfulness to you! And I too will reward you
because you have done this thing. 7 Therefore let your hands be
strong, and be valiant; for Saul your lord is dead, and the house of
Judah has anointed me king over them."

8 But Abner son of Ner, commander of Saul's army, had taken Ishbaal
son of Saul, and brought him over to Mahanaim. 9 He made him king
over Gilead, the Ashurites, Jezreel, Ephraim, Benjamin, and over all
Israel. 10 Ishbaal, Saul's son, was forty years old when he began to
reign over Israel, and he reigned two years. But the house of Judah
followed David. 11 The time that David was king in Hebron over the
house of Judah was seven years and six months.
War between Israel and Judah
12 Abner son of Ner, and the servants of Ishbaal son of Saul, went out
from Mahanaim to Gibeon. 13 Joab son of Zeruiah, and the servants of
David, went out and met them at the pool of Gibeon. One group sat
on one side of the pool, while the other sat on the other side of the
pool. 14 Abner said to Joab, "Let the young men come forward and
have a contest before us." Joab said, "Let them come forward." 15 So

609

2 SAMUEL 610

they came forward and were counted as they passed by, twelve for
Benjamin and Ishbaal son of Saul, and twelve of the servants of David.
16 Each grasped his opponent by the head, and thrust his sword in his
opponent's side; so they fell down together. Therefore that place was
called Helkath-hazzurim, which is at Gibeon. 17 The battle was very
fierce that day; and Abner and the men of Israel were beaten by the
servants of David.
18 The three sons of Zeruiah were there, Joab, Abishai, and Asahel.
Now Asahel was as swift of foot as a wild gazelle. 19 Asahel pursued
Abner, turning neither to the right nor to the left as he followed him.
20 Then Abner looked back and said, "Is it you, Asahel?" He answered,
"Yes, it is." 21 Abner said to him, "Turn to your right or to your left,
and seize one of the young men, and take his spoil." But Asahel would
not turn away from following him. 22 Abner said again to Asahel,
"Turn away from following me; why should I strike you to the ground?
How then could I show my face to your brother Joab?" 23 But he
refused to turn away. So Abner struck him in the stomach with the butt
of his spear, so that the spear came out at his back. He fell there, and
died where he lay. And all those who came to the place where Asahel
had fallen and died, stood still.
24 But Joab and Abishai pursued Abner. As the sun was going down
they came to the hill of Ammah, which lies before Giah on the way to
the wilderness of Gibeon. 25 The Benjaminites rallied around Abner
and formed a single band; they took their stand on the top of a hill. 26
Then Abner called to Joab, "Is the sword to keep devouring forever?
Do you not know that the end will be bitter? How long will it be
before you order your people to turn from the pursuit of their
kinsmen?" 27 Joab said, "As God lives, if you had not spoken, the
people would have continued to pursue their kinsmen, not stopping
until morning." 28 Joab sounded the trumpet and all the people
stopped; they no longer pursued Israel or engaged in battle any
further.
29 Abner and his men traveled all that night through the Arabah; they
crossed the Jordan, and, marching the whole forenoon, they came to
Mahanaim. 30 Joab returned from the pursuit of Abner; and when he

610

2 SAMUEL 611

had gathered all the people together, there were missing of David's
servants nineteen men besides Asahel. 31 But the servants of David had
killed of Benjamin three hundred sixty of Abner's men. 32 They took up
Asahel and buried him in the tomb of his father, which was at
Bethlehem. Joab and his men marched all night, and the day broke
upon them at Hebron.
[2 Samuel 3]
David's sons
1 There was a long war between the house of Saul and the house of
David; David grew stronger and stronger, while the house of Saul
became weaker and weaker.
2 Sons were born to David at Hebron: his firstborn was Amnon, of
Ahinoam of Jezreel; 3 his second, Chileab, of Abigail the widow of
Nabal of Carmel; the third, Absalom son of Maacah, daughter of King
Talmai of Geshur; 4 the fourth, Adonijah son of Haggith; the fifth,
Shephatiah son of Abital; 5 and the sixth, Ithream, of David's wife
Eglah. These were born to David in Hebron.
Abner's death
6 While there was war between the house of Saul and the house of
David, Abner was making himself strong in the house of Saul. 7 Now
Saul had a concubine whose name was Rizpah daughter of Aiah. And
Ishbaal said to Abner, "Why have you gone in to my father's
concubine?" 8 The words of Ishbaal made Abner very angry; he said,
"Am I a dog's head for Judah? Today I keep showing loyalty to the
house of your father Saul, to his brothers, and to his friends, and have
not given you into the hand of David; and yet you charge me now with
a crime concerning this woman. 9 So may God do to Abner and so may
he add to it! For just what the LORD has sworn to David, that will I
accomplish for him, 10 to transfer the kingdom from the house of Saul,
and set up the throne of David over Israel and over Judah, from Dan to
Beer-sheba." 11 And Ishbaal could not answer Abner another word,
because he feared him.

611

2 SAMUEL 612

12 Abner sent messengers to David at Hebron, saying, "To whom does
the land belong? Make your covenant with me, and I will give you my
support to bring all Israel over to you." 13 He said, "Good; I will make a
covenant with you. But one thing I require of you: you shall never
appear in my presence unless you bring Saul's daughter Michal when
you come to see me." 14 Then David sent messengers to Saul's son
Ishbaal, saying, "Give me my wife Michal, to whom I became engaged
at the price of one hundred foreskins of the Philistines." 15 Ishbaal sent
and took her from her husband Paltiel the son of Laish. 16 But her
husband went with her, weeping as he walked behind her all the way
to Bahurim. Then Abner said to him, "Go back home!" So he went
back.
17 Abner sent word to the elders of Israel, saying, "For some time past
you have been seeking David as king over you. 18 Now then bring it
about; for the LORD has promised David: Through my servant David I
will save my people Israel from the hand of the Philistines, and from all
their enemies." 19 Abner also spoke directly to the Benjaminites; then
Abner went to tell David at Hebron all that Israel and the whole house
of Benjamin were ready to do.
20 When Abner came with twenty men to David at Hebron, David
made a feast for Abner and the men who were with him. 21 Abner said
to David, "Let me go and rally all Israel to my lord the king, in order
that they may make a covenant with you, and that you may reign over
all that your heart desires." So David dismissed Abner, and he went
away in peace.
22 Just then the servants of David arrived with Joab from a raid,
bringing much spoil with them. But Abner was not with David at
Hebron, for David had dismissed him, and he had gone away in peace.
23 When Joab and all the army that was with him came, it was told
Joab, "Abner son of Ner came to the king, and he has dismissed him,
and he has gone away in peace." 24 Then Joab went to the king and
said, "What have you done? Abner came to you; why did you dismiss
him, so that he got away? 25 You know that Abner son of Ner came to
deceive you, and to learn your comings and goings and to learn all that
you are doing."

612

2 SAMUEL 613

26 When Joab came out from David's presence, he sent messengers
after Abner, and they brought him back from the cistern of Sirah; but
David did not know about it. 27 When Abner returned to Hebron, Joab
took him aside in the gateway to speak with him privately, and there
he stabbed him in the stomach. So he died for shedding the blood of
Asahel, Joab's brother. 28 Afterward, when David heard of it, he said,
"I and my kingdom are forever guiltless before the LORD for the blood
of Abner son of Ner. 29 May the guilt fall on the head of Joab, and on
all his father's house; and may the house of Joab never be without one
who has a discharge, or who is leprous, or who holds a spindle, or who
falls by the sword, or who lacks food!" 30 So Joab and his brother
Abishai murdered Abner because he had killed their brother Asahel in
the battle at Gibeon.
31 Then David said to Joab and to all the people who were with him,
"Tear your clothes, and put on sackcloth, and mourn over Abner." And
King David followed the bier. 32 They buried Abner at Hebron. The
king lifted up his voice and wept at the grave of Abner, and all the
people wept. 33 The king lamented for Abner, saying,
"Should Abner die as a fool dies?
34 Your hands were not bound,
your feet were not fettered;
as one falls before the wicked
you have fallen."
And all the people wept over him again. 35 Then all the people came
to persuade David to eat something while it was still day; but David
swore, saying, "So may God do to me, and more, if I taste bread or
anything else before the sun goes down!" 36 All the people took
notice of it, and it pleased them; just as everything the king did
pleased all the people. 37 So all the people and all Israel understood
that day that the king had no part in the killing of Abner son of Ner.
38 And the king said to his servants, "Do you not know that a prince
and a great man has fallen this day in Israel? 39 Today I am powerless,
even though anointed king; these men, the sons of Zeruiah, are too
violent for me. The LORD pay back the one who does wickedly in
accordance with his wickedness!"

613

2 SAMUEL 614

[2 Samuel 4]
The assassination of Ishbaal
1 When Saul's son Ishbaal heard that Abner had died at Hebron, his
courage failed, and all Israel was dismayed. 2 Saul's son had two
captains of raiding bands; the name of the one was Baanah, and the
name of the other Rechab. They were sons of Rimmon a Benjaminite
from Beeroth — for Beeroth is considered to belong to Benjamin. 3
(Now the people of Beeroth had fled to Gittaim and are there as
resident aliens to this day).
4 Saul's son Jonathan had a son who was crippled in his feet. He was
five years old when the news about Saul and Jonathan came from
Jezreel. His nurse picked him up and fled; and, in her haste to flee, it
happened that he fell and became lame. His name was Mephibosheth.
5 Now the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, set
out, and about the heat of the day they came to the house of Ishbaal,
while he was taking his noonday rest. 6 They came inside the house as
though to take wheat, and they struck him in the stomach; then
Rechab and his brother Baanah escaped. 7 Now they had come into the
house while he was lying on his couch in his bedchamber; they
attacked him, killed him, and beheaded him. Then they took his head
and traveled by way of the Arabah all night long. 8 They brought the
head of Ishbaal to David at Hebron and said to the king, "Here is the
head of Ishbaal, son of Saul, your enemy, who sought your life; the
LORD has avenged my lord the king this day on Saul and on his
offspring."
9 David answered Rechab and his brother Baanah, the sons of Rimmon
the Beerothite, "As the LORD lives, who has redeemed my life out of
every adversity, 10 when the one who told me, 'See, Saul is dead,'
thought he was bringing good news, I seized him and killed him at
Ziklag — this was the reward I gave him for his news. 11 How much
more then, when wicked men have killed a righteous man on his bed
in his own house! And now shall I not require his blood at your hand,
and destroy you from the earth?" 12 So David commanded the young
men, and they killed them; they cut off their hands and feet, and hung

614

2 SAMUEL 615

their bodies beside the pool at Hebron. But the head of Ishbaal they
took and buried in the tomb of Abner at Hebron.
[2 Samuel 5]
David becomes king of Israel and conquers Jerusalem
1 Then all the tribes of Israel came to David at Hebron, and said, "Look,
we are your bone and flesh. 2 For some time, while Saul was king over
us, it was you who led out Israel and brought it in. The LORD said to
you: It is you who shall be shepherd of my people Israel, you who shall
be ruler over Israel." 3 So all the elders of Israel came to the king at
Hebron; and King David made a covenant with them at Hebron before
the LORD, and they anointed David king over Israel. 4 David was thirty
years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years. 5 At
Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months; and at
Jerusalem he reigned over all Israel and Judah thirty-three years.
6 The king and his men marched to Jerusalem against the Jebusites, the
inhabitants of the land, who said to David, "You will not come in here,
even the blind and the lame will turn you back" — thinking, "David
cannot come in here." 7 Nevertheless David took the stronghold of
Zion, which is now the city of David. 8 David had said on that day,
"Whoever would strike down the Jebusites, let him get up the water
shaft to attack the lame and the blind, those whom David hates."
Therefore it is said, "The blind and the lame shall not come into the
house." 9 David occupied the stronghold, and named it the city of
David. David built the city all around from the Millo inward. 10 And
David became greater and greater, for the LORD, the God of hosts, was
with him.
11 King Hiram of Tyre sent messengers to David, along with cedar trees,
and carpenters and masons who built David a house. 12 David then
perceived that the LORD had established him king over Israel, and that
he had exalted his kingdom for the sake of his people Israel.
13 In Jerusalem, after he came from Hebron, David took more
concubines and wives; and more sons and daughters were born to
David. 14 These are the names of those who were born to him in

615

2 SAMUEL 616

Jerusalem: Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon, 15 Ibhar, Elishua,
Nepheg, Japhia, 16 Elishama, Eliada, and Eliphelet.
War with the Philistines
17 When the Philistines heard that David had been anointed king over
Israel, all the Philistines went up in search of David; but David heard
about it and went down to the stronghold. 18 Now the Philistines had
come and spread out in the valley of Rephaim. 19 David inquired of the
LORD, "Shall I go up against the Philistines? Will you give them into my
hand?" The LORD said to David, "Go up; for I will certainly give the
Philistines into your hand." 20 So David came to Baal-perazim, and
David defeated them there. He said, "The LORD has burst forth against
my enemies before me, like a bursting flood." Therefore that place is
called Baal-perazim. 21 The Philistines abandoned their idols there, and
David and his men carried them away.
22 Once again the Philistines came up, and were spread out in the
valley of Rephaim. 23 When David inquired of the LORD, he said, "You
shall not go up; go around to their rear, and come upon them opposite
the balsam trees. 24 When you hear the sound of marching in the tops
of the balsam trees, then be on the alert; for then the LORD has gone
out before you to strike down the army of the Philistines." 25 David did
just as the LORD had commanded him; and he struck down the
Philistines from Geba all the way to Gezer.
[2 Samuel 6]
David brings the ark to Jerusalem
1 David again gathered all the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand. 2
David and all the people with him set out and went from Baale-judah,
to bring up from there the ark of God, which is called by the name of
the LORD of hosts who is enthroned on the cherubim. 3 They carried the
ark of God on a new cart, and brought it out of the house of
Abinadab, which was on the hill. Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of
Abinadab, were driving the new cart 4 with the ark of God; and Ahio
went in front of the ark. 5 David and all the house of Israel were

616

2 SAMUEL 617

dancing before the LORD with all their might, with songs and lyres and
harps and tambourines and castanets and cymbals.
6 When they came to the threshing floor of Nacon, Uzzah reached out
his hand to the ark of God and took hold of it, for the oxen shook it. 7
The anger of the LORD was kindled against Uzzah; and God struck him
there because he reached out his hand to the ark; and he died there
beside the ark of God. 8 David was angry because the LORD had burst
forth with an outburst upon Uzzah; so that place is called Perez-uzzah,
to this day. 9 David was afraid of the LORD that day; he said, "How can
the ark of the LORD come into my care?" 10 So David was unwilling to
take the ark of the LORD into his care in the city of David; instead David
took it to the house of Obed-edom the Gittite. 11 The ark of the LORD
remained in the house of Obed-edom the Gittite three months; and
the LORD blessed Obed-edom and all his household.
12 It was told King David, "The LORD has blessed the household of
Obed-edom and all that belongs to him, because of the ark of God." So
David went and brought up the ark of God from the house of Obededom to the city of David with rejoicing; 13 and when those who bore
the ark of the LORD had gone six paces, he sacrificed an ox and a
fatling. 14 David danced before the LORD with all his might; David was
girded with a linen ephod. 15 So David and all the house of Israel
brought up the ark of the LORD with shouting, and with the sound of
the trumpet.
16 As the ark of the LORD came into the city of David, Michal daughter
of Saul looked out of the window, and saw King David leaping and
dancing before the LORD; and she despised him in her heart.
17 They brought in the ark of the LORD, and set it in its place, inside the
tent that David had pitched for it; and David offered burnt offerings
and offerings of well-being before the LORD. 18 When David had
finished offering the burnt offerings and the offerings of well-being,
he blessed the people in the name of the LORD of hosts, 19 and
distributed food among all the people, the whole multitude of Israel,
both men and women, to each a cake of bread, a portion of meat, and
a cake of raisins. Then all the people went back to their homes.

617

2 SAMUEL 618

20 David returned to bless his household. But Michal the daughter of
Saul came out to meet David, and said, "How the king of Israel
honored himself today, uncovering himself today before the eyes of his
servants' maids, as any vulgar fellow might shamelessly uncover
himself!" 21 David said to Michal, "It was before the LORD, who chose
me in place of your father and all his household, to appoint me as
prince over Israel, the people of the LORD, that I have danced before
the LORD. 22 I will make myself yet more contemptible than this, and I
will be abased in my own eyes; but by the maids of whom you have
spoken, by them I shall be held in honor." 23 And Michal the daughter
of Saul had no child to the day of her death.
[2 Samuel 7]
A dynasty for David
1 Now when the king was settled in his house, and the LORD had given
him rest from all his enemies around him, 2 the king said to the
prophet Nathan, "See now, I am living in a house of cedar, but the ark
of God stays in a tent." 3 Nathan said to the king, "Go, do all that you
have in mind; for the LORD is with you."
4 But that same night the word of the LORD came to Nathan: 5 Go and
tell my servant David: Thus says the LORD: Are you the one to build me
a house to live in? 6 I have not lived in a house since the day I brought
up the people of Israel from Egypt to this day, but I have been moving
about in a tent and a tabernacle. 7 Wherever I have moved about
among all the people of Israel, did I ever speak a word with any of the
tribal leaders of Israel, whom I commanded to shepherd my people
Israel, saying, "Why have you not built me a house of cedar?" 8 Now
therefore thus you shall say to my servant David: Thus says the LORD of
hosts: I took you from the pasture, from following the sheep to be
prince over my people Israel; 9 and I have been with you wherever you
went, and have cut off all your enemies from before you; and I will
make for you a great name, like the name of the great ones of the
earth. 10 And I will appoint a place for my people Israel and will plant
them, so that they may live in their own place, and be disturbed no
more; and evildoers shall afflict them no more, as formerly, 11 from the
time that I appointed judges over my people Israel; and I will give you

618

2 SAMUEL 619

rest from all your enemies. Moreover the LORD declares to you that the
LORD will make you a house. 12 When your days are fulfilled and you lie
down with your ancestors, I will raise up your offspring after you, who
shall come forth from your body, and I will establish his kingdom. 13 He
shall build a house for my name, and I will establish the throne of his
kingdom forever. 14 I will be a father to him, and he shall be a son to
me. When he commits iniquity, I will punish him with a rod such as
mortals use, with blows inflicted by human beings. 15 But I will not
take my steadfast love from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put
away from before you. 16 Your house and your kingdom shall be made
sure forever before me; your throne shall be established forever. 17 In
accordance with all these words and with all this vision, Nathan spoke
to David.
18 Then King David went in and sat before the LORD, and said, "Who
am I, O Lord GOD, and what is my house, that you have brought me
thus far? 19 And yet this was a small thing in your eyes, O Lord GOD;
you have spoken also of your servant's house for a great while to
come. May this be instruction for the people, O Lord GOD! 20 And what
more can David say to you? For you know your servant, O Lord GOD! 21
Because of your promise, and according to your own heart, you have
wrought all this greatness, so that your servant may know it. 22
Therefore you are great, O LORD God; for there is no one like you, and
there is no God besides you, according to all that we have heard with
our ears. 23 Who is like your people, like Israel? Is there another nation
on earth whose God went to redeem it as a people, and to make a
name for himself, doing great and awesome things for them, by
driving out before his people nations and their gods? 24 And you
established your people Israel for yourself to be your people forever;
and you, O LORD, became their God. 25 And now, O LORD God, as for
the word that you have spoken concerning your servant and
concerning his house, confirm it forever; do as you have promised. 26
Thus your name will be magnified forever in the saying, 'The LORD of
hosts is God over Israel'; and the house of your servant David will be
established before you. 27 For you, O LORD of hosts, the God of Israel,
have made this revelation to your servant, saying, 'I will build you a
house'; therefore your servant has found courage to pray this prayer to
you. 28 And now, O Lord GOD, you are God, and your words are true,

619

2 SAMUEL 620

and you have promised this good thing to your servant; 29 now
therefore may it please you to bless the house of your servant, so that
it may continue forever before you; for you, O Lord GOD, have spoken,
and with your blessing shall the house of your servant be blessed
forever."
[2 Samuel 8]
David's wars
1 Some time afterward, David attacked the Philistines and subdued
them; David took Metheg-ammah out of the hand of the Philistines.
2 He also defeated the Moabites and, making them lie down on the
ground, measured them off with a cord; he measured two lengths of
cord for those who were to be put to death, and one length for those
who were to be spared. And the Moabites became servants to David
and brought tribute.
3 David also struck down King Hadadezer son of Rehob of Zobah, as he
went to restore his monument at the river Euphrates. 4 David took
from him one thousand seven hundred horsemen, and twenty
thousand foot soldiers. David hamstrung all the chariot horses, but left
enough for a hundred chariots. 5 When the Arameans of Damascus
came to help King Hadadezer of Zobah, David killed twenty-two
thousand men of the Arameans. 6 Then David put garrisons among the
Arameans of Damascus; and the Arameans became servants to David
and brought tribute. The LORD gave victory to David wherever he went.
7 David took the gold shields that were carried by the servants of
Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem. 8 From Betah and from
Berothai, towns of Hadadezer, King David took a great amount of
bronze.
9 When King Toi of Hamath heard that David had defeated the whole
army of Hadadezer, 10 Toi sent his son Joram to King David, to greet
him and to congratulate him because he had fought against
Hadadezer and defeated him. Now Hadadezer had often been at war
with Toi. Joram brought with him articles of silver, gold, and bronze; 11
these also King David dedicated to the LORD, together with the silver

620

2 SAMUEL 621

and gold that he dedicated from all the nations he subdued, 12 from
Edom, Moab, the Ammonites, the Philistines, Amalek, and from the
spoil of King Hadadezer son of Rehob of Zobah.
13 David won a name for himself. When he returned, he killed eighteen
thousand Edomites in the Valley of Salt. 14 He put garrisons in Edom;
throughout all Edom he put garrisons, and all the Edomites became
David's servants. And the LORD gave victory to David wherever he went.
15 So David reigned over all Israel; and David administered justice and
equity to all his people. 16 Joab son of Zeruiah was over the army;
Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was recorder; 17 Zadok son of Ahitub and
Ahimelech son of Abiathar were priests; Seraiah was secretary; 18
Benaiah son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites;
and David's sons were priests.
[2 Samuel 9]
Jonathan's son
1 David asked, "Is there still anyone left of the house of Saul to whom I
may show kindness for Jonathan's sake?" 2 Now there was a servant of
the house of Saul whose name was Ziba, and he was summoned to
David. The king said to him, "Are you Ziba?" And he said, "At your
service!" 3 The king said, "Is there anyone remaining of the house of
Saul to whom I may show the kindness of God?" Ziba said to the king,
"There remains a son of Jonathan; he is crippled in his feet." 4 The king
said to him, "Where is he?" Ziba said to the king, "He is in the house of
Machir son of Ammiel, at Lo-debar." 5 Then King David sent and
brought him from the house of Machir son of Ammiel, at Lo-debar. 6
Mephibosheth son of Jonathan son of Saul came to David, and fell on
his face and did obeisance. David said, "Mephibosheth!" He answered,
"I am your servant." 7 David said to him, "Do not be afraid, for I will
show you kindness for the sake of your father Jonathan; I will restore
to you all the land of your grandfather Saul, and you yourself shall eat
at my table always." 8 He did obeisance and said, "What is your
servant, that you should look upon a dead dog such as I?"

621

2 SAMUEL 622

9 Then the king summoned Saul's servant Ziba, and said to him, "All
that belonged to Saul and to all his house I have given to your master's
grandson. 10 You and your sons and your servants shall till the land for
him, and shall bring in the produce, so that your master's grandson
may have food to eat; but your master's grandson Mephibosheth shall
always eat at my table." Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty
servants. 11 Then Ziba said to the king, "According to all that my lord
the king commands his servant, so your servant will do." Mephibosheth
ate at David's table, like one of the king's sons. 12 Mephibosheth had a
young son whose name was Mica. And all who lived in Ziba's house
became Mephibosheth's servants. 13 Mephibosheth lived in Jerusalem,
for he always ate at the king's table. Now he was lame in both his feet.
[2 Samuel 10]
David defeats the Ammonites and Arameans
1 Some time afterward, the king of the Ammonites died, and his son
Hanun succeeded him. 2 David said, "I will deal loyally with Hanun son
of Nahash, just as his father dealt loyally with me." So David sent
envoys to console him concerning his father. When David's envoys
came into the land of the Ammonites, 3 the princes of the Ammonites
said to their lord Hanun, "Do you really think that David is honoring
your father just because he has sent messengers with condolences to
you? Has not David sent his envoys to you to search the city, to spy it
out, and to overthrow it?" 4 So Hanun seized David's envoys, shaved
off half the beard of each, cut off their garments in the middle at their
hips, and sent them away. 5 When David was told, he sent to meet
them, for the men were greatly ashamed. The king said, "Remain at
Jericho until your beards have grown, and then return."
6 When the Ammonites saw that they had become odious to David, the
Ammonites sent and hired the Arameans of Beth-rehob and the
Arameans of Zobah, twenty thousand foot soldiers, as well as the king
of Maacah, one thousand men, and the men of Tob, twelve thousand
men. 7 When David heard of it, he sent Joab and all the army with the
warriors. 8 The Ammonites came out and drew up in battle array at the
entrance of the gate; but the Arameans of Zobah and of Rehob, and
the men of Tob and Maacah, were by themselves in the open country.

622

2 SAMUEL 623

9 When Joab saw that the battle was set against him both in front and
in the rear, he chose some of the picked men of Israel, and arrayed
them against the Arameans; 10 the rest of his men he put in the charge
of his brother Abishai, and he arrayed them against the Ammonites. 11
He said, "If the Arameans are too strong for me, then you shall help
me; but if the Ammonites are too strong for you, then I will come and
help you. 12 Be strong, and let us be courageous for the sake of our
people, and for the cities of our God; and may the LORD do what seems
good to him." 13 So Joab and the people who were with him moved
forward into battle against the Arameans; and they fled before him. 14
When the Ammonites saw that the Arameans fled, they likewise fled
before Abishai, and entered the city. Then Joab returned from fighting
against the Ammonites, and came to Jerusalem.
15 But when the Arameans saw that they had been defeated by Israel,
they gathered themselves together. 16 Hadadezer sent and brought
out the Arameans who were beyond the Euphrates; and they came to
Helam, with Shobach the commander of the army of Hadadezer at
their head. 17 When it was told David, he gathered all Israel together,
and crossed the Jordan, and came to Helam. The Arameans arrayed
themselves against David and fought with him. 18 The Arameans fled
before Israel; and David killed of the Arameans seven hundred chariot
teams, and forty thousand horsemen, and wounded Shobach the
commander of their army, so that he died there. 19 When all the kings
who were servants of Hadadezer saw that they had been defeated by
Israel, they made peace with Israel, and became subject to them. So the
Arameans were afraid to help the Ammonites any more.
[2 Samuel 11]
David and Bathsheba
1 In the spring of the year, the time when kings go out to battle, David
sent Joab with his officers and all Israel with him; they ravaged the
Ammonites, and besieged Rabbah. But David remained at Jerusalem.
2 It happened, late one afternoon, when David rose from his couch and
was walking about on the roof of the king's house, that he saw from
the roof a woman bathing; the woman was very beautiful. 3 David sent

623

2 SAMUEL 624

someone to inquire about the woman. It was reported, "This is
Bathsheba daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite." 4 So David
sent messengers to get her, and she came to him, and he lay with her.
(Now she was purifying herself after her period.) Then she returned to
her house. 5 The woman conceived; and she sent and told David, "I am
pregnant."
6 So David sent word to Joab, "Send me Uriah the Hittite." And Joab
sent Uriah to David. 7 When Uriah came to him, David asked how Joab
and the people fared, and how the war was going. 8 Then David said
to Uriah, "Go down to your house, and wash your feet." Uriah went
out of the king's house, and there followed him a present from the
king. 9 But Uriah slept at the entrance of the king's house with all the
servants of his lord, and did not go down to his house. 10 When they
told David, "Uriah did not go down to his house," David said to Uriah,
"You have just come from a journey. Why did you not go down to your
house?" 11 Uriah said to David, "The ark and Israel and Judah remain in
booths; and my lord Joab and the servants of my lord are camping in
the open field; shall I then go to my house, to eat and to drink, and to
lie with my wife? As you live, and as your soul lives, I will not do such a
thing." 12 Then David said to Uriah, "Remain here today also, and
tomorrow I will send you back." So Uriah remained in Jerusalem that
day. On the next day, 13 David invited him to eat and drink in his
presence and made him drunk; and in the evening he went out to lie
on his couch with the servants of his lord, but he did not go down to
his house.
14 In the morning David wrote a letter to Joab, and sent it by the hand
of Uriah. 15 In the letter he wrote, "Set Uriah in the forefront of the
hardest fighting, and then draw back from him, so that he may be
struck down and die." 16 As Joab was besieging the city, he assigned
Uriah to the place where he knew there were valiant warriors. 17 The
men of the city came out and fought with Joab; and some of the
servants of David among the people fell. Uriah the Hittite was killed as
well. 18 Then Joab sent and told David all the news about the fighting;
19 and he instructed the messenger, "When you have finished telling
the king all the news about the fighting, 20 then, if the king's anger
rises, and if he says to you, 'Why did you go so near the city to fight?

624

2 SAMUEL 625

Did you not know that they would shoot from the wall? 21 Who killed
Abimelech son of Jerubbaal? Did not a woman throw an upper
millstone on him from the wall, so that he died at Thebez? Why did
you go so near the wall?' then you shall say, 'Your servant Uriah the
Hittite is dead too.'"
22 So the messenger went, and came and told David all that Joab had
sent him to tell. 23 The messenger said to David, "The men gained an
advantage over us, and came out against us in the field; but we drove
them back to the entrance of the gate. 24 Then the archers shot at
your servants from the wall; some of the king's servants are dead; and
your servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also." 25 David said to the
messenger, "Thus you shall say to Joab, 'Do not let this matter trouble
you, for the sword devours now one and now another; press your
attack on the city, and overthrow it.' And encourage him."
26 When the wife of Uriah heard that her husband was dead, she made
lamentation for him. 27 When the mourning was over, David sent and
brought her to his house, and she became his wife, and bore him a son.
David's punishment
But the thing that David had done displeased the LORD, [2 Samuel 12] 1
and the LORD sent Nathan to David. He came to him, and said to him,
"There were two men in a certain city, the one rich and the other poor.
2 The rich man had very many flocks and herds; 3 but the poor man
had nothing but one little ewe lamb, which he had bought. He
brought it up, and it grew up with him and with his children; it used to
eat of his meager fare, and drink from his cup, and lie in his bosom,
and it was like a daughter to him. 4 Now there came a traveler to the
rich man, and he was loath to take one of his own flock or herd to
prepare for the wayfarer who had come to him, but he took the poor
man's lamb, and prepared that for the guest who had come to him." 5
Then David's anger was greatly kindled against the man. He said to
Nathan, "As the LORD lives, the man who has done this deserves to die;
6 he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing, and
because he had no pity."

625

2 SAMUEL 626

7 Nathan said to David, "You are the man! Thus says the LORD, the God
of Israel: I anointed you king over Israel, and I rescued you from the
hand of Saul; 8 I gave you your master's house, and your master's wives
into your bosom, and gave you the house of Israel and of Judah; and if
that had been too little, I would have added as much more. 9 Why
have you despised the word of the LORD, to do what is evil in his sight?
You have struck down Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and have
taken his wife to be your wife, and have killed him with the sword of
the Ammonites. 10 Now therefore the sword shall never depart from
your house, for you have despised me, and have taken the wife of
Uriah the Hittite to be your wife. 11 Thus says the LORD: I will raise up
trouble against you from within your own house; and I will take your
wives before your eyes, and give them to your neighbor, and he shall
lie with your wives in the sight of this very sun. 12 For you did it
secretly; but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the sun." 13
David said to Nathan, "I have sinned against the LORD." Nathan said to
David, "Now the LORD has put away your sin; you shall not die. 14
Nevertheless, because by this deed you have utterly scorned the LORD,
the child that is born to you shall die." 15 Then Nathan went to his
house.
The LORD struck the child that Uriah's wife bore to David, and it
became very ill. 16 David therefore pleaded with God for the child;
David fasted, and went in and lay all night on the ground. 17 The elders
of his house stood beside him, urging him to rise from the ground; but
he would not, nor did he eat food with them. 18 On the seventh day
the child died. And the servants of David were afraid to tell him that
the child was dead; for they said, "While the child was still alive, we
spoke to him, and he did not listen to us; how then can we tell him the
child is dead? He may do himself some harm." 19 But when David saw
that his servants were whispering together, he perceived that the child
was dead; and David said to his servants, "Is the child dead?" They said,
"He is dead."
20 Then David rose from the ground, washed, anointed himself, and
changed his clothes. He went into the house of the LORD, and
worshiped; he then went to his own house; and when he asked, they
set food before him and he ate. 21 Then his servants said to him, "What

626

2 SAMUEL 627

is this thing that you have done? You fasted and wept for the child
while it was alive; but when the child died, you rose and ate food." 22
He said, "While the child was still alive, I fasted and wept; for I said,
'Who knows? The LORD may be gracious to me, and the child may live.'
23 But now he is dead; why should I fast? Can I bring him back again? I
shall go to him, but he will not return to me."
24 Then David consoled his wife Bathsheba, and went to her, and lay
with her; and she bore a son, and he named him Solomon. The LORD
loved him, 25 and sent a message by the prophet Nathan; so he named
him Jedidiah, because of the LORD.
The conclusion of the Ammonite war
26 Now Joab fought against Rabbah of the Ammonites, and took the
royal city. 27 Joab sent messengers to David, and said, "I have fought
against Rabbah; moreover, I have taken the water city. 28 Now, then,
gather the rest of the people together, and encamp against the city,
and take it; or I myself will take the city, and it will be called by my
name." 29 So David gathered all the people together and went to
Rabbah, and fought against it and took it. 30 He took the crown of
Milcom from his head; the weight of it was a talent of gold, and in it
was a precious stone; and it was placed on David's head. He also
brought forth the spoil of the city, a very great amount. 31 He brought
out the people who were in it, and set them to work with saws and
iron picks and iron axes, or sent them to the brickworks. Thus he did to
all the cities of the Ammonites. Then David and all the people returned
to Jerusalem.
[2 Samuel 13]
The rape of Tamar and the murder of Amnon
1 Some time passed. David's son Absalom had a beautiful sister whose
name was Tamar; and David's son Amnon fell in love with her. 2
Amnon was so tormented that he made himself ill because of his sister
Tamar, for she was a virgin and it seemed impossible to Amnon to do
anything to her. 3 But Amnon had a friend whose name was Jonadab,
the son of David's brother Shimeah; and Jonadab was a very crafty

627

2 SAMUEL 628

man. 4 He said to him, "O son of the king, why are you so haggard
morning after morning? Will you not tell me?" Amnon said to him, "I
love Tamar, my brother Absalom's sister." 5 Jonadab said to him, "Lie
down on your bed, and pretend to be ill; and when your father comes
to see you, say to him, 'Let my sister Tamar come and give me
something to eat, and prepare the food in my sight, so that I may see it
and eat it from her hand.'" 6 So Amnon lay down, and pretended to be
ill; and when the king came to see him, Amnon said to the king,
"Please let my sister Tamar come and make a couple of cakes in my
sight, so that I may eat from her hand."
7 Then David sent home to Tamar, saying, "Go to your brother
Amnon's house, and prepare food for him." 8 So Tamar went to her
brother Amnon's house, where he was lying down. She took dough,
kneaded it, made cakes in his sight, and baked the cakes. 9 Then she
took the pan and set them out before him, but he refused to eat.
Amnon said, "Send out everyone from me." So everyone went out
from him. 10 Then Amnon said to Tamar, "Bring the food into the
chamber, so that I may eat from your hand." So Tamar took the cakes
she had made, and brought them into the chamber to Amnon her
brother. 11 But when she brought them near him to eat, he took hold
of her, and said to her, "Come, lie with me, my sister." 12 She answered
him, "No, my brother, do not force me; for such a thing is not done in
Israel; do not do anything so vile! 13 As for me, where could I carry my
shame? And as for you, you would be as one of the scoundrels in Israel.
Now therefore, I beg you, speak to the king; for he will not withhold
me from you." 14 But he would not listen to her; and being stronger
than she, he forced her and lay with her.
15 Then Amnon was seized with a very great loathing for her; indeed,
his loathing was even greater than the lust he had felt for her. Amnon
said to her, "Get out!" 16 But she said to him, "No, my brother; for this
wrong in sending me away is greater than the other that you did to
me." But he would not listen to her. 17 He called the young man who
served him and said, "Put this woman out of my presence, and bolt the
door after her." 18 (Now she was wearing a long robe with sleeves; for
this is how the virgin daughters of the king were clothed in earlier
times.) So his servant put her out, and bolted the door after her. 19 But

628

2 SAMUEL 629

Tamar put ashes on her head, and tore the long robe that she was
wearing; she put her hand on her head, and went away, crying aloud
as she went.
20 Her brother Absalom said to her, "Has Amnon your brother been
with you? Be quiet for now, my sister; he is your brother; do not take
this to heart." So Tamar remained, a desolate woman, in her brother
Absalom's house. 21 When King David heard of all these things, he
became very angry, but he would not punish his son Amnon, because
he loved him, for he was his firstborn. 22 But Absalom spoke to Amnon
neither good nor bad; for Absalom hated Amnon, because he had
raped his sister Tamar.
23 After two full years Absalom had sheepshearers at Baal-hazor, which
is near Ephraim, and Absalom invited all the king's sons. 24 Absalom
came to the king, and said, "Your servant has sheepshearers; will the
king and his servants please go with your servant?" 25 But the king
said to Absalom, "No, my son, let us not all go, or else we will be
burdensome to you." He pressed him, but he would not go but gave
him his blessing. 26 Then Absalom said, "If not, please let my brother
Amnon go with us." The king said to him, "Why should he go with
you?" 27 But Absalom pressed him until he let Amnon and all the
king's sons go with him. Absalom made a feast like a king's feast. 28
Then Absalom commanded his servants, "Watch when Amnon's heart
is merry with wine, and when I say to you, 'Strike Amnon,' then kill
him. Do not be afraid; have I not myself commanded you? Be
courageous and valiant." 29 So the servants of Absalom did to Amnon
as Absalom had commanded. Then all the king's sons rose, and each
mounted his mule and fled.
30 While they were on the way, the report came to David that Absalom
had killed all the king's sons, and not one of them was left. 31 The king
rose, tore his garments, and lay on the ground; and all his servants who
were standing by tore their garments. 32 But Jonadab, the son of
David's brother Shimeah, said, "Let not my lord suppose that they have
killed all the young men the king's sons; Amnon alone is dead. This has
been determined by Absalom from the day Amnon raped his sister

629

2 SAMUEL 630

Tamar. 33 Now therefore, do not let my lord the king take it to heart,
as if all the king's sons were dead; for Amnon alone is dead."
34 But Absalom fled. When the young man who kept watch looked up,
he saw many people coming from the Horonaim road by the side of
the mountain. 35 Jonadab said to the king, "See, the king's sons have
come; as your servant said, so it has come about." 36 As soon as he had
finished speaking, the king's sons arrived, and raised their voices and
wept; and the king and all his servants also wept very bitterly.
37 But Absalom fled, and went to Talmai son of Ammihud, king of
Geshur. David mourned for his son day after day. 38 Absalom, having
fled to Geshur, stayed there three years. 39 And the heart of the king
went out, yearning for Absalom; for he was now consoled over the
death of Amnon.
[2 Samuel 14]
Absalom's return
1 Now Joab son of Zeruiah perceived that the king's mind was on
Absalom. 2 Joab sent to Tekoa and brought from there a wise woman.
He said to her, "Pretend to be a mourner; put on mourning garments,
do not anoint yourself with oil, but behave like a woman who has
been mourning many days for the dead. 3 Go to the king and speak to
him as follows." And Joab put the words into her mouth.
4 When the woman of Tekoa came to the king, she fell on her face to
the ground and did obeisance, and said, "Help, O king!" 5 The king
asked her, "What is your trouble?" She answered, "Alas, I am a widow;
my husband is dead. 6 Your servant had two sons, and they fought
with one another in the field; there was no one to part them, and one
struck the other and killed him. 7 Now the whole family has risen
against your servant. They say, 'Give up the man who struck his
brother, so that we may kill him for the life of his brother whom he
murdered, even if we destroy the heir as well.' Thus they would quench
my one remaining ember, and leave to my husband neither name nor
remnant on the face of the earth."

630

2 SAMUEL 631

8 Then the king said to the woman, "Go to your house, and I will give
orders concerning you." 9 The woman of Tekoa said to the king, "On
me be the guilt, my lord the king, and on my father's house; let the
king and his throne be guiltless." 10 The king said, "If anyone says
anything to you, bring him to me, and he shall never touch you again."
11 Then she said, "Please, may the king keep the LORD your God in
mind, so that the avenger of blood may kill no more, and my son not
be destroyed." He said, "As the LORD lives, not one hair of your son
shall fall to the ground."
12 Then the woman said, "Please let your servant speak a word to my
lord the king." He said, "Speak." 13 The woman said, "Why then have
you planned such a thing against the people of God? For in giving this
decision the king convicts himself, inasmuch as the king does not bring
his banished one home again. 14 We must all die; we are like water
spilled on the ground, which cannot be gathered up. But God will not
take away a life; he will devise plans so as not to keep an outcast
banished forever from his presence. 15 Now I have come to say this to
my lord the king because the people have made me afraid; your
servant thought, 'I will speak to the king; it may be that the king will
perform the request of his servant. 16 For the king will hear, and
deliver his servant from the hand of the man who would cut both me
and my son off from the heritage of God.' 17 Your servant thought,
'The word of my lord the king will set me at rest'; for my lord the king
is like the angel of God, discerning good and evil. The LORD your God
be with you!"
18 Then the king answered the woman, "Do not withhold from me
anything I ask you." The woman said, "Let my lord the king speak." 19
The king said, "Is the hand of Joab with you in all this?" The woman
answered and said, "As surely as you live, my lord the king, one cannot
turn right or left from anything that my lord the king has said. For it
was your servant Joab who commanded me; it was he who put all
these words into the mouth of your servant. 20 In order to change the
course of affairs your servant Joab did this. But my lord has wisdom like
the wisdom of the angel of God to know all things that are on the
earth."

631

2 SAMUEL 632

21 Then the king said to Joab, "Very well, I grant this; go, bring back
the young man Absalom." 22 Joab prostrated himself with his face to
the ground and did obeisance, and blessed the king; and Joab said,
"Today your servant knows that I have found favor in your sight, my
lord the king, in that the king has granted the request of his servant."
23 So Joab set off, went to Geshur, and brought Absalom to Jerusalem.
24 The king said, "Let him go to his own house; he is not to come into
my presence." So Absalom went to his own house, and did not come
into the king's presence.
25 Now in all Israel there was no one to be praised so much for his
beauty as Absalom; from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head
there was no blemish in him. 26 When he cut the hair of his head (for
at the end of every year he used to cut it; when it was heavy on him,
he cut it), he weighed the hair of his head, two hundred shekels by the
king's weight. 27 There were born to Absalom three sons, and one
daughter whose name was Tamar; she was a beautiful woman.
28 So Absalom lived two full years in Jerusalem, without coming into
the king's presence. 29 Then Absalom sent for Joab to send him to the
king; but Joab would not come to him. He sent a second time, but Joab
would not come. 30 Then he said to his servants, "Look, Joab's field is
next to mine, and he has barley there; go and set it on fire." So
Absalom's servants set the field on fire. 31 Then Joab rose and went to
Absalom at his house, and said to him, "Why have your servants set my
field on fire?" 32 Absalom answered Joab, "Look, I sent word to you:
Come here, that I may send you to the king with the question, 'Why
have I come from Geshur? It would be better for me to be there still.'
Now let me go into the king's presence; if there is guilt in me, let him
kill me!" 33 Then Joab went to the king and told him; and he
summoned Absalom. So he came to the king and prostrated himself
with his face to the ground before the king; and the king kissed
Absalom.

632

2 SAMUEL 633

[2 Samuel 15]
Absalom revolts
1 After this Absalom got himself a chariot and horses, and fifty men to
run ahead of him. 2 Absalom used to rise early and stand beside the
road into the gate; and when anyone brought a suit before the king
for judgment, Absalom would call out and say, "From what city are
you?" When the person said, "Your servant is of such and such a tribe
in Israel," 3 Absalom would say, "See, your claims are good and right;
but there is no one deputed by the king to hear you." 4 Absalom said
moreover, "If only I were judge in the land! Then all who had a suit or
cause might come to me, and I would give them justice." 5 Whenever
people came near to do obeisance to him, he would put out his hand
and take hold of them, and kiss them. 6 Thus Absalom did to every
Israelite who came to the king for judgment; so Absalom stole the
hearts of the people of Israel.
7 At the end of four years Absalom said to the king, "Please let me go
to Hebron and pay the vow that I have made to the LORD. 8 For your
servant made a vow while I lived at Geshur in Aram: If the LORD will
indeed bring me back to Jerusalem, then I will worship the LORD in
Hebron." 9 The king said to him, "Go in peace." So he got up, and
went to Hebron. 10 But Absalom sent secret messengers throughout all
the tribes of Israel, saying, "As soon as you hear the sound of the
trumpet, then shout: Absalom has become king at Hebron!" 11 Two
hundred men from Jerusalem went with Absalom; they were invited
guests, and they went in their innocence, knowing nothing of the
matter. 12 While Absalom was offering the sacrifices, he sent for
Ahithophel the Gilonite, David's counselor, from his city Giloh. The
conspiracy grew in strength, and the people with Absalom kept
increasing.
David flees Jerusalem
13 A messenger came to David, saying, "The hearts of the Israelites
have gone after Absalom." 14 Then David said to all his officials who
were with him at Jerusalem, "Get up! Let us flee, or there will be no
escape for us from Absalom. Hurry, or he will soon overtake us, and

633

2 SAMUEL 634

bring disaster down upon us, and attack the city with the edge of the
sword." 15 The king's officials said to the king, "Your servants are
ready to do whatever our lord the king decides." 16 So the king left,
followed by all his household, except ten concubines whom he left
behind to look after the house. 17 The king left, followed by all the
people; and they stopped at the last house. 18 All his officials passed by
him; and all the Cherethites, and all the Pelethites, and all the six
hundred Gittites who had followed him from Gath, passed on before
the king.
19 Then the king said to Ittai the Gittite, "Why are you also coming
with us? Go back, and stay with the king; for you are a foreigner, and
also an exile from your home. 20 You came only yesterday, and shall I
today make you wander about with us, while I go wherever I can? Go
back, and take your kinsfolk with you; and may the LORD show
steadfast love and faithfulness to you." 21 But Ittai answered the king,
"As the LORD lives, and as my lord the king lives, wherever my lord the
king may be, whether for death or for life, there also your servant will
be." 22 David said to Ittai, "Go then, march on." So Ittai the Gittite
marched on, with all his men and all the little ones who were with him.
23 The whole country wept aloud as all the people passed by; the king
crossed the Wadi Kidron, and all the people moved on toward the
wilderness.
24 Abiathar came up, and Zadok also, with all the Levites, carrying the
ark of the covenant of God. They set down the ark of God, until the
people had all passed out of the city. 25 Then the king said to Zadok,
"Carry the ark of God back into the city. If I find favor in the eyes of
the LORD, he will bring me back and let me see both it and the place
where it stays. 26 But if he says, 'I take no pleasure in you,' here I am,
let him do to me what seems good to him." 27 The king also said to the
priest Zadok, "Look, go back to the city in peace, you and Abiathar,
with your two sons, Ahimaaz your son, and Jonathan son of Abiathar.
28 See, I will wait at the fords of the wilderness until word comes from
you to inform me." 29 So Zadok and Abiathar carried the ark of God
back to Jerusalem, and they remained there.

634

2 SAMUEL 635

30 But David went up the ascent of the Mount of Olives, weeping as he
went, with his head covered and walking barefoot; and all the people
who were with him covered their heads and went up, weeping as they
went. 31 David was told that Ahithophel was among the conspirators
with Absalom. And David said, "O LORD, I pray you, turn the counsel of
Ahithophel into foolishness."
32 When David came to the summit, where God was worshiped, Hushai
the Archite came to meet him with his coat torn and earth on his head.
33 David said to him, "If you go on with me, you will be a burden to
me. 34 But if you return to the city and say to Absalom, 'I will be your
servant, O king; as I have been your father's servant in time past, so
now I will be your servant,' then you will defeat for me the counsel of
Ahithophel. 35 The priests Zadok and Abiathar will be with you there.
So whatever you hear from the king's house, tell it to the priests Zadok
and Abiathar. 36 Their two sons are with them there, Zadok's son
Ahimaaz and Abiathar's son Jonathan; and by them you shall report to
me everything you hear." 37 So Hushai, David's friend, came into the
city, just as Absalom was entering Jerusalem.
[2 Samuel 16]
1 When David had passed a little beyond the summit, Ziba the servant
of Mephibosheth met him, with a couple of donkeys saddled, carrying
two hundred loaves of bread, one hundred bunches of raisins, one
hundred of summer fruits, and one skin of wine. 2 The king said to
Ziba, "Why have you brought these?" Ziba answered, "The donkeys
are for the king's household to ride, the bread and summer fruit for
the young men to eat, and the wine is for those to drink who faint in
the wilderness." 3 The king said, "And where is your master's son?"
Ziba said to the king, "He remains in Jerusalem; for he said, 'Today the
house of Israel will give me back my grandfather's kingdom.'" 4 Then
the king said to Ziba, "All that belonged to Mephibosheth is now
yours." Ziba said, "I do obeisance; let me find favor in your sight, my
lord the king."

635

2 SAMUEL 636

5 When King David came to Bahurim, a man of the family of the house
of Saul came out whose name was Shimei son of Gera; he came out
cursing. 6 He threw stones at David and at all the servants of King
David; now all the people and all the warriors were on his right and on
his left. 7 Shimei shouted while he cursed, "Out! Out! Murderer!
Scoundrel! 8 The LORD has avenged on all of you the blood of the
house of Saul, in whose place you have reigned; and the LORD has given
the kingdom into the hand of your son Absalom. See, disaster has
overtaken you; for you are a man of blood."
9 Then Abishai son of Zeruiah said to the king, "Why should this dead
dog curse my lord the king? Let me go over and take off his head." 10
But the king said, "What have I to do with you, you sons of Zeruiah? If
he is cursing because the LORD has said to him, 'Curse David,' who then
shall say, 'Why have you done so?'" 11 David said to Abishai and to all
his servants, "My own son seeks my life; how much more now may this
Benjaminite! Let him alone, and let him curse; for the LORD has bidden
him. 12 It may be that the LORD will look on my distress, and the LORD
will repay me with good for this cursing of me today." 13 So David and
his men went on the road, while Shimei went along on the hillside
opposite him and cursed as he went, throwing stones and flinging dust
at him. 14 The king and all the people who were with him arrived
weary at the Jordan; and there he refreshed himself.
Overcoming Ahithophel
15 Now Absalom and all the Israelites came to Jerusalem; Ahithophel
was with him. 16 When Hushai the Archite, David's friend, came to
Absalom, Hushai said to Absalom, "Long live the king! Long live the
king!" 17 Absalom said to Hushai, "Is this your loyalty to your friend?
Why did you not go with your friend?" 18 Hushai said to Absalom, "No;
but the one whom the LORD and this people and all the Israelites have
chosen, his I will be, and with him I will remain. 19 Moreover, whom
should I serve? Should it not be his son? Just as I have served your
father, so I will serve you."

636

2 SAMUEL 637

20 Then Absalom said to Ahithophel, "Give us your counsel; what shall
we do?" 21 Ahithophel said to Absalom, "Go in to your father's
concubines, the ones he has left to look after the house; and all Israel
will hear that you have made yourself odious to your father, and the
hands of all who are with you will be strengthened." 22 So they
pitched a tent for Absalom upon the roof; and Absalom went in to his
father's concubines in the sight of all Israel. 23 Now in those days the
counsel that Ahithophel gave was as if one consulted the oracle of
God; so all the counsel of Ahithophel was esteemed, both by David and
by Absalom.
[2 Samuel 17]
1 Moreover Ahithophel said to Absalom, "Let me choose twelve
thousand men, and I will set out and pursue David tonight. 2 I will
come upon him while he is weary and discouraged, and throw him into
a panic; and all the people who are with him will flee. I will strike
down only the king, 3 and I will bring all the people back to you as a
bride comes home to her husband. You seek the life of only one man,
and all the people will be at peace." 4 The advice pleased Absalom and
all the elders of Israel.
5 Then Absalom said, "Call Hushai the Archite also, and let us hear too
what he has to say." 6 When Hushai came to Absalom, Absalom said to
him, "This is what Ahithophel has said; shall we do as he advises? If
not, you tell us." 7 Then Hushai said to Absalom, "This time the counsel
that Ahithophel has given is not good." 8 Hushai continued, "You
know that your father and his men are warriors, and that they are
enraged, like a bear robbed of her cubs in the field. Besides, your
father is expert in war; he will not spend the night with the troops. 9
Even now he has hidden himself in one of the pits, or in some other
place. And when some of our troops fall at the first attack, whoever
hears it will say, 'There has been a slaughter among the troops who
follow Absalom.' 10 Then even the valiant warrior, whose heart is like
the heart of a lion, will utterly melt with fear; for all Israel knows that
your father is a warrior, and that those who are with him are valiant
warriors. 11 But my counsel is that all Israel be gathered to you, from
Dan to Beer-sheba, like the sand by the sea for multitude, and that you

637

2 SAMUEL 638

go to battle in person. 12 So we shall come upon him in whatever place
he may be found, and we shall light on him as the dew falls on the
ground; and he will not survive, nor will any of those with him. 13 If he
withdraws into a city, then all Israel will bring ropes to that city, and
we shall drag it into the valley, until not even a pebble is to be found
there." 14 Absalom and all the men of Israel said, "The counsel of
Hushai the Archite is better than the counsel of Ahithophel." For the
LORD had ordained to defeat the good counsel of Ahithophel, so that
the LORD might bring ruin on Absalom.
15 Then Hushai said to the priests Zadok and Abiathar, "Thus and so
did Ahithophel counsel Absalom and the elders of Israel; and thus and
so I have counseled. 16 Therefore send quickly and tell David, 'Do not
lodge tonight at the fords of the wilderness, but by all means cross
over; otherwise the king and all the people who are with him will be
swallowed up.'" 17 Jonathan and Ahimaaz were waiting at En-rogel; a
servant-girl used to go and tell them, and they would go and tell King
David; for they could not risk being seen entering the city. 18 But a boy
saw them, and told Absalom; so both of them went away quickly, and
came to the house of a man at Bahurim, who had a well in his
courtyard; and they went down into it. 19 The man's wife took a
covering, stretched it over the well's mouth, and spread out grain on it;
and nothing was known of it. 20 When Absalom's servants came to the
woman at the house, they said, "Where are Ahimaaz and Jonathan?"
The woman said to them, "They have crossed over the brook of
water." And when they had searched and could not find them, they
returned to Jerusalem.
21 After they had gone, the men came up out of the well, and went
and told King David. They said to David, "Go and cross the water
quickly; for thus and so has Ahithophel counseled against you." 22 So
David and all the people who were with him set out and crossed the
Jordan; by daybreak not one was left who had not crossed the Jordan.
23 When Ahithophel saw that his counsel was not followed, he saddled
his donkey and went off home to his own city. He set his house in
order, and hanged himself; he died and was buried in the tomb of his
father.

638

2 SAMUEL 639

24 Then David came to Mahanaim, while Absalom crossed the Jordan
with all the men of Israel. 25 Now Absalom had set Amasa over the
army in the place of Joab. Amasa was the son of a man named Ithra
the Ishmaelite, who had married Abigal daughter of Nahash, sister of
Zeruiah, Joab's mother. 26 The Israelites and Absalom encamped in the
land of Gilead.
27 When David came to Mahanaim, Shobi son of Nahash from Rabbah
of the Ammonites, and Machir son of Ammiel from Lo-debar, and
Barzillai the Gileadite from Rogelim, 28 brought beds, basins, and
earthen vessels, wheat, barley, meal, parched grain, beans and lentils,
29 honey and curds, sheep, and cheese from the herd, for David and
the people with him to eat; for they said, "The troops are hungry and
weary and thirsty in the wilderness."
[2 Samuel 18]
The defeat and death of Absalom
1 Then David mustered the men who were with him, and set over them
commanders of thousands and commanders of hundreds. 2 And David
divided the army into three groups: one third under the command of
Joab, one third under the command of Abishai son of Zeruiah, Joab's
brother, and one third under the command of Ittai the Gittite. The
king said to the men, "I myself will also go out with you." 3 But the
men said, "You shall not go out. For if we flee, they will not care about
us. If half of us die, they will not care about us. But you are worth ten
thousand of us; therefore it is better that you send us help from the
city." 4 The king said to them, "Whatever seems best to you I will do."
So the king stood at the side of the gate, while all the army marched
out by hundreds and by thousands. 5 The king ordered Joab and
Abishai and Ittai, saying, "Deal gently for my sake with the young man
Absalom." And all the people heard when the king gave orders to all
the commanders concerning Absalom.
6 So the army went out into the field against Israel; and the battle was
fought in the forest of Ephraim. 7 The men of Israel were defeated
there by the servants of David, and the slaughter there was great on
that day, twenty thousand men. 8 The battle spread over the face of all

639

2 SAMUEL 640

the country; and the forest claimed more victims that day than the
sword.
9 Absalom happened to meet the servants of David. Absalom was
riding on his mule, and the mule went under the thick branches of a
great oak. His head caught fast in the oak, and he was left hanging
between heaven and earth, while the mule that was under him went
on. 10 A man saw it, and told Joab, "I saw Absalom hanging in an oak."
11 Joab said to the man who told him, "What, you saw him! Why then
did you not strike him there to the ground? I would have been glad to
give you ten pieces of silver and a belt." 12 But the man said to Joab,
"Even if I felt in my hand the weight of a thousand pieces of silver, I
would not raise my hand against the king's son; for in our hearing the
king commanded you and Abishai and Ittai, saying: For my sake protect
the young man Absalom! 13 On the other hand, if I had dealt
treacherously against his life (and there is nothing hidden from the
king), then you yourself would have stood aloof." 14 Joab said, "I will
not waste time like this with you." He took three spears in his hand,
and thrust them into the heart of Absalom, while he was still alive in
the oak. 15 And ten young men, Joab's armor-bearers, surrounded
Absalom and struck him, and killed him.
16 Then Joab sounded the trumpet, and the troops came back from
pursuing Israel, for Joab restrained the troops. 17 They took Absalom,
threw him into a great pit in the forest, and raised over him a very
great heap of stones. Meanwhile all the Israelites fled to their homes.
18 Now Absalom in his lifetime had taken and set up for himself a pillar
that is in the King's Valley, for he said, "I have no son to keep my name
in remembrance"; he called the pillar by his own name. It is called
Absalom's Monument to this day.
19 Then Ahimaaz son of Zadok said, "Let me run, and carry tidings to
the king that the LORD has delivered him from the power of his
enemies." 20 Joab said to him, "You are not to carry tidings today; you
may carry tidings another day, but today you shall not do so, because
the king's son is dead." 21 Then Joab said to a Cushite, "Go, tell the
king what you have seen." The Cushite bowed before Joab, and ran. 22
Then Ahimaaz son of Zadok said again to Joab, "Come what may, let

640

2 SAMUEL 641

me also run after the Cushite." And Joab said, "Why will you run, my
son, seeing that you have no reward for the tidings?" 23 "Come what
may," he said, "I will run." So he said to him, "Run." Then Ahimaaz ran
by the way of the Plain, and outran the Cushite.
24 Now David was sitting between the two gates. The sentinel went up
to the roof of the gate by the wall, and when he looked up, he saw a
man running alone. 25 The sentinel shouted and told the king. The
king said, "If he is alone, there are tidings in his mouth." He kept
coming, and drew near. 26 Then the sentinel saw another man
running; and the sentinel called to the gatekeeper and said, "See,
another man running alone!" The king said, "He also is bringing
tidings." 27 The sentinel said, "I think the running of the first one is
like the running of Ahimaaz son of Zadok." The king said, "He is a
good man, and comes with good tidings."
28 Then Ahimaaz cried out to the king, "All is well!" He prostrated
himself before the king with his face to the ground, and said, "Blessed
be the LORD your God, who has delivered up the men who raised their
hand against my lord the king." 29 The king said, "Is it well with the
young man Absalom?" Ahimaaz answered, "When Joab sent your
servant, I saw a great tumult, but I do not know what it was." 30 The
king said, "Turn aside, and stand here." So he turned aside, and stood
still.
31 Then the Cushite came; and the Cushite said, "Good tidings for my
lord the king! For the LORD has vindicated you this day, delivering you
from the power of all who rose up against you." 32 The king said to
the Cushite, "Is it well with the young man Absalom?" The Cushite
answered, "May the enemies of my lord the king, and all who rise up
to do you harm, be like that young man."
33 The king was deeply moved, and went up to the chamber over the
gate, and wept; and as he went, he said, "O my son Absalom, my son,
my son Absalom! Would I had died instead of you, O Absalom, my son,
my son!"

641

2 SAMUEL 642

[2 Samuel 19]
1 It was told Joab, "The king is weeping and mourning for Absalom." 2
So the victory that day was turned into mourning for all the troops; for
the troops heard that day, "The king is grieving for his son." 3 The
troops stole into the city that day as soldiers steal in who are ashamed
when they flee in battle. 4 The king covered his face, and the king
cried with a loud voice, "O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my
son!" 5 Then Joab came into the house to the king, and said, "Today
you have covered with shame the faces of all your officers who have
saved your life today, and the lives of your sons and your daughters,
and the lives of your wives and your concubines, 6 for love of those
who hate you and for hatred of those who love you. You have made it
clear today that commanders and officers are nothing to you; for I
perceive that if Absalom were alive and all of us were dead today, then
you would be pleased. 7 So go out at once and speak kindly to your
servants; for I swear by the LORD, if you do not go, not a man will stay
with you this night; and this will be worse for you than any disaster
that has come upon you from your youth until now." 8 Then the king
got up and took his seat in the gate. The troops were all told, "See, the
king is sitting in the gate"; and all the troops came before the king.
Meanwhile, all the Israelites had fled to their homes. 9 All the people
were disputing throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, "The king
delivered us from the hand of our enemies, and saved us from the
hand of the Philistines; and now he has fled out of the land because of
Absalom. 10 But Absalom, whom we anointed over us, is dead in battle.
Now therefore why do you say nothing about bringing the king back?"
David returns to Jerusalem
11 King David sent this message to the priests Zadok and Abiathar, "Say
to the elders of Judah, 'Why should you be the last to bring the king
back to his house? The talk of all Israel has come to the king. 12 You
are my kin, you are my bone and my flesh; why then should you be the
last to bring back the king?' 13 And say to Amasa, 'Are you not my
bone and my flesh? So may God do to me, and more, if you are not the
commander of my army from now on, in place of Joab.'" 14 Amasa

642

2 SAMUEL 643

swayed the hearts of all the people of Judah as one, and they sent
word to the king, "Return, both you and all your servants." 15 So the
king came back to the Jordan; and Judah came to Gilgal to meet the
king and to bring him over the Jordan.
16 Shimei son of Gera, the Benjaminite, from Bahurim, hurried to come
down with the people of Judah to meet King David; 17 with him were a
thousand people from Benjamin. And Ziba, the servant of the house of
Saul, with his fifteen sons and his twenty servants, rushed down to the
Jordan ahead of the king, 18 while the crossing was taking place, to
bring over the king's household, and to do his pleasure.
Shimei son of Gera fell down before the king, as he was about to cross
the Jordan, 19 and said to the king, "May my lord not hold me guilty or
remember how your servant did wrong on the day my lord the king
left Jerusalem; may the king not bear it in mind. 20 For your servant
knows that I have sinned; therefore, see, I have come this day, the first
of all the house of Joseph to come down to meet my lord the king." 21
Abishai son of Zeruiah answered, "Shall not Shimei be put to death for
this, because he cursed the LORD's anointed?" 22 But David said, "What
have I to do with you, you sons of Zeruiah, that you should today
become an adversary to me? Shall anyone be put to death in Israel this
day? For do I not know that I am this day king over Israel?" 23 The king
said to Shimei, "You shall not die." And the king gave him his oath.
24 Mephibosheth grandson of Saul came down to meet the king; he
had not taken care of his feet, or trimmed his beard, or washed his
clothes, from the day the king left until the day he came back in safety.
25 When he came from Jerusalem to meet the king, the king said to
him, "Why did you not go with me, Mephibosheth?" 26 He answered,
"My lord, O king, my servant deceived me; for your servant said to him,
'Saddle a donkey for me, so that I may ride on it and go with the king.'
For your servant is lame. 27 He has slandered your servant to my lord
the king. But my lord the king is like the angel of God; do therefore
what seems good to you. 28 For all my father's house were doomed to
death before my lord the king; but you set your servant among those
who eat at your table. What further right have I, then, to appeal to the
king?" 29 The king said to him, "Why speak any more of your affairs? I

643

2 SAMUEL 644

have decided: you and Ziba shall divide the land." 30 Mephibosheth
said to the king, "Let him take it all, since my lord the king has arrived
home safely."
31 Now Barzillai the Gileadite had come down from Rogelim; he went
on with the king to the Jordan, to escort him over the Jordan. 32
Barzillai was a very aged man, eighty years old. He had provided the
king with food while he stayed at Mahanaim, for he was a very
wealthy man. 33 The king said to Barzillai, "Come over with me, and I
will provide for you in Jerusalem at my side." 34 But Barzillai said to
the king, "How many years have I still to live, that I should go up with
the king to Jerusalem? 35 Today I am eighty years old; can I discern
what is pleasant and what is not? Can your servant taste what he eats
or what he drinks? Can I still listen to the voice of singing men and
singing women? Why then should your servant be an added burden to
my lord the king? 36 Your servant will go a little way over the Jordan
with the king. Why should the king recompense me with such a
reward? 37 Please let your servant return, so that I may die in my own
town, near the graves of my father and my mother. But here is your
servant Chimham; let him go over with my lord the king; and do for
him whatever seems good to you." 38 The king answered, "Chimham
shall go over with me, and I will do for him whatever seems good to
you; and all that you desire of me I will do for you." 39 Then all the
people crossed over the Jordan, and the king crossed over; the king
kissed Barzillai and blessed him, and he returned to his own home. 40
The king went on to Gilgal, and Chimham went on with him; all the
people of Judah, and also half the people of Israel, brought the king
on his way.
41 Then all the people of Israel came to the king, and said to him,
"Why have our kindred the people of Judah stolen you away, and
brought the king and his household over the Jordan, and all David's
men with him?" 42 All the people of Judah answered the people of
Israel, "Because the king is near of kin to us. Why then are you angry
over this matter? Have we eaten at all at the king's expense? Or has he
given us any gift?" 43 But the people of Israel answered the people of
Judah, "We have ten shares in the king, and in David also we have
more than you. Why then did you despise us? Were we not the first to

644

2 SAMUEL 645

speak of bringing back our king?" But the words of the people of
Judah were fiercer than the words of the people of Israel.
[2 Samuel 20]
Sheba's revolt
1 Now a scoundrel named Sheba son of Bichri, a Benjaminite, happened
to be there. He sounded the trumpet and cried out,
"We have no portion in David,
no share in the son of Jesse!
Everyone to your tents, O Israel!"
2 So all the people of Israel withdrew from David and followed Sheba
son of Bichri; but the people of Judah followed their king steadfastly
from the Jordan to Jerusalem.
3 David came to his house at Jerusalem; and the king took the ten
concubines whom he had left to look after the house, and put them in
a house under guard, and provided for them, but did not go in to
them. So they were shut up until the day of their death, living as if in
widowhood.
4 Then the king said to Amasa, "Call the men of Judah together to me
within three days, and be here yourself." 5 So Amasa went to summon
Judah; but he delayed beyond the set time that had been appointed
him. 6 David said to Abishai, "Now Sheba son of Bichri will do us more
harm than Absalom; take your lord's servants and pursue him, or he
will find fortified cities for himself, and escape from us." 7 Joab's men
went out after him, along with the Cherethites, the Pelethites, and all
the warriors; they went out from Jerusalem to pursue Sheba son of
Bichri. 8 When they were at the large stone that is in Gibeon, Amasa
came to meet them. Now Joab was wearing a soldier's garment and
over it was a belt with a sword in its sheath fastened at his waist; as he
went forward it fell out. 9 Joab said to Amasa, "Is it well with you, my
brother?" And Joab took Amasa by the beard with his right hand to
kiss him. 10 But Amasa did not notice the sword in Joab's hand; Joab
struck him in the belly so that his entrails poured out on the ground,
and he died. He did not strike a second blow.

645

2 SAMUEL 646

Then Joab and his brother Abishai pursued Sheba son of Bichri. 11 And
one of Joab's men took his stand by Amasa, and said, "Whoever favors
Joab, and whoever is for David, let him follow Joab." 12 Amasa lay
wallowing in his blood on the highway, and the man saw that all the
people were stopping. Since he saw that all who came by him were
stopping, he carried Amasa from the highway into a field, and threw a
garment over him. 13 Once he was removed from the highway, all the
people went on after Joab to pursue Sheba son of Bichri.
14 Sheba passed through all the tribes of Israel to Abel of Beth-maacah;
and all the Bichrites assembled, and followed him inside. 15 Joab's
forces came and besieged him in Abel of Beth-maacah; they threw up a
siege ramp against the city, and it stood against the rampart. Joab's
forces were battering the wall to break it down. 16 Then a wise woman
called from the city, "Listen! Listen! Tell Joab, 'Come here, I want to
speak to you.'" 17 He came near her; and the woman said, "Are you
Joab?" He answered, "I am." Then she said to him, "Listen to the
words of your servant." He answered, "I am listening." 18 Then she
said, "They used to say in the old days, 'Let them inquire at Abel'; and
so they would settle a matter. 19 I am one of those who are peaceable
and faithful in Israel; you seek to destroy a city that is a mother in
Israel; why will you swallow up the heritage of the LORD?" 20 Joab
answered, "Far be it from me, far be it, that I should swallow up or
destroy! 21 That is not the case! But a man of the hill country of
Ephraim, called Sheba son of Bichri, has lifted up his hand against King
David; give him up alone, and I will withdraw from the city." The
woman said to Joab, "His head shall be thrown over the wall to you."
22 Then the woman went to all the people with her wise plan. And
they cut off the head of Sheba son of Bichri, and threw it out to Joab.
So he blew the trumpet, and they dispersed from the city, and all went
to their homes, while Joab returned to Jerusalem to the king.
23 Now Joab was in command of all the army of Israel; Benaiah son of
Jehoiada was in command of the Cherethites and the Pelethites; 24
Adoram was in charge of the forced labor; Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud
was the recorder; 25 Sheva was secretary; Zadok and Abiathar were
priests; 26 and Ira the Jairite was also David's priest.

646

2 SAMUEL 647

[2 Samuel 21]
An appendix to the miscellaneous stories and poems; the execution of
Saul's heirs
1 Now there was a famine in the days of David for three years, year
after year; and David inquired of the LORD. The LORD said, "There is
bloodguilt on Saul and on his house, because he put the Gibeonites to
death." 2 So the king called the Gibeonites and spoke to them. (Now
the Gibeonites were not of the people of Israel, but of the remnant of
the Amorites; although the people of Israel had sworn to spare them,
Saul had tried to wipe them out in his zeal for the people of Israel and
Judah.) 3 David said to the Gibeonites, "What shall I do for you? How
shall I make expiation, that you may bless the heritage of the LORD?" 4
The Gibeonites said to him, "It is not a matter of silver or gold between
us and Saul or his house; neither is it for us to put anyone to death in
Israel." He said, "What do you say that I should do for you?" 5 They
said to the king, "The man who consumed us and planned to destroy
us, so that we should have no place in all the territory of Israel — 6 let
seven of his sons be handed over to us, and we will impale them before
the LORD at Gibeon on the mountain of the LORD." The king said, "I will
hand them over."
7 But the king spared Mephibosheth, the son of Saul's son Jonathan,
because of the oath of the LORD that was between them, between
David and Jonathan son of Saul. 8 The king took the two sons of
Rizpah daughter of Aiah, whom she bore to Saul, Armoni and
Mephibosheth; and the five sons of Merab daughter of Saul, whom she
bore to Adriel son of Barzillai the Meholathite; 9 he gave them into the
hands of the Gibeonites, and they impaled them on the mountain
before the LORD. The seven of them perished together. They were put
to death in the first days of harvest, at the beginning of barley harvest.
10 Then Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took sackcloth, and spread it on a
rock for herself, from the beginning of harvest until rain fell on them
from the heavens; she did not allow the birds of the air to come on the
bodies by day, or the wild animals by night. 11 When David was told
what Rizpah daughter of Aiah, the concubine of Saul, had done, 12
David went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of his son

647

2 SAMUEL 648

Jonathan from the people of Jabesh-gilead, who had stolen them from
the public square of Beth-shan, where the Philistines had hung them
up, on the day the Philistines killed Saul on Gilboa. 13 He brought up
from there the bones of Saul and the bones of his son Jonathan; and
they gathered the bones of those who had been impaled. 14 They
buried the bones of Saul and of his son Jonathan in the land of
Benjamin in Zela, in the tomb of his father Kish; they did all that the
king commanded. After that, God heeded supplications for the land.
Stories from the Philistine wars
15 The Philistines went to war again with Israel, and David went down
together with his servants. They fought against the Philistines, and
David grew weary. 16 Ishbi-benob, one of the descendants of the
giants, whose spear weighed three hundred shekels of bronze, and
who was fitted out with new weapons, said he would kill David. 17 But
Abishai son of Zeruiah came to his aid, and attacked the Philistine and
killed him. Then David's men swore to him, "You shall not go out with
us to battle any longer, so that you do not quench the lamp of Israel."
18 After this a battle took place with the Philistines, at Gob; then
Sibbecai the Hushathite killed Saph, who was one of the descendants
of the giants. 19 Then there was another battle with the Philistines at
Gob; and Elhanan son of Jaare-oregim, the Bethlehemite, killed Goliath
the Gittite, the shaft of whose spear was like a weaver's beam. 20
There was again war at Gath, where there was a man of great size,
who had six fingers on each hand, and six toes on each foot, twentyfour in number; he too was descended from the giants. 21 When he
taunted Israel, Jonathan son of David's brother Shimei, killed him. 22
These four were descended from the giants in Gath; they fell by the
hands of David and his servants.
[2 Samuel 22]
A psalm of praise
1 David spoke to the LORD the words of this song on the day when the
LORD delivered him from the hand of all his enemies, and from the
hand of Saul. 2 He said:

648

2 SAMUEL 649

The LORD is my rock, my fortress, and my deliverer,
3
my God, my rock, in whom I take refuge,
my shield and the horn of my salvation,
my stronghold and my refuge,
my savior; you save me from violence.
4 I call upon the LORD, who is worthy to be praised,
and I am saved from my enemies.
5 For the waves of death encompassed me,
the torrents of perdition assailed me;
6 the cords of Sheol entangled me,
the snares of death confronted me.
7 In my distress I called upon the LORD;
to my God I called.
From his temple he heard my voice,
and my cry came to his ears.
8 Then the earth reeled and rocked;
the foundations of the heavens trembled
and quaked, because he was angry.
9 Smoke went up from his nostrils,
and devouring fire from his mouth;
glowing coals flamed forth from him.
10 He bowed the heavens, and came down;
thick darkness was under his feet.
11 He rode on a cherub, and flew;
he was seen upon the wings of the wind.
12 He made darkness around him a canopy,
thick clouds, a gathering of water.
13 Out of the brightness before him
coals of fire flamed forth.
14 The LORD thundered from heaven;
the Most High uttered his voice.
15 He sent out arrows, and scattered them
— lightning, and routed them.

649

2 SAMUEL 650

16 Then the channels of the sea were seen,
the foundations of the world were laid bare
at the rebuke of the LORD,
at the blast of the breath of his nostrils.
17 He reached from on high, he took me,
he drew me out of mighty waters.
18 He delivered me from my strong enemy,
from those who hated me;
for they were too mighty for me.
19 They came upon me in the day of my calamity,
but the LORD was my stay.
20 He brought me out into a broad place;
he delivered me, because he delighted in me.
21 The LORD rewarded me according to my righteousness;
according to the cleanness of my hands he recompensed me.
22 For I have kept the ways of the LORD,
and have not wickedly departed from my God.
23 For all his ordinances were before me,
and from his statutes I did not turn aside.
24 I was blameless before him,
and I kept myself from guilt.
25 Therefore the LORD has recompensed me according to
my righteousness, according to my cleanness in his sight.
26 With the loyal you show yourself loyal;
with the blameless you show yourself blameless;
27 with the pure you show yourself pure,
and with the crooked you show yourself perverse.
28 You deliver a humble people,
but your eyes are upon the haughty to bring them down.
29 Indeed, you are my lamp, O LORD,
the LORD lightens my darkness.
30 By you I can crush a troop,
and by my God I can leap over a wall.

650

2 SAMUEL 651

31 This God — his way is perfect;
the promise of the LORD proves true;
he is a shield for all who take refuge in him.
32 For who is God, but the LORD?
And who is a rock, except our God?
33 The God who has girded me with strength
has opened wide my path.
34 He made my feet like the feet of deer,
and set me secure on the heights.
35 He trains my hands for war,
so that my arms can bend a bow of bronze.
36 You have given me the shield of your salvation,
and your help has made me great.
37 You have made me stride freely,
and my feet do not slip;
38 I pursued my enemies and destroyed them,
and did not turn back until they were consumed.
39 I consumed them; I struck them down, so that they did not rise;
they fell under my feet.
40 For you girded me with strength for the battle;
you made my assailants sink under me.
41 You made my enemies turn their backs to me,
those who hated me, and I destroyed them.
42 They looked, but there was no one to save them;
they cried to the LORD, but he did not answer them.
43 I beat them fine like the dust of the earth,
I crushed them and stamped them down like the
mire of the streets.
44 You delivered me from strife with the peoples;
you kept me as the head of the nations;
people whom I had not known served me.
45 Foreigners came cringing to me;
as soon as they heard of me, they obeyed me.
46 Foreigners lost heart,
and came trembling out of their strongholds.

651

2 SAMUEL 652

47 The LORD lives! Blessed be my rock,
and exalted be my God, the rock of my salvation,
48 the God who gave me vengeance
and brought down peoples under me,
49 who brought me out from my enemies;
you exalted me above my adversaries,
you delivered me from the violent.
50 For this I will extol you, O LORD, among the nations,
and sing praises to your name.
51 He is a tower of salvation for his king,
and shows steadfast love to his anointed,
to David and his descendants forever.
[2 Samuel 23]
The last words of David
1 Now these are the last words of David:
The oracle of David, son of Jesse,
the oracle of the man whom God exalted,
the anointed of the God of Jacob,
the favorite of the Strong One of Israel:
2 The spirit of the LORD speaks through me,
his word is upon my tongue.
3 The God of Israel has spoken,
the Rock of Israel has said to me:
One who rules over people justly,
ruling in the fear of God,
4 is like the light of morning,
like the sun rising on a cloudless morning,
gleaming from the rain on the grassy land.
5 Is not my house like this with God?
For he has made with me an everlasting covenant,
ordered in all things and secure.
Will he not cause to prosper
all my help and my desire?

652

2 SAMUEL 653

6 But the godless are all like thorns that are thrown away;
for they cannot be picked up with the hand;
7 to touch them one uses an iron bar
or the shaft of a spear.
And they are entirely consumed in fire on the spot.
David's heroes
8 These are the names of the warriors whom David had: Joshebbasshebeth a Tahchemonite; he was chief of the Three; he wielded his
spear against eight hundred whom he killed at one time.
9 Next to him among the three warriors was Eleazar son of Dodo son
of Ahohi. He was with David when they defied the Philistines who
were gathered there for battle. The Israelites withdrew, 10 but he
stood his ground. He struck down the Philistines until his arm grew
weary, though his hand clung to the sword. The LORD brought about a
great victory that day. Then the people came back to him — but only
to strip the dead.
11 Next to him was Shammah son of Agee, the Hararite. The Philistines
gathered together at Lehi, where there was a plot of ground full of
lentils; and the army fled from the Philistines. 12 But he took his stand
in the middle of the plot, defended it, and killed the Philistines; and
the LORD brought about a great victory.
13 Towards the beginning of harvest three of the thirty chiefs went
down to join David at the cave of Adullam, while a band of Philistines
was encamped in the valley of Rephaim. 14 David was then in the
stronghold; and the garrison of the Philistines was then at Bethlehem.
15 David said longingly, "O that someone would give me water to
drink from the well of Bethlehem that is by the gate!" 16 Then the
three warriors broke through the camp of the Philistines, drew water
from the well of Bethlehem that was by the gate, and brought it to
David. But he would not drink of it; he poured it out to the LORD, 17 for
he said, "The LORD forbid that I should do this. Can I drink the blood of
the men who went at the risk of their lives?" Therefore he would not
drink it. The three warriors did these things.

653

2 SAMUEL 654

18 Now Abishai son of Zeruiah, the brother of Joab, was chief of the
Thirty. With his spear he fought against three hundred men and killed
them, and won a name beside the Three. 19 He was the most
renowned of the Thirty, and became their commander; but he did not
attain to the Three.
20 Benaiah son of Jehoiada was a valiant warrior from Kabzeel, a doer
of great deeds; he struck down two sons of Ariel of Moab. He also
went down and killed a lion in a pit on a day when snow had fallen. 21
And he killed an Egyptian, a handsome man. The Egyptian had a spear
in his hand; but Benaiah went against him with a staff, snatched the
spear out of the Egyptian's hand, and killed him with his own spear. 22
Such were the things Benaiah son of Jehoiada did, and won a name
beside the three warriors. 23 He was renowned among the Thirty, but
he did not attain to the Three. And David put him in charge of his
bodyguard.
24 Among the Thirty were Asahel brother of Joab; Elhanan son of
Dodo of Bethlehem; 25 Shammah of Harod; Elika of Harod; 26 Helez
the Paltite; Ira son of Ikkesh of Tekoa; 27 Abiezer of Anathoth;
Mebunnai the Hushathite; 28 Zalmon the Ahohite; Maharai of
Netophah; 29 Heleb son of Baanah of Netophah; Ittai son of Ribai of
Gibeah of the Benjaminites; 30 Benaiah of Pirathon; Hiddai of the
torrents of Gaash; 31 Abi-albon the Arbathite; Azmaveth of Bahurim; 32
Eliahba of Shaalbon; the sons of Jashen: Jonathan 33 son of Shammah
the Hararite; Ahiam son of Sharar the Hararite; 34 Eliphelet son of
Ahasbai of Maacah; Eliam son of Ahithophel the Gilonite; 35 Hezro of
Carmel; Paarai the Arbite; 36 Igal son of Nathan of Zobah; Bani the
Gadite; 37 Zelek the Ammonite; Naharai of Beeroth, the armor-bearer
of Joab son of Zeruiah; 38 Ira the Ithrite; Gareb the Ithrite; 39 Uriah the
Hittite — thirty-seven in all.
[2 Samuel 24]
David's census
1 Again the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and he incited
David against them, saying, "Go, count the people of Israel and
Judah." 2 So the king said to Joab and the commanders of the army,

654

2 SAMUEL 655

who were with him, "Go through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan to
Beer-sheba, and take a census of the people, so that I may know how
many there are." 3 But Joab said to the king, "May the LORD your God
increase the number of the people a hundredfold, while the eyes of my
lord the king can still see it! But why does my lord the king want to do
this?" 4 But the king's word prevailed against Joab and the
commanders of the army. So Joab and the commanders of the army
went out from the presence of the king to take a census of the people
of Israel. 5 They crossed the Jordan, and began from Aroer and from
the city that is in the middle of the valley, toward Gad and on to Jazer.
6 Then they came to Gilead, and to Kadesh in the land of the Hittites;
and they came to Dan, and from Dan they went around to Sidon, 7 and
came to the fortress of Tyre and to all the cities of the Hivites and
Canaanites; and they went out to the Negeb of Judah at Beer-sheba. 8
So when they had gone through all the land, they came back to
Jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days. 9 Joab reported
to the king the number of those who had been recorded: in Israel
there were eight hundred thousand soldiers able to draw the sword,
and those of Judah were five hundred thousand.
10 But afterward, David was stricken to the heart because he had
numbered the people. David said to the LORD, "I have sinned greatly in
what I have done. But now, O LORD, I pray you, take away the guilt of
your servant; for I have done very foolishly." 11 When David rose in the
morning, the word of the LORD came to the prophet Gad, David's seer,
saying, 12 "Go and say to David: Thus says the LORD: Three things I offer
you; choose one of them, and I will do it to you." 13 So Gad came to
David and told him; he asked him, "Shall three years of famine come to
you on your land? Or will you flee three months before your foes while
they pursue you? Or shall there be three days' pestilence in your land?
Now consider, and decide what answer I shall return to the one who
sent me." 14 Then David said to Gad, "I am in great distress; let us fall
into the hand of the LORD, for his mercy is great; but let me not fall
into human hands."

655

2 SAMUEL 656

15 So the LORD sent a pestilence on Israel from that morning until the
appointed time; and seventy thousand of the people died, from Dan to
Beer-sheba. 16 But when the angel stretched out his hand toward
Jerusalem to destroy it, the LORD relented concerning the evil, and said
to the angel who was bringing destruction among the people, "It is
enough; now stay your hand." The angel of the LORD was then by the
threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite. 17 When David saw the angel
who was destroying the people, he said to the LORD, "I alone have
sinned, and I alone have done wickedly; but these sheep, what have
they done? Let your hand, I pray, be against me and against my
father's house."
18 That day Gad came to David and said to him, "Go up and erect an
altar to the LORD on the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite." 19
Following Gad's instructions, David went up, as the LORD had
commanded. 20 When Araunah looked down, he saw the king and his
servants coming toward him; and Araunah went out and prostrated
himself before the king with his face to the ground. 21 Araunah said,
"Why has my lord the king come to his servant?" David said, "To buy
the threshing floor from you in order to build an altar to the LORD, so
that the plague may be averted from the people." 22 Then Araunah
said to David, "Let my lord the king take and offer up what seems
good to him; here are the oxen for the burnt offering, and the
threshing sledges and the yokes of the oxen for the wood. 23 All this, O
king, Araunah gives to the king." And Araunah said to the king, "May
the LORD your God respond favorably to you."
24 But the king said to Araunah, "No, but I will buy them from you for
a price; I will not offer burnt offerings to the LORD my God that cost me
nothing." So David bought the threshing floor and the oxen for fifty
shekels of silver. 25 David built there an altar to the LORD, and offered
burnt offerings and offerings of well-being. So the LORD answered his
supplication for the land, and the plague was averted from Israel.

656

1 KINGS 657

1 KINGS
Introduction
First Kings continues the story of Israel begun in the early chapters of
Genesis, carrying forward in particular the account of the period of the
monarchy already begun in 1-2 Samuel. It opens with the transition of
power from David to Solomon (chs 1-2) and proceeds to recount the
reign of Solomon over a united Israel (chs 3-11) and the subsequent
history of the divided kingdoms of (northern) Israel and (southern)
Judah through to the reigns Ahaziah of Israel and Jehoshaphat of
Judah (chs 12-22). The artificial break between between First and
Second Kings right in the middle of the account of Ahaziah's reign (1
Kings 22.51-2 Kings 1.18) is evidence that they originally formed one
book, relating Israel's story under kingly rule from the death of David
until the exile. The division into two books was originally made in the
ancient Greek translation, the Septuagint (LXX), of the Hebrew Bible.
The books of Kings probably resulted from a long process of collecting,
writing, editing, and revising diverse materials that themselves were
based upon written documents or oral traditions. Among the written
documents we must no doubt include temple and palace annals (for
instance, the Book of the Acts of Solomon, 11.41; the Book of the
Annals of the Kings of Israel, 14.19; and the Book of the Annals of the
Kings of Judah, 14.29). Some scholars have thought that the opening
two chapters of 1 Kings belonged originally to an extended narrative
about David's reign known as the "Court History" or "Succession
Narrative." Among the oral traditions, we should think primarily of the
stories of Elijah and Elisha in 1 Kings 17-19, 21, and 2 Kings 1-8, although
other prophetical cycles of stories may also have existed. Decisive
moments in this process of composition may have occurred as early as
the reigns of the reforming kings Hezekiah and Josiah (eight-seventh
centuries BCE), with revisions taking place after 586 BCE in light of the
Judean exile. Those involved in the process seem to have been
657

1 KINGS 658

particularly influenced by the book of Deuteronomy, whose language
and theological themes are prominent (for instance, in the long review
of the history of Israel in 2 Kings 17). For this reason 1-2 Kings are often
thought of as comprising part of a "Deuteronomistic History" that
includes Joshua, Judges, and Samuel. The close connection between
Deuteronomy and Kings should not, however, distract attention from
the many ways in which 1-2 Kings also invite reflection in the light of
Pentateuchal writings (especially the book of Exodus) and of the latter
prophets. The process of composition was also a process by which
different biblical books were progressively viewed more and more as
one scripture.
In summarizing the character of the books of Kings, we should
emphasize three distinct but interrelated features. First of all, these
books tell us a story, bound together by multiple verbal and thematic
links between its parts — they are narrative literature. The main
characters in this story are the Lord God of Israel, various Israelite kings
and prophets, and a number of significant foreigners. The plot
concerns the attempt Israel makes (or more often, fails to make) under
its monarchy to live as the people of God in the promised land, and
how God deals with his people in their success and failure. It is a plot
worked out in an ordered way, as the reign of each king finds its
particular place in the framework (the so-called "regnal formulae")
around which the book are constructed. This framework (e.g., 22.41-43,
45, 50) characteristically tells us when, in relation to another king, a
certain monarch came to the throne; how long he reigned; and the
name of his capital city. It gives us information about his death/burial
and his successor, and tells us where to look for further information
about him. It offers an evaluation of him in terms of his religious
policy. In the case of Judean (rather than northern Israelite) kings, it
tells us the name of his mother and his age at his accession to the
throne. These formulae, with their general regularity of expression
throughout Kings, contribute much to the books' sense of coherence.
The narrative more generally also gives every impression of the care
and artistry exercised by the authors as they composed them.

658

1 KINGS 659

The story told in Kings is, secondly, a story about the past. We are
dealing here with historiographical literature. For all the narrative
artistry involved in the telling, there is a concern to write about a real
past that is shared by other peoples in the ancient Near East (whose
own records frequently shed light on this period of Israel's history). The
concern is best evidenced in the frequent reference to royal annals that
may otherwise be consulted by the original reader (e.g., 14.29; 15.31).
The portrait painted of the past is naturally only one among the many
that it might have been possible to illustrate. It is clear on any reading
of Kings that the authors do not tells us everything that has happened
in the region of Palestine during that part of the Iron Age about which
they are writing, nor do they claim to do so. Theirs is a highly selective
account, in which fairly long periods can be passed over very briefly,
and periods of a year or less can occupy considerable space. They
present a particular view of the past, with its own highlights and its
own persuasive appeal. All historiographers must inevitably do this — a
point whose force has not always been grasped by those who in recent
years have expressed skepticism about the idea that literature like
Kings should be regarded historiographical literature. The political
history of Israel, for our biblical authors, is important not so much in
itself as for what it reveals about the moral and religious failure that
eventually led to the loss of national identity and autonomy. This
failure is rooted especially in the apostasy of Solomon (ch 11), which
precedes the long and troubled story of the divided kingdoms, and of
Jeroboam who, as the first king of the North, fell away from God's
(and David's) ways and paved the way in this respect for his successors
(chs 11-14).
Finally, the books of Kings are didactic literature. They seek to teach
their readers something about the God of Israel and his ways. Several
themes are prominent in the story when viewed from this perspective.
The first is that the Lord is indeed God, and must not be confused with
the various gods worshiped within Israel and outside, which are simply
human creations (see 12.25-30; 2 Kings 19.14-19). The Lord is the
incomparable creator of heaven and earth, distinct from the world that
he has created, yet powerfully active within it. He has both coercive
and persuasive power, and uses both in the course of human events. It
is he, and not any god, who controls nature (e.g., chs 17-19). It is he,

659

1 KINGS 660

and neither god, nor king, nor prophet, who controls history (see 22.138; 2 Kings 5.1-18). This latter point is perhaps illustrated most clearly in
the way that prophets generally function within Kings, describing the
future before God brings it about (e.g., 11.29-39; 2 Kings 17.13). A
second theme is that as the only God there is, the Lord demands
exclusive worship. The main interest is in the content of this worship,
which must not involve idols or images, nor reflect any aspect of the
fertility and other rituals of "the nations" (see 11.1-40; 12.25-13.34).
There is an accompanying concern about the place of worship, which is
ideally the Jerusalem Temple, and not the local "high places" (see 3.2;
15.14). The books also elaborate the moral wrongs that inevitably
accompany false worship (see ch 21; 2 Kings 16.1-4). Third, as the giver
of the law that defines true worship, right thinking, and overall
behavior, the Lord is also one who executes the judgment upon
wrongdoers. The world of Kings is a moral world, in which wrongdoing
is punished, whether the sinner be king (11.9-13), prophet (13.7-25), or
ordinary Israelite (2 Kings 7.17-20). There is, on the other hand, no clean
correlation between sin and judgment in Kings, largely because of the
compassionate character of the Judge who accepts the repentant
sinner, who does not desire final judgment to fall upon his creatures
(see 2 Kings 13.23; 14.27), and who is always ready to find cause why
such judgment should be delayed or mitigated (as in 21.25-28; 2 Kings
22.15-20). Yet sin can, nevertheless, accumulate to such an extent that
judgment falls not only upon individuals but upon whole cultures,
sweeping the relatively innocent away with the guilty (see 2 Kings
23.29-25.26). A final prominent theme in Kings is divine promise,
especially the repeated promise to David that he should have an
eternal dynasty (11.36; 15.4); not also the reference to the promise to
Israel's ancestors in 2 Kings 13.23. These promises each in their own way
hold out hope for Israel that, even after the exile, there may be
forgiveness in place of judgment (see 8.22-53) and a future for the
Davidic line through the descendants of King Jehoiachin (see 2 Kings
25.27-30).

660

1 KINGS 661

[1 Kings 1]
Solomon becomes king
1 King David was old and advanced in years; and although they covered
him with clothes, he could not get warm. 2 So his servants said to him,
"Let a young virgin be sought for my lord the king, and let her wait on
the king, and be his attendant; let her lie in your bosom, so that my
lord the king may be warm." 3 So they searched for a beautiful girl
throughout all the territory of Israel, and found Abishag the
Shunammite, and brought her to the king. 4 The girl was very
beautiful. She became the king's attendant and served him, but the
king did not know her sexually.
5 Now Adonijah son of Haggith exalted himself, saying, "I will be
king"; he prepared for himself chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to
run before him. 6 His father had never at any time displeased him by
asking, "Why have you done thus and so?" He was also a very
handsome man, and he was born next after Absalom. 7 He conferred
with Joab son of Zeruiah and with the priest Abiathar, and they
supported Adonijah. 8 But the priest Zadok, and Benaiah son of
Jehoiada, and the prophet Nathan, and Shimei, and Rei, and David's
own warriors did not side with Adonijah.
9 Adonijah sacrificed sheep, oxen, and fatted cattle by the stone
Zoheleth, which is beside En-rogel, and he invited all his brothers, the
king's sons, and all the royal officials of Judah, 10 but he did not invite
the prophet Nathan or Benaiah or the warriors or his brother Solomon.
11 Then Nathan said to Bathsheba, Solomon's mother, "Have you not
heard that Adonijah son of Haggith has become king and our lord
David does not know it? 12 Now therefore come, let me give you
advice, so that you may save your own life and the life of your son
Solomon. 13 Go in at once to King David, and say to him, 'Did you not,
my lord the king, swear to your servant, saying: Your son Solomon shall
succeed me as king, and he shall sit on my throne? Why then is
Adonijah king?' 14 Then while you are still there speaking with the
king, I will come in after you and confirm your words."

661

1 KINGS 662

15 So Bathsheba went to the king in his room. The king was very old;
Abishag the Shunammite was attending the king. 16 Bathsheba bowed
and did obeisance to the king, and the king said, "What do you wish?"
17 She said to him, "My lord, you swore to your servant by the LORD
your God, saying: Your son Solomon shall succeed me as king, and he
shall sit on my throne. 18 But now suddenly Adonijah has become king,
though you, my lord the king, do not know it. 19 He has sacrificed
oxen, fatted cattle, and sheep in abundance, and has invited all the
children of the king, the priest Abiathar, and Joab the commander of
the army; but your servant Solomon he has not invited. 20 But you, my
lord the king — the eyes of all Israel are on you to tell them who shall
sit on the throne of my lord the king after him. 21 Otherwise it will
come to pass, when my lord the king sleeps with his ancestors, that my
son Solomon and I will be counted offenders."
22 While she was still speaking with the king, the prophet Nathan came
in. 23 The king was told, "Here is the prophet Nathan." When he came
in before the king, he did obeisance to the king, with his face to the
ground. 24 Nathan said, "My lord the king, have you said, 'Adonijah
shall succeed me as king, and he shall sit on my throne'? 25 For today
he has gone down and has sacrificed oxen, fatted cattle, and sheep in
abundance, and has invited all the king's children, Joab the
commander of the army, and the priest Abiathar, who are now eating
and drinking before him, and saying, 'Long live King Adonijah!' 26 But
he did not invite me, your servant, and the priest Zadok, and Benaiah
son of Jehoiada, and your servant Solomon. 27 Has this thing been
brought about by my lord the king and you have not let your servants
know who should sit on the throne of my lord the king after him?"
28 King David answered, "Summon Bathsheba to me." So she came
into the king's presence, and stood before the king. 29 The king swore,
saying, "As the LORD lives, who has saved my life from every adversity,
30 as I swore to you by the LORD, the God of Israel, 'Your son Solomon
shall succeed me as king, and he shall sit on my throne in my place,' so
will I do this day." 31 Then Bathsheba bowed with her face to the
ground, and did obeisance to the king, and said, "May my lord King
David live forever!"

662

1 KINGS 663

32 King David said, "Summon to me the priest Zadok, the prophet
Nathan, and Benaiah son of Jehoiada." When they came before the
king, 33 the king said to them, "Take with you the servants of your
lord, and have my son Solomon ride on my own mule, and bring him
down to Gihon. 34 There let the priest Zadok and the prophet Nathan
anoint him king over Israel; then blow the trumpet, and say, 'Long live
King Solomon!' 35 You shall go up following him. Let him enter and sit
on my throne; he shall be king in my place; for I have appointed him to
be ruler over Israel and over Judah." 36 Benaiah son of Jehoiada
answered the king, "Amen! May the LORD, the God of my lord the king,
so ordain. 37 As the LORD has been with my lord the king, so may he be
with Solomon, and make his throne greater than the throne of my lord
King David."
38 So the priest Zadok, the prophet Nathan, and Benaiah son of
Jehoiada, and the Cherethites and the Pelethites, went down and had
Solomon ride on King David's mule, and led him to Gihon. 39 There the
priest Zadok took the horn of oil from the tent and anointed Solomon.
Then they blew the trumpet, and all the people said, "Long live King
Solomon!" 40 And all the people went up following him, playing on
pipes and rejoicing with great joy, so that the earth quaked at their
noise.
41 Adonijah and all the guests who were with him heard it as they
finished feasting. When Joab heard the sound of the trumpet, he said,
"Why is the city in an uproar?" 42 While he was still speaking,
Jonathan son of the priest Abiathar arrived. Adonijah said, "Come in,
for you are a worthy man and surely you bring good news." 43
Jonathan answered Adonijah, "No, for our lord King David has made
Solomon king; 44 the king has sent with him the priest Zadok, the
prophet Nathan, and Benaiah son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites and
the Pelethites; and they had him ride on the king's mule; 45 the priest
Zadok and the prophet Nathan have anointed him king at Gihon; and
they have gone up from there rejoicing, so that the city is in an uproar.
This is the noise that you heard. 46 Solomon now sits on the royal
throne. 47 Moreover the king's servants came to congratulate our lord
King David, saying, 'May God make the name of Solomon more famous
than yours, and make his throne greater than your throne.' The king

663

1 KINGS 664

bowed in worship on the bed 48 and went on to pray thus, 'Blessed be
the LORD, the God of Israel, who today has granted one of my offspring
to sit on my throne and permitted me to witness it.'"
49 Then all the guests of Adonijah got up trembling and went their
own ways. 50 Adonijah, fearing Solomon, got up and went to grasp
the horns of the altar. 51 Solomon was informed, "Adonijah is afraid of
King Solomon; see, he has laid hold of the horns of the altar, saying,
'Let King Solomon swear to me first that he will not kill his servant
with the sword.'" 52 So Solomon responded, "If he proves to be a
worthy man, not one of his hairs shall fall to the ground; but if
wickedness is found in him, he shall die." 53 Then King Solomon sent
to have him brought down from the altar. He came to do obeisance to
King Solomon; and Solomon said to him, "Go home."
[1 Kings 2]
David's last instructions and Solomon's consolidation of his position
1 When David's time to die drew near, he charged his son Solomon,
saying: 2 "I am about to go the way of all the earth. Be strong, be
courageous, 3 and keep the charge of the LORD your God, walking in
his ways and keeping his statutes, his commandments, his ordinances,
and his testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moses, so that you
may prosper in all that you do and wherever you turn. 4 Then the LORD
will establish his word that he spoke concerning me: 'If your heirs take
heed to their way, to walk before me in faithfulness with all their heart
and with all their soul, there shall not fail you a successor on the
throne of Israel.'
5 "Moreover you know also what Joab son of Zeruiah did to me, how
he dealt with the two commanders of the armies of Israel, Abner son
of Ner, and Amasa son of Jether, whom he murdered, retaliating in
time of peace for blood that had been shed in war, and putting the
blood of war on the belt around his waist, and on the sandals on his
feet. 6 Act therefore according to your wisdom, but do not let his gray
head go down to Sheol in peace. 7 Deal loyally, however, with the sons
of Barzillai the Gileadite, and let them be among those who eat at
your table; for with such loyalty they met me when I fled from your

664

1 KINGS 665

brother Absalom. 8 There is also with you Shimei son of Gera, the
Benjaminite from Bahurim, who cursed me with a terrible curse on the
day when I went to Mahanaim; but when he came down to meet me at
the Jordan, I swore to him by the LORD, 'I will not put you to death with
the sword.' 9 Therefore do not hold him guiltless, for you are a wise
man; you will know what you ought to do to him, and you must bring
his gray head down with blood to Sheol."
10 Then David slept with his ancestors, and was buried in the city of
David. 11 The time that David reigned over Israel was forty years; he
reigned seven years in Hebron, and thirty-three years in Jerusalem. 12
So Solomon sat on the throne of his father David; and his kingdom was
firmly established.
13 Then Adonijah son of Haggith came to Bathsheba, Solomon's
mother. She asked, "Do you come peaceably?" He said, "Peaceably." 14
Then he said, "May I have a word with you?" She said, "Go on." 15 He
said, "You know that the kingdom was mine, and that all Israel
expected me to reign; however, the kingdom has turned about and
become my brother's, for it was his from the LORD. 16 And now I have
one request to make of you; do not refuse me." She said to him, "Go
on." 17 He said, "Please ask King Solomon — he will not refuse you —
to give me Abishag the Shunammite as my wife." 18 Bathsheba said,
"Very well; I will speak to the king on your behalf."
19 So Bathsheba went to King Solomon, to speak to him on behalf of
Adonijah. The king rose to meet her, and bowed down to her; then he
sat on his throne, and had a throne brought for the king's mother, and
she sat on his right. 20 Then she said, "I have one small request to
make of you; do not refuse me." And the king said to her, "Make your
request, my mother; for I will not refuse you." 21 She said, "Let Abishag
the Shunammite be given to your brother Adonijah as his wife." 22
King Solomon answered his mother, "And why do you ask Abishag the
Shunammite for Adonijah? Ask for him the kingdom as well! For he is
my elder brother; ask not only for him but also for the priest Abiathar
and for Joab son of Zeruiah!" 23 Then King Solomon swore by the
LORD, "So may God do to me, and more also, for Adonijah has devised
this scheme at the risk of his life! 24 Now therefore as the LORD lives,

665

1 KINGS 666

who has established me and placed me on the throne of my father
David, and who has made me a house as he promised, today Adonijah
shall be put to death." 25 So King Solomon sent Benaiah son of
Jehoiada; he struck him down, and he died.
26 The king said to the priest Abiathar, "Go to Anathoth, to your
estate; for you deserve death. But I will not at this time put you to
death, because you carried the ark of the Lord GOD before my father
David, and because you shared in all the hardships my father endured."
27 So Solomon banished Abiathar from being priest to the LORD, thus
fulfilling the word of the LORD that he had spoken concerning the
house of Eli in Shiloh.
28 When the news came to Joab — for Joab had supported Adonijah
though he had not supported Absalom — Joab fled to the tent of the
LORD and grasped the horns of the altar. 29 When it was told King
Solomon, "Joab has fled to the tent of the LORD and now is beside the
altar," Solomon sent Benaiah son of Jehoiada, saying, "Go, strike him
down." 30 So Benaiah came to the tent of the LORD and said to him,
"The king commands, 'Come out.'" But he said, "No, I will die here."
Then Benaiah brought the king word again, saying, "Thus said Joab,
and thus he answered me." 31 The king replied to him, "Do as he has
said, strike him down and bury him; and thus take away from me and
from my father's house the guilt for the blood that Joab shed without
cause. 32 The LORD will bring back his bloody deeds on his own head,
because, without the knowledge of my father David, he attacked and
killed with the sword two men more righteous and better than himself,
Abner son of Ner, commander of the army of Israel, and Amasa son of
Jether, commander of the army of Judah. 33 So shall their blood come
back on the head of Joab and on the head of his descendants forever;
but to David, and to his descendants, and to his house, and to his
throne, there shall be peace from the LORD forevermore." 34 Then
Benaiah son of Jehoiada went up and struck him down and killed him;
and he was buried at his own house near the wilderness. 35 The king
put Benaiah son of Jehoiada over the army in his place, and the king
put the priest Zadok in the place of Abiathar.

666

1 KINGS 667

36 Then the king sent and summoned Shimei, and said to him, "Build
yourself a house in Jerusalem, and live there, and do not go out from
there to any place whatever. 37 For on the day you go out, and cross
the Wadi Kidron, know for certain that you shall die; your blood shall
be on your own head." 38 And Shimei said to the king, "The sentence
is fair; as my lord the king has said, so will your servant do." So Shimei
lived in Jerusalem many days.
39 But it happened at the end of three years that two of Shimei's slaves
ran away to King Achish son of Maacah of Gath. When it was told
Shimei, "Your slaves are in Gath," 40 Shimei arose and saddled a
donkey, and went to Achish in Gath, to search for his slaves; Shimei
went and brought his slaves from Gath. 41 When Solomon was told
that Shimei had gone from Jerusalem to Gath and returned, 42 the
king sent and summoned Shimei, and said to him, "Did I not make you
swear by the LORD, and solemnly adjure you, saying, 'Know for certain
that on the day you go out and go to any place whatever, you shall
die'? And you said to me, 'The sentence is fair; I accept.' 43 Why then
have you not kept your oath to the LORD and the commandment with
which I charged you?" 44 The king also said to Shimei, "You know in
your own heart all the evil that you did to my father David; so the LORD
will bring back your evil on your own head. 45 But King Solomon shall
be blessed, and the throne of David shall be established before the
LORD forever." 46 Then the king commanded Benaiah son of Jehoiada;
and he went out and struck him down, and he died.
So the kingdom was established in the hand of Solomon.
[1 Kings 3]
More on Solomon and wisdom
1 Solomon made a marriage alliance with Pharaoh king of Egypt; he
took Pharaoh's daughter and brought her into the city of David, until
he had finished building his own house and the house of the LORD and
the wall around Jerusalem. 2 The people were sacrificing at the high
places, however, because no house had yet been built for the name of
the LORD.

667

1 KINGS 668

3 Solomon loved the LORD, walking in the statutes of his father David;
only, he sacrificed and offered incense at the high places. 4 The king
went to Gibeon to sacrifice there, for that was the principal high place;
Solomon used to offer a thousand burnt offerings on that altar. 5 At
Gibeon the LORD appeared to Solomon in a dream by night; and God
said, "Ask what I should give you." 6 And Solomon said, "You have
shown great and steadfast love to your servant my father David,
because he walked before you in faithfulness, in righteousness, and in
uprightness of heart toward you; and you have kept for him this great
and steadfast love, and have given him a son to sit on his throne today.
7 And now, O LORD my God, you have made your servant king in place
of my father David, although I am only a little child; I do not know how
to go out or come in. 8 And your servant is in the midst of the people
whom you have chosen, a great people, so numerous they cannot be
numbered or counted. 9 Give your servant therefore an understanding
mind to govern your people, able to discern between good and evil;
for who can govern this your great people?"
10 It pleased the Lord that Solomon had asked this. 11 God said to him,
"Because you have asked this, and have not asked for yourself long life
or riches, or for the life of your enemies, but have asked for yourself
understanding to discern what is right, 12 I now do according to your
word. Indeed I give you a wise and discerning mind; no one like you
has been before you and no one like you shall arise after you. 13 I give
you also what you have not asked, both riches and honor all your life;
no other king shall compare with you. 14 If you will walk in my ways,
keeping my statutes and my commandments, as your father David
walked, then I will lengthen your life."
15 Then Solomon awoke; it had been a dream. He came to Jerusalem
where he stood before the ark of the covenant of the LORD. He offered
up burnt offerings and offerings of well-being, and provided a feast
for all his servants.
16 Later, two women who were prostitutes came to the king and stood
before him. 17 The one woman said, "Please, my lord, this woman and I
live in the same house; and I gave birth while she was in the house. 18
Then on the third day after I gave birth, this woman also gave birth.

668

1 KINGS 669

We were together; there was no one else with us in the house, only the
two of us were in the house. 19 Then this woman's son died in the
night, because she lay on him. 20 She got up in the middle of the night
and took my son from beside me while your servant slept. She laid him
at her breast, and laid her dead son at my breast. 21 When I rose in the
morning to nurse my son, I saw that he was dead; but when I looked at
him closely in the morning, clearly it was not the son I had borne." 22
But the other woman said, "No, the living son is mine, and the dead
son is yours." The first said, "No, the dead son is yours, and the living
son is mine." So they argued before the king.
23 Then the king said, "The one says, 'This is my son that is alive, and
your son is dead'; while the other says, 'Not so! Your son is dead, and
my son is the living one.'" 24 So the king said, "Bring me a sword," and
they brought a sword before the king. 25 The king said, "Divide the
living boy in two; then give half to the one, and half to the other." 26
But the woman whose son was alive said to the king — because
compassion for her son burned within her — "Please, my lord, give her
the living boy; certainly do not kill him!" The other said, "It shall be
neither mine nor yours; divide it." 27 Then the king responded: "Give
the first woman the living boy; do not kill him. She is his mother." 28
All Israel heard of the judgment that the king had rendered; and they
stood in awe of the king, because they perceived that the wisdom of
God was in him, to execute justice.
[1 Kings 4]
Solomon's rule over Israel
1 King Solomon was king over all Israel, 2 and these were his high
officials: Azariah son of Zadok was the priest; 3 Elihoreph and Ahijah
sons of Shisha were secretaries; Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was
recorder; 4 Benaiah son of Jehoiada was in command of the army;
Zadok and Abiathar were priests; 5 Azariah son of Nathan was over the
officials; Zabud son of Nathan was priest and king's friend; 6 Ahishar
was in charge of the palace; and Adoniram son of Abda was in charge
of the forced labor.

669

1 KINGS 670

7 Solomon had twelve officials over all Israel, who provided food for
the king and his household; each one had to make provision for one
month in the year. 8 These were their names: Ben-hur, in the hill
country of Ephraim; 9 Ben-deker, in Makaz, Shaalbim, Beth-shemesh,
and Elon-beth-hanan; 10 Ben-hesed, in Arubboth (to him belonged
Socoh and all the land of Hepher); 11 Ben-abinadab, in all Naphath-dor
(he had Taphath, Solomon's daughter, as his wife); 12 Baana son of
Ahilud, in Taanach, Megiddo, and all Beth-shean, which is beside
Zarethan below Jezreel, and from Beth-shean to Abel-meholah, as far
as the other side of Jokmeam; 13 Ben-geber, in Ramoth-gilead (he had
the villages of Jair son of Manasseh, which are in Gilead, and he had
the region of Argob, which is in Bashan, sixty great cities with walls
and bronze bars); 14 Ahinadab son of Iddo, in Mahanaim; 15 Ahimaaz,
in Naphtali (he had taken Basemath, Solomon's daughter, as his wife);
16 Baana son of Hushai, in Asher and Bealoth; 17 Jehoshaphat son of
Paruah, in Issachar; 18 Shimei son of Ela, in Benjamin; 19 Geber son of
Uri, in the land of Gilead, the country of King Sihon of the Amorites
and of King Og of Bashan. And there was one official in the land of
Judah.
Solomon and the nations
20 Judah and Israel were as numerous as the sand by the sea; they ate
and drank and were happy. 21 Solomon was sovereign over all the
kingdoms from the Euphrates to the land of the Philistines, even to the
border of Egypt; they brought tribute and served Solomon all the days
of his life.
22 Solomon's provision for one day was thirty cors of choice flour, and
sixty cors of meal, 23 ten fat oxen, and twenty pasture-fed cattle, one
hundred sheep, besides deer, gazelles, roebucks, and fatted fowl. 24
For he had dominion over all the region west of the Euphrates from
Tiphsah to Gaza, over all the kings west of the Euphrates; and he had
peace on all sides. 25 During Solomon's lifetime Judah and Israel lived
in safety, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, all of them under their vines
and fig trees. 26 Solomon also had forty thousand stalls of horses for
his chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen. 27 Those officials supplied
provisions for King Solomon and for all who came to King Solomon's

670

1 KINGS 671

table, each one in his month; they let nothing be lacking. 28 They also
brought to the required place barley and straw for the horses and swift
steeds, each according to his charge.
29 God gave Solomon very great wisdom, discernment, and breadth of
understanding as vast as the sand on the seashore, 30 so that
Solomon's wisdom surpassed the wisdom of all the people of the east,
and all the wisdom of Egypt. 31 He was wiser than anyone else, wiser
than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, Calcol, and Darda, children of
Mahol; his fame spread throughout all the surrounding nations. 32 He
composed three thousand proverbs, and his songs numbered a
thousand and five. 33 He would speak of trees, from the cedar that is in
the Lebanon to the hyssop that grows in the wall; he would speak of
animals, and birds, and reptiles, and fish. 34 People came from all the
nations to hear the wisdom of Solomon; they came from all the kings
of the earth who had heard of his wisdom.
[1 Kings 5]
Preparations for building the Temple
1 Now King Hiram of Tyre sent his servants to Solomon, when he heard
that they had anointed him king in place of his father; for Hiram had
always been a friend to David. 2 Solomon sent word to Hiram, saying, 3
"You know that my father David could not build a house for the name
of the LORD his God because of the warfare with which his enemies
surrounded him, until the LORD put them under the soles of his feet. 4
But now the LORD my God has given me rest on every side; there is
neither adversary nor misfortune. 5 So I intend to build a house for the
name of the LORD my God, as the LORD said to my father David, 'Your
son, whom I will set on your throne in your place, shall build the house
for my name.' 6 Therefore command that cedars from the Lebanon be
cut for me. My servants will join your servants, and I will give you
whatever wages you set for your servants; for you know that there is
no one among us who knows how to cut timber like the Sidonians."
7 When Hiram heard the words of Solomon, he rejoiced greatly, and
said, "Blessed be the LORD today, who has given to David a wise son to
be over this great people." 8 Hiram sent word to Solomon, "I have

671

1 KINGS 672

heard the message that you have sent to me; I will fulfill all your needs
in the matter of cedar and cypress timber. 9 My servants shall bring it
down to the sea from the Lebanon; I will make it into rafts to go by sea
to the place you indicate. I will have them broken up there for you to
take away. And you shall meet my needs by providing food for my
household." 10 So Hiram supplied Solomon's every need for timber of
cedar and cypress. 11 Solomon in turn gave Hiram twenty thousand cors
of wheat as food for his household, and twenty cors of fine oil.
Solomon gave this to Hiram year by year. 12 So the LORD gave Solomon
wisdom, as he promised him. There was peace between Hiram and
Solomon; and the two of them made a treaty.
13 King Solomon conscripted forced labor out of all Israel; the levy
numbered thirty thousand men. 14 He sent them to the Lebanon, ten
thousand a month in shifts; they would be a month in the Lebanon and
two months at home; Adoniram was in charge of the forced labor. 15
Solomon also had seventy thousand laborers and eighty thousand
stonecutters in the hill country, 16 besides Solomon's three thousand
three hundred supervisors who were over the work, having charge of
the people who did the work. 17 At the king's command, they quarried
out great, costly stones in order to lay the foundation of the house
with dressed stones. 18 So Solomon's builders and Hiram's builders and
the Gebalites did the stonecutting and prepared the timber and the
stone to build the house.
[1 Kings 6]
Solomon builds the Temple
1 In the four hundred eightieth year after the Israelites came out of the
land of Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon's reign over Israel, in the
month of Ziv, which is the second month, he began to build the house
of the LORD. 2 The house that King Solomon built for the LORD was sixty
cubits long, twenty cubits wide, and thirty cubits high. 3 The vestibule
in front of the nave of the house was twenty cubits wide, across the
width of the house. Its depth was ten cubits in front of the house. 4 For
the house he made windows with recessed frames. 5 He also built a
structure against the wall of the house, running around the walls of
the house, both the nave and the inner sanctuary; and he made side

672

1 KINGS 673

chambers all around. 6 The lowest story was five cubits wide, the
middle one was six cubits wide, and the third was seven cubits wide;
for around the outside of the house he made offsets on the wall in
order that the supporting beams should not be inserted into the walls
of the house.
7 The house was built with stone finished at the quarry, so that neither
hammer nor ax nor any tool of iron was heard in the temple while it
was being built.
8 The entrance for the middle story was on the south side of the house:
one went up by winding stairs to the middle story, and from the
middle story to the third. 9 So he built the house, and finished it; he
roofed the house with beams and planks of cedar. 10 He built the
structure against the whole house, each story five cubits high, and it
was joined to the house with timbers of cedar.
11 Now the word of the LORD came to Solomon, 12 "Concerning this
house that you are building, if you will walk in my statutes, obey my
ordinances, and keep all my commandments by walking in them, then I
will establish my promise with you, which I made to your father David.
13 I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will not forsake my
people Israel."
14 So Solomon built the house, and finished it. 15 He lined the walls of
the house on the inside with boards of cedar; from the floor of the
house to the rafters of the ceiling, he covered them on the inside with
wood; and he covered the floor of the house with boards of cypress. 16
He built twenty cubits of the rear of the house with boards of cedar
from the floor to the rafters, and he built this within as an inner
sanctuary, as the most holy place. 17 The house, that is, the nave in
front of the inner sanctuary, was forty cubits long. 18 The cedar within
the house had carvings of gourds and open flowers; all was cedar, no
stone was seen. 19 The inner sanctuary he prepared in the innermost
part of the house, to set there the ark of the covenant of the LORD. 20
The interior of the inner sanctuary was twenty cubits long, twenty
cubits wide, and twenty cubits high; he overlaid it with pure gold. He
also overlaid the altar with cedar. 21 Solomon overlaid the inside of the

673

1 KINGS 674

house with pure gold, then he drew chains of gold across, in front of
the inner sanctuary, and overlaid it with gold. 22 Next he overlaid the
whole house with gold, in order that the whole house might be
perfect; even the whole altar that belonged to the inner sanctuary he
overlaid with gold.
23 In the inner sanctuary he made two cherubim of olivewood, each
ten cubits high. 24 Five cubits was the length of one wing of the
cherub, and five cubits the length of the other wing of the cherub; it
was ten cubits from the tip of one wing to the tip of the other. 25 The
other cherub also measured ten cubits; both cherubim had the same
measure and the same form. 26 The height of one cherub was ten
cubits, and so was that of the other cherub. 27 He put the cherubim in
the innermost part of the house; the wings of the cherubim were
spread out so that a wing of one was touching the one wall, and a
wing of the other cherub was touching the other wall; their other
wings toward the center of the house were touching wing to wing. 28
He also overlaid the cherubim with gold.
29 He carved the walls of the house all around about with carved
engravings of cherubim, palm trees, and open flowers, in the inner and
outer rooms. 30 The floor of the house he overlaid with gold, in the
inner and outer rooms.
31 For the entrance to the inner sanctuary he made doors of olivewood;
the lintel and the doorposts were five-sided. 32 He covered the two
doors of olivewood with carvings of cherubim, palm trees, and open
flowers; he overlaid them with gold, and spread gold on the cherubim
and on the palm trees.
33 So also he made for the entrance to the nave doorposts of
olivewood, four-sided each, 34 and two doors of cypress wood; the two
leaves of the one door were folding, and the two leaves of the other
door were folding. 35 He carved cherubim, palm trees, and open
flowers, overlaying them with gold evenly applied upon the carved
work. 36 He built the inner court with three courses of dressed stone to
one course of cedar beams.

674

1 KINGS 675

37 In the fourth year the foundation of the house of the LORD was laid,
in the month of Ziv. 38 In the eleventh year, in the month of Bul, which
is the eighth month, the house was finished in all its parts, and
according to all its specifications. He was seven years in building it.
[1 Kings 7]
Solomon builds his palace
1 Solomon was building his own house thirteen years, and he finished
his entire house.
2 He built the House of the Forest of the Lebanon one hundred cubits
long, fifty cubits wide, and thirty cubits high, built on four rows of
cedar pillars, with cedar beams on the pillars. 3 It was roofed with
cedar on the forty-five rafters, fifteen in each row, which were on the
pillars. 4 There were window frames in the three rows, facing each
other in the three rows. 5 All the doorways and doorposts had foursided frames, opposite, facing each other in the three rows.
6 He made the Hall of Pillars fifty cubits long and thirty cubits wide.
There was a porch in front with pillars, and a canopy in front of them.
7 He made the Hall of the Throne where he was to pronounce
judgment, the Hall of Justice, covered with cedar from floor to floor.
8 His own house where he would reside, in the other court back of the
hall, was of the same construction. Solomon also made a house like this
hall for Pharaoh's daughter, whom he had taken in marriage.
9 All these were made of costly stones, cut according to measure,
sawed with saws, back and front, from the foundation to the coping,
and from outside to the great court. 10 The foundation was of costly
stones, huge stones, stones of eight and ten cubits. 11 There were costly
stones above, cut to measure, and cedarwood. 12 The great court had
three courses of dressed stone to one layer of cedar beams all around;
so had the inner court of the house of the LORD, and the vestibule of
the house.

675

1 KINGS 676

The Temple's furnishings
13 Now King Solomon invited and received Hiram from Tyre. 14 He was
the son of a widow of the tribe of Naphtali, whose father, a man of
Tyre, had been an artisan in bronze; he was full of skill, intelligence,
and knowledge in working bronze. He came to King Solomon, and did
all his work.
15 He cast two pillars of bronze. Eighteen cubits was the height of the
one, and a cord of twelve cubits would encircle it; the second pillar was
the same. 16 He also made two capitals of molten bronze, to set on the
tops of the pillars; the height of the one capital was five cubits, and the
height of the other capital was five cubits. 17 There were nets of
checker work with wreaths of chain work for the capitals on the tops
of the pillars; seven for the one capital, and seven for the other capital.
18 He made the columns with two rows around each latticework to
cover the capitals that were above the pomegranates; he did the same
with the other capital. 19 Now the capitals that were on the tops of the
pillars in the vestibule were of lily-work, four cubits high. 20 The
capitals were on the two pillars and also above the rounded projection
that was beside the latticework; there were two hundred
pomegranates in rows all around; and so with the other capital. 21 He
set up the pillars at the vestibule of the temple; he set up the pillar on
the south and called it Jachin; and he set up the pillar on the north and
called it Boaz. 22 On the tops of the pillars was lily-work. Thus the work
of the pillars was finished.
23 Then he made the molten sea; it was round, ten cubits from brim to
brim, and five cubits high. A line of thirty cubits would encircle it
completely. 24 Under its brim were panels all around it, each of ten
cubits, surrounding the sea; there were two rows of panels, cast when
it was cast. 25 It stood on twelve oxen, three facing north, three facing
west, three facing south, and three facing east; the sea was set on
them. The hindquarters of each were toward the inside. 26 Its thickness
was a handbreadth; its brim was made like the brim of a cup, like the
flower of a lily; it held two thousand baths.

676

1 KINGS 677

27 He also made the ten stands of bronze; each stand was four cubits
long, four cubits wide, and three cubits high. 28 This was the
construction of the stands: they had borders; the borders were within
the frames; 29 on the borders that were set in the frames were lions,
oxen, and cherubim. On the frames, both above and below the lions
and oxen, there were wreaths of beveled work. 30 Each stand had four
bronze wheels and axles of bronze; at the four corners were supports
for a basin. The supports were cast with wreaths at the side of each. 31
Its opening was within the crown whose height was one cubit; its
opening was round, as a pedestal is made; it was a cubit and a half
wide. At its opening there were carvings; its borders were four-sided,
not round. 32 The four wheels were underneath the borders; the axles
of the wheels were in the stands; and the height of a wheel was a cubit
and a half. 33 The wheels were made like a chariot wheel; their axles,
their rims, their spokes, and their hubs were all cast. 34 There were
four supports at the four corners of each stand; the supports were of
one piece with the stands. 35 On the top of the stand there was a
round band half a cubit high; on the top of the stand, its stays and its
borders were of one piece with it. 36 On the surfaces of its stays and on
its borders he carved cherubim, lions, and palm trees, where each had
space, with wreaths all around. 37 In this way he made the ten stands;
all of them were cast alike, with the same size and the same form.
38 He made ten basins of bronze; each basin held forty baths, each
basin measured four cubits; there was a basin for each of the ten
stands. 39 He set five of the stands on the south side of the house, and
five on the north side of the house; he set the sea on the southeast
corner of the house.
40 Hiram also made the pots, the shovels, and the basins. So Hiram
finished all the work that he did for King Solomon on the house of the
LORD: 41 the two pillars, the two bowls of the capitals that were on the
tops of the pillars, the two latticeworks to cover the two bowls of the
capitals that were on the tops of the pillars; 42 the four hundred
pomegranates for the two latticeworks, two rows of pomegranates for
each latticework, to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on
the pillars; 43 the ten stands, the ten basins on the stands; 44 the one
sea, and the twelve oxen underneath the sea.

677

1 KINGS 678

45 The pots, the shovels, and the basins, all these vessels that Hiram
made for King Solomon for the house of the LORD were of burnished
bronze. 46 In the plain of the Jordan the king cast them, in the clay
ground between Succoth and Zarethan. 47 Solomon left all the vessels
unweighed, because there were so many of them; the weight of the
bronze was not determined.
48 So Solomon made all the vessels that were in the house of the LORD:
the golden altar, the golden table for the bread of the Presence, 49 the
lampstands of pure gold, five on the south side and five on the north,
in front of the inner sanctuary; the flowers, the lamps, and the tongs,
of gold; 50 the cups, snuffers, basins, dishes for incense, and firepans,
of pure gold; the sockets for the doors of the innermost part of the
house, the most holy place, and for the doors of the nave of the
temple, of gold.

51 Thus all the work that King Solomon did on the house of the LORD
was finished. Solomon brought in the things that his father David had
dedicated, the silver, the gold, and the vessels, and stored them in the
treasuries of the house of the LORD.
[1 Kings 8]
The ark of the covenant brought to the Temple
1 Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel and all the heads of the
tribes, the leaders of the ancestral houses of the Israelites, before King
Solomon in Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD
out of the city of David, which is Zion. 2 All the people of Israel
assembled to King Solomon at the festival in the month Ethanim,
which is the seventh month. 3 And all the elders of Israel came, and the
priests carried the ark. 4 So they brought up the ark of the LORD, the
tent of meeting, and all the holy vessels that were in the tent; the
priests and the Levites brought them up. 5 King Solomon and all the
congregation of Israel, who had assembled before him, were with him
before the ark, sacrificing so many sheep and oxen that they could not
be counted or numbered. 6 Then the priests brought the ark of the
covenant of the LORD to its place, in the inner sanctuary of the house,

678

1 KINGS 679

in the most holy place, underneath the wings of the cherubim. 7 For
the cherubim spread out their wings over the place of the ark, so that
the cherubim made a covering above the ark and its poles. 8 The poles
were so long that the ends of the poles were seen from the holy place
in front of the inner sanctuary; but they could not be seen from
outside; they are there to this day. 9 There was nothing in the ark
except the two tablets of stone that Moses had placed there at Horeb,
where the LORD made a covenant with the Israelites, when they came
out of the land of Egypt. 10 And when the priests came out of the holy
place, a cloud filled the house of the LORD, 11 so that the priests could
not stand to minister because of the cloud; for the glory of the LORD
filled the house of the LORD.
12 Then Solomon said,
"The LORD has said that he would dwell in thick darkness.
13 I have built you an exalted house,
a place for you to dwell in forever."
14 Then the king turned around and blessed all the assembly of Israel,
while all the assembly of Israel stood. 15 He said, "Blessed be the LORD,
the God of Israel, who with his hand has fulfilled what he promised
with his mouth to my father David, saying, 16 'Since the day that I
brought my people Israel out of Egypt, I have not chosen a city from
any of the tribes of Israel in which to build a house, that my name
might be there; but I chose David to be over my people Israel.' 17 My
father David had it in mind to build a house for the name of the LORD,
the God of Israel. 18 But the LORD said to my father David, 'You did well
to consider building a house for my name; 19 nevertheless you shall not
build the house, but your son who shall be born to you shall build the
house for my name.' 20 Now the LORD has upheld the promise that he
made; for I have risen in the place of my father David; I sit on the
throne of Israel, as the LORD promised, and have built the house for the
name of the LORD, the God of Israel. 21 There I have provided a place
for the ark, in which is the covenant of the LORD that he made with our
ancestors when he brought them out of the land of Egypt."

679

1 KINGS 680

Solomon's prayer and vision
22 Then Solomon stood before the altar of the LORD in the presence of
all the assembly of Israel, and spread out his hands to heaven. 23 He
said, "O LORD, God of Israel, there is no God like you in heaven above
or on earth beneath, keeping covenant and steadfast love for your
servants who walk before you with all their heart, 24 the covenant that
you kept for your servant my father David as you declared to him; you
promised with your mouth and have this day fulfilled with your hand.
25 Therefore, O LORD, God of Israel, keep for your servant my father
David that which you promised him, saying, 'There shall never fail you
a successor before me to sit on the throne of Israel, if only your
children look to their way, to walk before me as you have walked
before me.' 26 Therefore, O God of Israel, let your word be confirmed,
which you promised to your servant my father David.
27 "But will God indeed dwell on the earth? Even heaven and the
highest heaven cannot contain you, much less this house that I have
built! 28 Regard your servant's prayer and his plea, O LORD my God,
heeding the cry and the prayer that your servant prays to you today; 29
that your eyes may be open night and day toward this house, the place
of which you said, 'My name shall be there,' that you may heed the
prayer that your servant prays toward this place. 30 Hear the plea of
your servant and of your people Israel when they pray toward this
place; O hear in heaven your dwelling place; heed and forgive.
31 "If someone sins against a neighbor and is given an oath to swear,
and comes and swears before your altar in this house, 32 then hear in
heaven, and act, and judge your servants, condemning the guilty by
bringing their conduct on their own head, and vindicating the
righteous by rewarding them according to their righteousness.
33 "When your people Israel, having sinned against you, are defeated
before an enemy but turn again to you, confess your name, pray and
plead with you in this house, 34 then hear in heaven, forgive the sin of
your people Israel, and bring them again to the land that you gave to
their ancestors.

680

1 KINGS 681

35 "When heaven is shut up and there is no rain because they have
sinned against you, and then they pray toward this place, confess your
name, and turn from their sin, because you punish them, 36 then hear
in heaven, and forgive the sin of your servants, your people Israel,
when you teach them the good way in which they should walk; and
grant rain on your land, which you have given to your people as an
inheritance.
37 "If there is famine in the land, if there is plague, blight, mildew,
locust, or caterpillar; if their enemy besieges them in any of their cities;
whatever plague, whatever sickness there is; 38 whatever prayer,
whatever plea there is from any individual or from all your people
Israel, all knowing the afflictions of their own hearts so that they
stretch out their hands toward this house; 39 then hear in heaven your
dwelling place, forgive, act, and render to all whose hearts you know
— according to all their ways, for only you know what is in every
human heart — 40 so that they may fear you all the days that they live
in the land that you gave to our ancestors.
41 "Likewise when a foreigner, who is not of your people Israel, comes
from a distant land because of your name 42 — for they shall hear of
your great name, your mighty hand, and your outstretched arm —
when a foreigner comes and prays toward this house, 43 then hear in
heaven your dwelling place, and do according to all that the foreigner
calls to you, so that all the peoples of the earth may know your name
and fear you, as do your people Israel, and so that they may know that
your name has been invoked on this house that I have built.
44 "If your people go out to battle against their enemy, by whatever
way you shall send them, and they pray to the LORD toward the city
that you have chosen and the house that I have built for your name, 45
then hear in heaven their prayer and their plea, and maintain their
cause.
46 "If they sin against you — for there is no one who does not sin —
and you are angry with them and give them to an enemy, so that they
are carried away captive to the land of the enemy, far off or near; 47
yet if they come to their senses in the land to which they have been

681

1 KINGS 682

taken captive, and repent, and plead with you in the land of their
captors, saying, 'We have sinned, and have done wrong; we have acted
wickedly'; 48 if they repent with all their heart and soul in the land of
their enemies, who took them captive, and pray to you toward their
land, which you gave to their ancestors, the city that you have chosen,
and the house that I have built for your name; 49 then hear in heaven
your dwelling place their prayer and their plea, maintain their cause 50
and forgive your people who have sinned against you, and all their
transgressions that they have committed against you; and grant them
compassion in the sight of their captors, so that they may have
compassion on them 51 (for they are your people and heritage, which
you brought out of Egypt, from the midst of the iron-smelter). 52 Let
your eyes be open to the plea of your servant, and to the plea of your
people Israel, listening to them whenever they call to you. 53 For you
have separated them from among all the peoples of the earth, to be
your heritage, just as you promised through Moses, your servant, when
you brought our ancestors out of Egypt, O Lord GOD."
54 Now when Solomon finished offering all this prayer and this plea to
the LORD, he arose from facing the altar of the LORD, where he had
knelt with hands outstretched toward heaven; 55 he stood and blessed
all the assembly of Israel with a loud voice:
56 "Blessed be the LORD, who has given rest to his people Israel
according to all that he promised; not one word has failed of all his
good promise, which he spoke through his servant Moses. 57 The LORD
our God be with us, as he was with our ancestors; may he not leave us
or abandon us, 58 but incline our hearts to him, to walk in all his ways,
and to keep his commandments, his statutes, and his ordinances, which
he commanded our ancestors. 59 Let these words of mine, with which I
pleaded before the LORD, be near to the LORD our God day and night,
and may he maintain the cause of his servant and the cause of his
people Israel, as each day requires; 60 so that all the peoples of the
earth may know that the LORD is God; there is no other. 61 Therefore
devote yourselves completely to the LORD our God, walking in his
statutes and keeping his commandments, as at this day."

682

1 KINGS 683

62 Then the king, and all Israel with him, offered sacrifice before the
LORD. 63 Solomon offered as sacrifices of well-being to the LORD
twenty-two thousand oxen and one hundred twenty thousand sheep.
So the king and all the people of Israel dedicated the house of the
LORD. 64 The same day the king consecrated the middle of the court
that was in front of the house of the LORD; for there he offered the
burnt offerings and the grain offerings and the fat pieces of the
sacrifices of well-being, because the bronze altar that was before the
LORD was too small to receive the burnt offerings and the grain
offerings and the fat pieces of the sacrifices of well-being.
65 So Solomon held the festival at that time, and all Israel with him —
a great assembly, people from Lebo-hamath to the Wadi of Egypt —
before the LORD our God, seven days. 66 On the eighth day he sent the
people away; and they blessed the king, and went to their tents, joyful
and in good spirits because of all the goodness that the LORD had
shown to his servant David and to his people Israel.
[1 Kings 9]
1 When Solomon had finished building the house of the LORD and the
king's house and all that Solomon desired to build, 2 the LORD
appeared to Solomon a second time, as he had appeared to him at
Gibeon. 3 The LORD said to him, "I have heard your prayer and your
plea, which you made before me; I have consecrated this house that
you have built, and put my name there forever; my eyes and my heart
will be there for all time. 4 As for you, if you will walk before me, as
David your father walked, with integrity of heart and uprightness,
doing according to all that I have commanded you, and keeping my
statutes and my ordinances, 5 then I will establish your royal throne
over Israel forever, as I promised your father David, saying, 'There shall
not fail you a successor on the throne of Israel.'
6 "If you turn aside from following me, you or your children, and do
not keep my commandments and my statutes that I have set before
you, but go and serve other gods and worship them, 7 then I will cut
Israel off from the land that I have given them; and the house that I
have consecrated for my name I will cast out of my sight; and Israel will

683

1 KINGS 684

become a proverb and a taunt among all peoples. 8 This house will
become a heap of ruins; everyone passing by it will be astonished, and
will hiss; and they will say, 'Why has the LORD done such a thing to this
land and to this house?' 9 Then they will say, 'Because they have
forsaken the LORD their God, who brought their ancestors out of the
land of Egypt, and embraced other gods, worshiping them and serving
them; therefore the LORD has brought this disaster upon them.'"
The glory of Solomon reviewed
10 At the end of twenty years, in which Solomon had built the two
houses, the house of the LORD and the king's house, 11 King Hiram of
Tyre having supplied Solomon with cedar and cypress timber and gold,
as much as he desired, King Solomon gave to Hiram twenty cities in the
land of Galilee. 12 But when Hiram came from Tyre to see the cities
that Solomon had given him, they did not please him. 13 Therefore he
said, "What kind of cities are these that you have given me, my
brother?" So they are called the land of Cabul to this day. 14 But Hiram
had sent to the king one hundred twenty talents of gold.
Miscellaneous notices
15 This is the account of the forced labor that King Solomon
conscripted to build the house of the LORD and his own house, the
Millo and the wall of Jerusalem, Hazor, Megiddo, Gezer 16 (Pharaoh
king of Egypt had gone up and captured Gezer and burned it down,
had killed the Canaanites who lived in the city, and had given it as
dowry to his daughter, Solomon's wife; 17 so Solomon rebuilt Gezer),
Lower Beth-horon, 18 Baalath, Tamar in the wilderness, within the
land, 19 as well as all of Solomon's storage cities, the cities for his
chariots, the cities for his cavalry, and whatever Solomon desired to
build, in Jerusalem, in Lebanon, and in all the land of his dominion. 20
All the people who were left of the Amorites, the Hittites, the
Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites, who were not of the people
of Israel — 21 their descendants who were still left in the land, whom
the Israelites were unable to destroy completely — these Solomon
conscripted for slave labor, and so they are to this day. 22 But of the
Israelites Solomon made no slaves; they were the soldiers, they were his

684

1 KINGS 685

officials, his commanders, his captains, and the commanders of his
chariotry and cavalry.
23 These were the chief officers who were over Solomon's work: five
hundred fifty, who had charge of the people who carried on the work.
24 But Pharaoh's daughter went up from the city of David to her own
house that Solomon had built for her; then he built the Millo.
25 Three times a year Solomon used to offer up burnt offerings and
sacrifices of well-being on the altar that he built for the LORD, offering
incense before the LORD. So he completed the house.
26 King Solomon built a fleet of ships at Ezion-geber, which is near
Eloth on the shore of the Red Sea, in the land of Edom. 27 Hiram sent
his servants with the fleet, sailors who were familiar with the sea,
together with the servants of Solomon. 28 They went to Ophir, and
imported from there four hundred twenty talents of gold, which they
delivered to King Solomon.
[1 Kings 10]
The visit of the queen of Sheba
1 When the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon (fame due
to the name of the LORD), she came to test him with hard questions. 2
She came to Jerusalem with a very great retinue, with camels bearing
spices, and very much gold, and precious stones; and when she came to
Solomon, she told him all that was on her mind. 3 Solomon answered
all her questions; there was nothing hidden from the king that he
could not explain to her. 4 When the queen of Sheba had observed all
the wisdom of Solomon, the house that he had built, 5 the food of his
table, the seating of his officials, and the attendance of his servants,
their clothing, his valets, and his burnt offerings that he offered at the
house of the LORD, there was no more spirit in her.
6 So she said to the king, "The report was true that I heard in my own
land of your accomplishments and of your wisdom, 7 but I did not
believe the reports until I came and my own eyes had seen it. Not even

685

1 KINGS 686

half had been told me; your wisdom and prosperity far surpass the
report that I had heard. 8 Happy are your wives! Happy are these your
servants, who continually attend you and hear your wisdom! 9 Blessed
be the LORD your God, who has delighted in you and set you on the
throne of Israel! Because the LORD loved Israel forever, he has made
you king to execute justice and righteousness." 10 Then she gave the
king one hundred twenty talents of gold, a great quantity of spices,
and precious stones; never again did spices come in such quantity as
that which the queen of Sheba gave to King Solomon.
11 Moreover, the fleet of Hiram, which carried gold from Ophir,
brought from Ophir a great quantity of almug wood and precious
stones. 12 From the almug wood the king made supports for the house
of the LORD, and for the king's house, lyres also and harps for the
singers; no such almug wood has come or been seen to this day.
13 Meanwhile King Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba every desire
that she expressed, as well as what he gave her out of Solomon's royal
bounty. Then she returned to her own land, with her servants.
Royal wealth
14 The weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six
hundred sixty-six talents of gold, 15 besides that which came from the
traders and from the business of the merchants, and from all the kings
of Arabia and the governors of the land. 16 King Solomon made two
hundred large shields of beaten gold; six hundred shekels of gold went
into each large shield. 17 He made three hundred shields of beaten
gold; three minas of gold went into each shield; and the king put them
in the House of the Forest of Lebanon. 18 The king also made a great
ivory throne, and overlaid it with the finest gold. 19 The throne had six
steps. The top of the throne was rounded in the back, and on each side
of the seat were arm rests and two lions standing beside the arm rests,
20 while twelve lions were standing, one on each end of a step on the
six steps. Nothing like it was ever made in any kingdom. 21 All King
Solomon's drinking vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of the
House of the Forest of Lebanon were of pure gold; none were of silver
— it was not considered as anything in the days of Solomon. 22 For the

686

1 KINGS 687

king had a fleet of ships of Tarshish at sea with the fleet of Hiram.
Once every three years the fleet of ships of Tarshish used to come
bringing gold, silver, ivory, apes, and peacocks.
23 Thus King Solomon excelled all the kings of the earth in riches and
in wisdom. 24 The whole earth sought the presence of Solomon to hear
his wisdom, which God had put into his mind. 25 Every one of them
brought a present, objects of silver and gold, garments, weaponry,
spices, horses, and mules, so much year by year.
26 Solomon gathered together chariots and horses; he had fourteen
hundred chariots and twelve thousand horses, which he stationed in
the chariot cities and with the king in Jerusalem. 27 The king made
silver as common in Jerusalem as stones, and he made cedars as
numerous as the sycamores of the Shephelah. 28 Solomon's import of
horses was from Egypt and Kue, and the king's traders received them
from Kue at a price. 29 A chariot could be imported from Egypt for six
hundred shekels of silver, and a horse for one hundred fifty; so
through the king's traders they were exported to all the kings of the
Hittites and the kings of Aram.
[1 Kings 11]
Solomon's apostasy and its consequences
1 King Solomon loved many foreign women along with the daughter
of Pharaoh: Moabite, Ammonite, Edomite, Sidonian, and Hittite
women, 2 from the nations concerning which the LORD had said to the
Israelites, "You shall not enter into marriage with them, neither shall
they with you; for they will surely incline your heart to follow their
gods"; Solomon clung to these in love. 3 Among his wives were seven
hundred princesses and three hundred concubines; and his wives
turned away his heart. 4 For when Solomon was old, his wives turned
away his heart after other gods; and his heart was not true to the LORD
his God, as was the heart of his father David. 5 For Solomon followed
Astarte the goddess of the Sidonians, and Milcom the abomination of
the Ammonites. 6 So Solomon did what was evil in the sight of the
LORD, and did not completely follow the LORD, as his father David had
done. 7 Then Solomon built a high place for Chemosh the abomination

687

1 KINGS 688

of Moab, and for Molech the abomination of the Ammonites, on the
mountain east of Jerusalem. 8 He did the same for all his foreign wives,
who offered incense and sacrificed to their gods.
9 Then the LORD was angry with Solomon, because his heart had turned
away from the LORD, the God of Israel, who had appeared to him twice,
10 and had commanded him concerning this matter, that he should not
follow other gods; but he did not observe what the LORD commanded.
11 Therefore the LORD said to Solomon, "Since this has been your mind
and you have not kept my covenant and my statutes that I have
commanded you, I will surely tear the kingdom from you and give it to
your servant. 12 Yet for the sake of your father David I will not do it in
your lifetime; I will tear it out of the hand of your son. 13 I will not,
however, tear away the entire kingdom; I will give one tribe to your
son, for the sake of my servant David and for the sake of Jerusalem,
which I have chosen."
14 Then the LORD raised up an adversary against Solomon, Hadad the
Edomite; he was of the royal house in Edom. 15 For when David was in
Edom, and Joab the commander of the army went up to bury the dead,
he killed every male in Edom 16 (for Joab and all Israel remained there
six months, until he had eliminated every male in Edom); 17 but Hadad
fled to Egypt with some Edomites who were servants of his father. He
was a young boy at that time. 18 They set out from Midian and came to
Paran; they took people with them from Paran and came to Egypt, to
Pharaoh king of Egypt, who gave him a house, assigned him an
allowance of food, and gave him land. 19 Hadad found great favor in
the sight of Pharaoh, so that he gave him his sister-in-law for a wife,
the sister of Queen Tahpenes. 20 The sister of Tahpenes gave birth by
him to his son Genubath, whom Tahpenes weaned in Pharaoh's house;
Genubath was in Pharaoh's house among the children of Pharaoh. 21
When Hadad heard in Egypt that David slept with his ancestors and
that Joab the commander of the army was dead, Hadad said to
Pharaoh, "Let me depart, that I may go to my own country." 22 But
Pharaoh said to him, "What do you lack with me that you now seek to
go to your own country?" And he said, "No, do let me go."

688

1 KINGS 689

23 God raised up another adversary against Solomon, Rezon son of
Eliada, who had fled from his master, King Hadadezer of Zobah. 24 He
gathered followers around him and became leader of a marauding
band, after the slaughter by David; they went to Damascus, settled
there, and made him king in Damascus. 25 He was an adversary of
Israel all the days of Solomon, making trouble as Hadad did; he
despised Israel and reigned over Aram.
26 Jeroboam son of Nebat, an Ephraimite of Zeredah, a servant of
Solomon, whose mother's name was Zeruah, a widow, rebelled against
the king. 27 The following was the reason he rebelled against the king.
Solomon built the Millo, and closed up the gap in the wall of the city
of his father David. 28 The man Jeroboam was very able, and when
Solomon saw that the young man was industrious he gave him charge
over all the forced labor of the house of Joseph. 29 About that time,
when Jeroboam was leaving Jerusalem, the prophet Ahijah the
Shilonite found him on the road. Ahijah had clothed himself with a
new garment. The two of them were alone in the open country 30
when Ahijah laid hold of the new garment he was wearing and tore it
into twelve pieces. 31 He then said to Jeroboam: Take for yourself ten
pieces; for thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, "See, I am about to
tear the kingdom from the hand of Solomon, and will give you ten
tribes. 32 One tribe will remain his, for the sake of my servant David
and for the sake of Jerusalem, the city that I have chosen out of all the
tribes of Israel. 33 This is because he has forsaken me, worshiped
Astarte the goddess of the Sidonians, Chemosh the god of Moab, and
Milcom the god of the Ammonites, and has not walked in my ways,
doing what is right in my sight and keeping my statutes and my
ordinances, as his father David did. 34 Nevertheless I will not take the
whole kingdom away from him but will make him ruler all the days of
his life, for the sake of my servant David whom I chose and who did
keep my commandments and my statutes; 35 but I will take the
kingdom away from his son and give it to you — that is, the ten tribes.
36 Yet to his son I will give one tribe, so that my servant David may
always have a lamp before me in Jerusalem, the city where I have
chosen to put my name. 37 I will take you, and you shall reign over all
that your soul desires; you shall be king over Israel. 38 If you will listen
to all that I command you, walk in my ways, and do what is right in my

689

1 KINGS 690

sight by keeping my statutes and my commandments, as David my
servant did, I will be with you, and will build you an enduring house, as
I built for David, and I will give Israel to you. 39 For this reason I will
punish the descendants of David, but not forever." 40 Solomon sought
therefore to kill Jeroboam; but Jeroboam promptly fled to Egypt, to
King Shishak of Egypt, and remained in Egypt until the death of
Solomon.
Conclusion of Solomon's reign
41 Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, all that he did as well as his
wisdom, are they not written in the Book of the Acts of Solomon? 42
The time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel was forty
years. 43 Solomon slept with his ancestors and was buried in the city of
his father David; and his son Rehoboam succeeded him.
[1 Kings 12]
The kingdom torn away; Jeroboam's sin
1 Rehoboam went to Shechem, for all Israel had come to Shechem to
make him king. 2 When Jeroboam son of Nebat heard of it (for he was
still in Egypt, where he had fled from King Solomon), then Jeroboam
returned from Egypt. 3 And they sent and called him; and Jeroboam
and all the assembly of Israel came and said to Rehoboam, 4 "Your
father made our yoke heavy. Now therefore lighten the hard service of
your father and his heavy yoke that he placed on us, and we will serve
you." 5 He said to them, "Go away for three days, then come again to
me." So the people went away.
6 Then King Rehoboam took counsel with the older men who had
attended his father Solomon while he was still alive, saying, "How do
you advise me to answer this people?" 7 They answered him, "If you
will be a servant to this people today and serve them, and speak good
words to them when you answer them, then they will be your servants
forever." 8 But he disregarded the advice that the older men gave him,
and consulted with the young men who had grown up with him and
now attended him. 9 He said to them, "What do you advise that we
answer this people who have said to me, 'Lighten the yoke that your

690

1 KINGS 691

father put on us'?" 10 The young men who had grown up with him
said to him, "Thus you should say to this people who spoke to you,
'Your father made our yoke heavy, but you must lighten it for us'; thus
you should say to them, 'My little finger is thicker than my father's
loins. 11 Now, whereas my father laid on you a heavy yoke, I will add to
your yoke. My father disciplined you with whips, but I will discipline
you with scorpions.'"
12 So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day, as
the king had said, "Come to me again the third day." 13 The king
answered the people harshly. He disregarded the advice that the older
men had given him 14 and spoke to them according to the advice of
the young men, "My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add to
your yoke; my father disciplined you with whips, but I will discipline
you with scorpions." 15 So the king did not listen to the people,
because it was a turn of affairs brought about by the LORD that he
might fulfill his word, which the LORD had spoken by Ahijah the
Shilonite to Jeroboam son of Nebat.
16 When all Israel saw that the king would not listen to them, the
people answered the king,
"What share do we have in David?
We have no inheritance in the son of Jesse.
To your tents, O Israel!
Look now to your own house, O David."
So Israel went away to their tents. 17 But Rehoboam reigned over the
Israelites who were living in the towns of Judah. 18 When King
Rehoboam sent Adoram, who was taskmaster over the forced labor, all
Israel stoned him to death. King Rehoboam then hurriedly mounted his
chariot to flee to Jerusalem. 19 So Israel has been in rebellion against
the house of David to this day.
20 When all Israel heard that Jeroboam had returned, they sent and
called him to the assembly and made him king over all Israel. There was
no one who followed the house of David, except the tribe of Judah
alone.

691

1 KINGS 692

21 When Rehoboam came to Jerusalem, he assembled all the house of
Judah and the tribe of Benjamin, one hundred eighty thousand chosen
troops to fight against the house of Israel, to restore the kingdom to
Rehoboam son of Solomon. 22 But the word of God came to Shemaiah
the man of God: 23 Say to King Rehoboam of Judah, son of Solomon,
and to all the house of Judah and Benjamin, and to the rest of the
people, 24 "Thus says the LORD, You shall not go up or fight against
your kindred the people of Israel. Let everyone go home, for this thing
is from me." So they heeded the word of the LORD and went home
again, according to the word of the LORD.
25 Then Jeroboam built Shechem in the hill country of Ephraim, and
resided there; he went out from there and built Penuel. 26 Then
Jeroboam said to himself, "Now the kingdom may well revert to the
house of David. 27 If this people continues to go up to offer sacrifices
in the house of the LORD at Jerusalem, the heart of this people will turn
again to their master, King Rehoboam of Judah; they will kill me and
return to King Rehoboam of Judah." 28 So the king took counsel, and
made two calves of gold. He said to the people, "You have gone up to
Jerusalem long enough. Here are your gods, O Israel, who brought you
up out of the land of Egypt." 29 He set one in Bethel, and the other he
put in Dan. 30 And this thing became a sin, for the people went to
worship before the one at Bethel and before the other as far as Dan. 31
He also made houses on high places, and appointed priests from
among all the people, who were not Levites. 32 Jeroboam appointed a
festival on the fifteenth day of the eighth month like the festival that
was in Judah, and he offered sacrifices on the altar; so he did in Bethel,
sacrificing to the calves that he had made. And he placed in Bethel the
priests of the high places that he had made. 33 He went up to the altar
that he had made in Bethel on the fifteenth day in the eighth month,
in the month that he alone had devised; he appointed a festival for the
people of Israel, and he went up to the altar to offer incense.

692

1 KINGS 693

[1 Kings 13]
The man of God from Judah
1 While Jeroboam was standing by the altar to offer incense, a man of
God came out of Judah by the word of the LORD to Bethel 2 and
proclaimed against the altar by the word of the LORD, and said, "O
altar, altar, thus says the LORD: 'A son shall be born to the house of
David, Josiah by name; and he shall sacrifice on you the priests of the
high places who offer incense on you, and human bones shall be
burned on you.'" 3 He gave a sign the same day, saying, "This is the
sign that the LORD has spoken: 'The altar shall be torn down, and the
ashes that are on it shall be poured out.'" 4 When the king heard what
the man of God cried out against the altar at Bethel, Jeroboam
stretched out his hand from the altar, saying, "Seize him!" But the
hand that he stretched out against him withered so that he could not
draw it back to himself. 5 The altar also was torn down, and the ashes
poured out from the altar, according to the sign that the man of God
had given by the word of the LORD. 6 The king said to the man of God,
"Entreat now the favor of the LORD your God, and pray for me, so that
my hand may be restored to me." So the man of God entreated the
LORD; and the king's hand was restored to him, and became as it was
before. 7 Then the king said to the man of God, "Come home with me
and dine, and I will give you a gift." 8 But the man of God said to the
king, "If you give me half your kingdom, I will not go in with you; nor
will I eat food or drink water in this place. 9 For thus I was commanded
by the word of the LORD: You shall not eat food, or drink water, or
return by the way that you came." 10 So he went another way, and did
not return by the way that he had come to Bethel.
11 Now there lived an old prophet in Bethel. One of his sons came and
told him all that the man of God had done that day in Bethel; the
words also that he had spoken to the king, they told to their father. 12
Their father said to them, "Which way did he go?" And his sons
showed him the way that the man of God who came from Judah had
gone. 13 Then he said to his sons, "Saddle a donkey for me." So they
saddled a donkey for him, and he mounted it. 14 He went after the
man of God, and found him sitting under an oak tree. He said to him,
"Are you the man of God who came from Judah?" He answered, "I

693

1 KINGS 694

am." 15 Then he said to him, "Come home with me and eat some
food." 16 But he said, "I cannot return with you, or go in with you; nor
will I eat food or drink water with you in this place; 17 for it was said to
me by the word of the LORD: You shall not eat food or drink water
there, or return by the way that you came." 18 Then the other said to
him, "I also am a prophet as you are, and an angel spoke to me by the
word of the LORD: Bring him back with you into your house so that he
may eat food and drink water." But he was deceiving him. 19 Then the
man of God went back with him, and ate food and drank water in his
house.
20 As they were sitting at the table, the word of the LORD came to the
prophet who had brought him back; 21 and he proclaimed to the man
of God who came from Judah, "Thus says the LORD: Because you have
disobeyed the word of the LORD, and have not kept the commandment
that the LORD your God commanded you, 22 but have come back and
have eaten food and drunk water in the place of which he said to you,
'Eat no food, and drink no water,' your body shall not come to your
ancestral tomb." 23 After the man of God had eaten food and had
drunk, they saddled for him a donkey belonging to the prophet who
had brought him back. 24 Then as he went away, a lion met him on the
road and killed him. His body was thrown in the road, and the donkey
stood beside it; the lion also stood beside the body. 25 People passed
by and saw the body thrown in the road, with the lion standing by the
body. And they came and told it in the town where the old prophet
lived.
26 When the prophet who had brought him back from the way heard
of it, he said, "It is the man of God who disobeyed the word of the
LORD; therefore the LORD has given him to the lion, which has torn him
and killed him according to the word that the LORD spoke to him." 27
Then he said to his sons, "Saddle a donkey for me." So they saddled
one, 28 and he went and found the body thrown in the road, with the
donkey and the lion standing beside the body. The lion had not eaten
the body or attacked the donkey. 29 The prophet took up the body of
the man of God, laid it on the donkey, and brought it back to the city,
to mourn and to bury him. 30 He laid the body in his own grave; and
they mourned over him, saying, "Alas, my brother!" 31 After he had

694

1 KINGS 695

buried him, he said to his sons, "When I die, bury me in the grave in
which the man of God is buried; lay my bones beside his bones. 32 For
the saying that he proclaimed by the word of the LORD against the altar
in Bethel, and against all the houses of the high places that are in the
cities of Samaria, shall surely come to pass."
33 Even after this event Jeroboam did not turn from his evil way, but
made priests for the high places again from among all the people; any
who wanted to be priests he consecrated for the high places. 34 This
matter became sin to the house of Jeroboam, so as to cut it off and to
destroy it from the face of the earth.
[1 Kings 14]
The end of Jeroboam and Rehoboam
1 At that time Abijah son of Jeroboam fell sick. 2 Jeroboam said to his
wife, "Go, disguise yourself, so that it will not be known that you are
the wife of Jeroboam, and go to Shiloh; for the prophet Ahijah is
there, who said of me that I should be king over this people. 3 Take
with you ten loaves, some cakes, and a jar of honey, and go to him; he
will tell you what shall happen to the child."
4 Jeroboam's wife did so; she set out and went to Shiloh, and came to
the house of Ahijah. Now Ahijah could not see, for his eyes were dim
because of his age. 5 But the LORD said to Ahijah, "The wife of
Jeroboam is coming to inquire of you concerning her son; for he is sick.
Thus and thus you shall say to her."
When she came, she pretended to be another woman. 6 But when
Ahijah heard the sound of her feet, as she came in at the door, he said,
"Come in, wife of Jeroboam; why do you pretend to be another? For I
am charged with heavy tidings for you. 7 Go, tell Jeroboam, 'Thus says
the LORD, the God of Israel: Because I exalted you from among the
people, made you leader over my people Israel, 8 and tore the
kingdom away from the house of David to give it to you; yet you have
not been like my servant David, who kept my commandments and
followed me with all his heart, doing only that which was right in my
sight, 9 but you have done evil above all those who were before you

695

1 KINGS 696

and have gone and made for yourself other gods, and cast images,
provoking me to anger, and have thrust me behind your back; 10
therefore, I will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam. I will cut off
from Jeroboam every male, both bond and free in Israel, and will
consume the house of Jeroboam, just as one burns up dung until it is
all gone. 11 Anyone belonging to Jeroboam who dies in the city, the
dogs shall eat; and anyone who dies in the open country, the birds of
the air shall eat; for the LORD has spoken.' 12 Therefore set out, go to
your house. When your feet enter the city, the child shall die. 13 All
Israel shall mourn for him and bury him; for he alone of Jeroboam's
family shall come to the grave, because in him there is found
something pleasing to the LORD, the God of Israel, in the house of
Jeroboam. 14 Moreover the LORD will raise up for himself a king over
Israel, who shall cut off the house of Jeroboam today, even right now!
15 "The LORD will strike Israel, as a reed is shaken in the water; he will
root up Israel out of this good land that he gave to their ancestors, and
scatter them beyond the Euphrates, because they have made their
sacred poles, provoking the LORD to anger. 16 He will give Israel up
because of the sins of Jeroboam, which he sinned and which he caused
Israel to commit."
17 Then Jeroboam's wife got up and went away, and she came to
Tirzah. As she came to the threshold of the house, the child died. 18 All
Israel buried him and mourned for him, according to the word of the
LORD, which he spoke by his servant the prophet Ahijah.
19 Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how he warred and how he
reigned, are written in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Israel. 20
The time that Jeroboam reigned was twenty-two years; then he slept
with his ancestors, and his son Nadab succeeded him.
21 Now Rehoboam son of Solomon reigned in Judah. Rehoboam was
forty-one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen
years in Jerusalem, the city that the LORD had chosen out of all the
tribes of Israel, to put his name there. His mother's name was Naamah
the Ammonite. 22 Judah did what was evil in the sight of the LORD;
they provoked him to jealousy with their sins that they committed,

696

1 KINGS 697

more than all that their ancestors had done. 23 For they also built for
themselves high places, pillars, and sacred poles on every high hill and
under every green tree; 24 there were also male temple prostitutes in
the land. They committed all the abominations of the nations that the
LORD drove out before the people of Israel.
25 In the fifth year of King Rehoboam, King Shishak of Egypt came up
against Jerusalem; 26 he took away the treasures of the house of the
LORD and the treasures of the king's house; he took everything. He also
took away all the shields of gold that Solomon had made; 27 so King
Rehoboam made shields of bronze instead, and committed them to the
hands of the officers of the guard, who kept the door of the king's
house. 28 As often as the king went into the house of the LORD, the
guard carried them and brought them back to the guardroom.
29 Now the rest of the acts of Rehoboam, and all that he did, are they
not written in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Judah? 30 There
was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually. 31 Rehoboam
slept with his ancestors and was buried with his ancestors in the city of
David. His mother's name was Naamah the Ammonite. His son Abijam
succeeded him.
[1 Kings 15]
Abijam and Asa
1 Now in the eighteenth year of King Jeroboam son of Nebat, Abijam
began to reign over Judah. 2 He reigned for three years in Jerusalem.
His mother's name was Maacah daughter of Abishalom. 3 He
committed all the sins that his father did before him; his heart was not
true to the LORD his God, like the heart of his father David. 4
Nevertheless for David's sake the LORD his God gave him a lamp in
Jerusalem, setting up his son after him, and establishing Jerusalem; 5
because David did what was right in the sight of the LORD, and did not
turn aside from anything that he commanded him all the days of his
life, except in the matter of Uriah the Hittite. 6 The war begun
between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continued all the days of his life. 7
The rest of the acts of Abijam, and all that he did, are they not written
in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Judah? There was war

697

1 KINGS 698

between Abijam and Jeroboam. 8 Abijam slept with his ancestors, and
they buried him in the city of David. Then his son Asa succeeded him.
9 In the twentieth year of King Jeroboam of Israel, Asa began to reign
over Judah; 10 he reigned forty-one years in Jerusalem. His mother's
name was Maacah daughter of Abishalom. 11 Asa did what was right in
the sight of the LORD, as his father David had done. 12 He put away the
male temple prostitutes out of the land, and removed all the idols that
his ancestors had made. 13 He also removed his mother Maacah from
being queen mother, because she had made an abominable image for
Asherah; Asa cut down her image and burned it at the Wadi Kidron. 14
But the high places were not taken away. Nevertheless the heart of Asa
was true to the LORD all his days. 15 He brought into the house of the
LORD the votive gifts of his father and his own votive gifts — silver,
gold, and utensils.
16 There was war between Asa and King Baasha of Israel all their days.
17 King Baasha of Israel went up against Judah, and built Ramah, to
prevent anyone from going out or coming in to King Asa of Judah. 18
Then Asa took all the silver and the gold that were left in the treasures
of the house of the LORD and the treasures of the king's house, and
gave them into the hands of his servants. King Asa sent them to King
Ben-hadad son of Tabrimmon son of Hezion of Aram, who resided in
Damascus, saying, 19 "Let there be an alliance between me and you,
like that between my father and your father: I am sending you a
present of silver and gold; go, break your alliance with King Baasha of
Israel, so that he may withdraw from me." 20 Ben-hadad listened to
King Asa, and sent the commanders of his armies against the cities of
Israel. He conquered Ijon, Dan, Abel-beth-maacah, and all Chinneroth,
with all the land of Naphtali. 21 When Baasha heard of it, he stopped
building Ramah and lived in Tirzah. 22 Then King Asa made a
proclamation to all Judah, none was exempt: they carried away the
stones of Ramah and its timber, with which Baasha had been building;
with them King Asa built Geba of Benjamin and Mizpah. 23 Now the
rest of all the acts of Asa, all his power, all that he did, and the cities
that he built, are they not written in the Book of the Annals of the
Kings of Judah? But in his old age he was diseased in his feet. 24 Then

698

1 KINGS 699

Asa slept with his ancestors, and was buried with his ancestors in the
city of his father David; his son Jehoshaphat succeeded him.
From Nadab to Ahab
25 Nadab son of Jeroboam began to reign over Israel in the second
year of King Asa of Judah; he reigned over Israel two years. 26 He did
what was evil in the sight of the LORD, walking in the way of his
ancestor and in the sin that he caused Israel to commit.
27 Baasha son of Ahijah, of the house of Issachar, conspired against
him; and Baasha struck him down at Gibbethon, which belonged to the
Philistines; for Nadab and all Israel were laying siege to Gibbethon. 28
So Baasha killed Nadab in the third year of King Asa of Judah, and
succeeded him. 29 As soon as he was king, he killed all the house of
Jeroboam; he left to the house of Jeroboam not one that breathed,
until he had destroyed it, according to the word of the LORD that he
spoke by his servant Ahijah the Shilonite — 30 because of the sins of
Jeroboam that he committed and that he caused Israel to commit, and
because of the anger to which he provoked the LORD, the God of Israel.
31 Now the rest of the acts of Nadab, and all that he did, are they not
written in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Israel? 32 There was
war between Asa and King Baasha of Israel all their days.
33 In the third year of King Asa of Judah, Baasha son of Ahijah began
to reign over all Israel at Tirzah; he reigned twenty-four years. 34 He
did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, walking in the way of
Jeroboam and in the sin that he caused Israel to commit.
[1 Kings 16]
1 The word of the LORD came to Jehu son of Hanani against Baasha,
saying, 2 "Since I exalted you out of the dust and made you leader over
my people Israel, and you have walked in the way of Jeroboam, and
have caused my people Israel to sin, provoking me to anger with their
sins, 3 therefore, I will consume Baasha and his house, and I will make
your house like the house of Jeroboam son of Nebat. 4 Anyone

699

1 KINGS 700

belonging to Baasha who dies in the city the dogs shall eat; and
anyone of his who dies in the field the birds of the air shall eat."
5 Now the rest of the acts of Baasha, what he did, and his power, are
they not written in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Israel? 6
Baasha slept with his ancestors, and was buried at Tirzah; and his son
Elah succeeded him. 7 Moreover the word of the LORD came by the
prophet Jehu son of Hanani against Baasha and his house, both
because of all the evil that he did in the sight of the LORD, provoking
him to anger with the work of his hands, in being like the house of
Jeroboam, and also because he destroyed it.
8 In the twenty-sixth year of King Asa of Judah, Elah son of Baasha
began to reign over Israel in Tirzah; he reigned two years. 9 But his
servant Zimri, commander of half his chariots, conspired against him.
When he was at Tirzah, drinking himself drunk in the house of Arza,
who was in charge of the palace at Tirzah, 10 Zimri came in and struck
him down and killed him, in the twenty-seventh year of King Asa of
Judah, and succeeded him.
11 When he began to reign, as soon as he had seated himself on his
throne, he killed all the house of Baasha; he did not leave him a single
male of his kindred or his friends. 12 Thus Zimri destroyed all the house
of Baasha, according to the word of the LORD, which he spoke against
Baasha by the prophet Jehu — 13 because of all the sins of Baasha and
the sins of his son Elah that they committed, and that they caused
Israel to commit, provoking the LORD God of Israel to anger with their
idols. 14 Now the rest of the acts of Elah, and all that he did, are they
not written in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Israel?
15 In the twenty-seventh year of King Asa of Judah, Zimri reigned
seven days in Tirzah. Now the troops were encamped against
Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines, 16 and the troops who
were encamped heard it said, "Zimri has conspired, and he has killed
the king"; therefore all Israel made Omri, the commander of the army,
king over Israel that day in the camp. 17 So Omri went up from
Gibbethon, and all Israel with him, and they besieged Tirzah. 18 When
Zimri saw that the city was taken, he went into the citadel of the king's

700

1 KINGS 701

house; he burned down the king's house over himself with fire, and
died — 19 because of the sins that he committed, doing evil in the sight
of the LORD, walking in the way of Jeroboam, and for the sin that he
committed, causing Israel to sin. 20 Now the rest of the acts of Zimri,
and the conspiracy that he made, are they not written in the Book of
the Annals of the Kings of Israel?
21 Then the people of Israel were divided into two parts; half of the
people followed Tibni son of Ginath, to make him king, and half
followed Omri. 22 But the people who followed Omri overcame the
people who followed Tibni son of Ginath; so Tibni died, and Omri
became king. 23 In the thirty-first year of King Asa of Judah, Omri
began to reign over Israel; he reigned for twelve years, six of them in
Tirzah.
24 He bought the hill of Samaria from Shemer for two talents of silver;
he fortified the hill, and called the city that he built, Samaria, after the
name of Shemer, the owner of the hill.
25 Omri did what was evil in the sight of the LORD; he did more evil
than all who were before him. 26 For he walked in all the way of
Jeroboam son of Nebat, and in the sins that he caused Israel to commit,
provoking the LORD, the God of Israel, to anger by their idols. 27 Now
the rest of the acts of Omri that he did, and the power that he showed,
are they not written in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Israel?
28 Omri slept with his ancestors, and was buried in Samaria; his son
Ahab succeeded him.
29 In the thirty-eighth year of King Asa of Judah, Ahab son of Omri
began to reign over Israel; Ahab son of Omri reigned over Israel in
Samaria twenty-two years. 30 Ahab son of Omri did evil in the sight of
the LORD more than all who were before him.
31 And as if it had been a light thing for him to walk in the sins of
Jeroboam son of Nebat, he took as his wife Jezebel daughter of King
Ethbaal of the Sidonians, and went and served Baal, and worshiped
him. 32 He erected an altar for Baal in the house of Baal, which he built
in Samaria. 33 Ahab also made a sacred pole. Ahab did more to

701

1 KINGS 702

provoke the anger of the LORD, the God of Israel, than had all the kings
of Israel who were before him. 34 In his days Hiel of Bethel built
Jericho; he laid its foundation at the cost of Abiram his firstborn, and
set up its gates at the cost of his youngest son Segub, according to the
word of the LORD, which he spoke by Joshua son of Nun.
[1 Kings 17]
Elijah and the drought
1 Now Elijah the Tishbite, of Tishbe in Gilead, said to Ahab, "As the
LORD the God of Israel lives, before whom I stand, there shall be neither
dew nor rain these years, except by my word." 2 The word of the LORD
came to him, saying, 3 "Go from here and turn eastward, and hide
yourself by the Wadi Cherith, which is east of the Jordan. 4 You shall
drink from the wadi, and I have commanded the ravens to feed you
there." 5 So he went and did according to the word of the LORD; he
went and lived by the Wadi Cherith, which is east of the Jordan. 6 The
ravens brought him bread and meat in the morning, and bread and
meat in the evening; and he drank from the wadi. 7 But after a while
the wadi dried up, because there was no rain in the land.
8 Then the word of the LORD came to him, saying, 9 "Go now to
Zarephath, which belongs to Sidon, and live there; for I have
commanded a widow there to feed you." 10 So he set out and went to
Zarephath. When he came to the gate of the town, a widow was there
gathering sticks; he called to her and said, "Bring me a little water in a
vessel, so that I may drink." 11 As she was going to bring it, he called to
her and said, "Bring me a morsel of bread in your hand." 12 But she
said, "As the LORD your God lives, I have nothing baked, only a handful
of meal in a jar, and a little oil in a jug; I am now gathering a couple of
sticks, so that I may go home and prepare it for myself and my son,
that we may eat it, and die." 13 Elijah said to her, "Do not be afraid; go
and do as you have said; but first make me a little cake of it and bring
it to me, and afterwards make something for yourself and your son. 14
For thus says the LORD the God of Israel: The jar of meal will not be
emptied and the jug of oil will not fail until the day that the LORD
sends rain on the earth." 15 She went and did as Elijah said, so that she
as well as he and her household ate for many days. 16 The jar of meal

702

1 KINGS 703

was not emptied, neither did the jug of oil fail, according to the word
of the LORD that he spoke by Elijah.
17 After this the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, became
ill; his illness was so severe that there was no breath left in him. 18 She
then said to Elijah, "What have you against me, O man of God? You
have come to me to bring my sin to remembrance, and to cause the
death of my son!" 19 But he said to her, "Give me your son." He took
him from her bosom, carried him up into the upper chamber where he
was lodging, and laid him on his own bed. 20 He cried out to the LORD,
"O LORD my God, have you brought calamity even upon the widow
with whom I am staying, by killing her son?" 21 Then he stretched
himself upon the child three times, and cried out to the LORD, "O LORD
my God, let this child's life come into him again." 22 The LORD listened
to the voice of Elijah; the life of the child came into him again, and he
revived. 23 Elijah took the child, brought him down from the upper
chamber into the house, and gave him to his mother; then Elijah said,
"See, your son is alive." 24 So the woman said to Elijah, "Now I know
that you are a man of God, and that the word of the LORD in your
mouth is truth."
[1 Kings 18]
Elijah and the prophets of Baal
1 After many days the word of the LORD came to Elijah, in the third year
of the drought, saying, "Go, present yourself to Ahab; I will send rain
on the earth." 2 So Elijah went to present himself to Ahab. The famine
was severe in Samaria. 3 Ahab summoned Obadiah, who was in charge
of the palace. (Now Obadiah revered the LORD greatly; 4 when Jezebel
was killing off the prophets of the LORD, Obadiah took a hundred
prophets, hid them fifty to a cave, and provided them with bread and
water.) 5 Then Ahab said to Obadiah, "Go through the land to all the
springs of water and to all the wadis; perhaps we may find grass to
keep the horses and mules alive, and not lose some of the animals." 6
So they divided the land between them to pass through it; Ahab went
in one direction by himself, and Obadiah went in another direction by
himself.

703

1 KINGS 704

7 As Obadiah was on the way, Elijah met him; Obadiah recognized him,
fell on his face, and said, "Is it you, my lord Elijah?" 8 He answered
him, "It is I. Go, tell your lord that Elijah is here." 9 And he said, "How
have I sinned, that you would hand your servant over to Ahab, to kill
me? 10 As the LORD your God lives, there is no nation or kingdom to
which my lord has not sent to seek you; and when they would say, 'He
is not here,' he would require an oath of the kingdom or nation, that
they had not found you. 11 But now you say, 'Go, tell your lord that
Elijah is here.' 12 As soon as I have gone from you, the spirit of the LORD
will carry you I know not where; so, when I come and tell Ahab and he
cannot find you, he will kill me, although I your servant have revered
the LORD from my youth. 13 Has it not been told my lord what I did
when Jezebel killed the prophets of the LORD, how I hid a hundred of
the LORD's prophets fifty to a cave, and provided them with bread and
water? 14 Yet now you say, 'Go, tell your lord that Elijah is here'; he
will surely kill me." 15 Elijah said, "As the LORD of hosts lives, before
whom I stand, I will surely show myself to him today." 16 So Obadiah
went to meet Ahab, and told him; and Ahab went to meet Elijah.
17 When Ahab saw Elijah, Ahab said to him, "Is it you, you troubler of
Israel?" 18 He answered, "I have not troubled Israel; but you have, and
your father's house, because you have forsaken the commandments of
the LORD and followed the Baals. 19 Now therefore have all Israel
assemble for me at Mount Carmel, with the four hundred fifty
prophets of Baal and the four hundred prophets of Asherah, who eat
at Jezebel's table."
20 So Ahab sent to all the Israelites, and assembled the prophets at
Mount Carmel. 21 Elijah then came near to all the people, and said,
"How long will you go limping with two different opinions? If the LORD
is God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him." The people did not
answer him a word. 22 Then Elijah said to the people, "I, even I only,
am left a prophet of the LORD; but Baal's prophets number four
hundred fifty. 23 Let two bulls be given to us; let them choose one bull
for themselves, cut it in pieces, and lay it on the wood, but put no fire
to it; I will prepare the other bull and lay it on the wood, but put no
fire to it. 24 Then you call on the name of your god and I will call on
the name of the LORD; the god who answers by fire is indeed God." All

704

1 KINGS 705

the people answered, "Well spoken!" 25 Then Elijah said to the
prophets of Baal, "Choose for yourselves one bull and prepare it first,
for you are many; then call on the name of your god, but put no fire to
it." 26 So they took the bull that was given them, prepared it, and
called on the name of Baal from morning until noon, crying, "O Baal,
answer us!" But there was no voice, and no answer. They limped about
the altar that they had made. 27 At noon Elijah mocked them, saying,
"Cry aloud! Surely he is a god; either he is meditating, or he has
wandered away, or he is on a journey, or perhaps he is asleep and must
be awakened." 28 Then they cried aloud and, as was their custom, they
cut themselves with swords and lances until the blood gushed out over
them. 29 As midday passed, they raved on until the time of the
offering of the oblation, but there was no voice, no answer, and no
response.
30 Then Elijah said to all the people, "Come closer to me"; and all the
people came closer to him. First he repaired the altar of the LORD that
had been thrown down; 31 Elijah took twelve stones, according to the
number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, to whom the word of the
LORD came, saying, "Israel shall be your name"; 32 with the stones he
built an altar in the name of the LORD. Then he made a trench around
the altar, large enough to contain two measures of seed. 33 Next he
put the wood in order, cut the bull in pieces, and laid it on the wood.
He said, "Fill four jars with water and pour it on the burnt offering and
on the wood." 34 Then he said, "Do it a second time"; and they did it a
second time. Again he said, "Do it a third time"; and they did it a third
time, 35 so that the water ran all around the altar, and filled the trench
also with water.
36 At the time of the offering of the oblation, the prophet Elijah came
near and said, "O LORD, God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, let it be
known this day that you are God in Israel, that I am your servant, and
that I have done all these things at your bidding. 37 Answer me, O
LORD, answer me, so that this people may know that you, O LORD, are
God, and that you have turned their hearts back." 38 Then the fire of
the LORD fell and consumed the burnt offering, the wood, the stones,
and the dust, and even licked up the water that was in the trench. 39
When all the people saw it, they fell on their faces and said, "The LORD

705

1 KINGS 706

indeed is God; the LORD indeed is God." 40 Elijah said to them, "Seize
the prophets of Baal; do not let one of them escape." Then they seized
them; and Elijah brought them down to the Wadi Kishon, and killed
them there.
41 Elijah said to Ahab, "Go up, eat and drink; for there is a sound of
rushing rain." 42 So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. Elijah went up
to the top of Carmel; there he bowed himself down upon the earth
and put his face between his knees. 43 He said to his servant, "Go up
now, look toward the sea." He went up and looked, and said, "There is
nothing." Then he said, "Go again seven times." 44 At the seventh
time he said, "Look, a little cloud no bigger than a person's hand is
rising out of the sea." Then he said, "Go say to Ahab, 'Harness your
chariot and go down before the rain stops you.'" 45 In a little while the
heavens grew black with clouds and wind; there was a heavy rain.
Ahab rode off and went to Jezreel. 46 But the hand of the LORD was on
Elijah; he girded up his loins and ran in front of Ahab to the entrance
of Jezreel.
[1 Kings 19]
1 Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and how he had killed all
the prophets with the sword. 2 Then Jezebel sent a messenger to Elijah,
saying, "So may the gods do to me, and more also, if I do not make
your life like the life of one of them by this time tomorrow." 3 Then he
was afraid; he got up and fled for his life, and came to Beer-sheba,
which belongs to Judah; he left his servant there.
4 But he himself went a day's journey into the wilderness, and came
and sat down under a solitary broom tree. He asked that he might die:
"It is enough; now, O LORD, take away my life, for I am no better than
my ancestors." 5 Then he lay down under the broom tree and fell
asleep. Suddenly an angel touched him and said to him, "Get up and
eat." 6 He looked, and there at his head was a cake baked on hot
stones, and a jar of water. He ate and drank, and lay down again. 7 The
angel of the LORD came a second time, touched him, and said, "Get up
and eat, otherwise the journey will be too much for you." 8 He got up,
and ate and drank; then he went in the strength of that food forty

706

1 KINGS 707

days and forty nights to Horeb the mount of God. 9 At that place he
came to a cave, and spent the night there.
Then the word of the LORD came to him, saying, "What are you doing
here, Elijah?" 10 He answered, "I have been very zealous for the LORD,
the God of hosts; for the Israelites have forsaken your covenant,
thrown down your altars, and killed your prophets with the sword. I
alone am left, and they are seeking my life, to take it away."
11 He said, "Go out and stand on the mountain before the LORD, for the
LORD is about to pass by." Now there was a great wind, so strong that it
was splitting mountains and breaking rocks in pieces before the LORD,
but the LORD was not in the wind; and after the wind an earthquake,
but the LORD was not in the earthquake; 12 and after the earthquake a
fire, but the LORD was not in the fire; and after the fire a sound of
sheer silence. 13 When Elijah heard it, he wrapped his face in his mantle
and went out and stood at the entrance of the cave. Then there came a
voice to him that said, "What are you doing here, Elijah?" 14 He
answered, "I have been very zealous for the LORD, the God of hosts; for
the Israelites have forsaken your covenant, thrown down your altars,
and killed your prophets with the sword. I alone am left, and they are
seeking my life, to take it away." 15 Then the LORD said to him, "Go,
return on your way to the wilderness of Damascus; when you arrive,
you shall anoint Hazael as king over Aram. 16 Also you shall anoint
Jehu son of Nimshi as king over Israel; and you shall anoint Elisha son
of Shaphat of Abel-meholah as prophet in your place. 17 Whoever
escapes from the sword of Hazael, Jehu shall kill; and whoever escapes
from the sword of Jehu, Elisha shall kill. 18 Yet I will leave seven
thousand in Israel, all the knees that have not bowed to Baal, and
every mouth that has not kissed him."
19 So he set out from there, and found Elisha son of Shaphat, who was
plowing. There were twelve yoke of oxen ahead of him, and he was
with the twelfth. Elijah passed by him and threw his mantle over him.
20 He left the oxen, ran after Elijah, and said, "Let me kiss my father
and my mother, and then I will follow you." Then Elijah said to him,
"Go back again; for what have I done to you?" 21 He returned from
following him, took the yoke of oxen, and slaughtered them; using the

707

1 KINGS 708

equipment from the oxen, he boiled their flesh, and gave it to the
people, and they ate. Then he set out and followed Elijah, and became
his servant.
[1 Kings 20]
Ahab's ware against Aram
1 King Ben-hadad of Aram gathered all his army together; thirty-two
kings were with him, along with horses and chariots. He marched
against Samaria, laid siege to it, and attacked it. 2 Then he sent
messengers into the city to King Ahab of Israel, and said to him: "Thus
says Ben-hadad: 3 Your silver and gold are mine; your fairest wives and
children also are mine." 4 The king of Israel answered, "As you say, my
lord, O king, I am yours, and all that I have." 5 The messengers came
again and said: "Thus says Ben-hadad: I sent to you, saying, 'Deliver to
me your silver and gold, your wives and children'; 6 nevertheless I will
send my servants to you tomorrow about this time, and they shall
search your house and the houses of your servants, and lay hands on
whatever pleases them, and take it away."
7 Then the king of Israel called all the elders of the land, and said,
"Look now! See how this man is seeking trouble; for he sent to me for
my wives, my children, my silver, and my gold; and I did not refuse
him." 8 Then all the elders and all the people said to him, "Do not
listen or consent." 9 So he said to the messengers of Ben-hadad, "Tell
my lord the king: All that you first demanded of your servant I will do;
but this thing I cannot do." The messengers left and brought him word
again. 10 Ben-hadad sent to him and said, "The gods do so to me, and
more also, if the dust of Samaria will provide a handful for each of the
people who follow me." 11 The king of Israel answered, "Tell him: One
who puts on armor should not brag like one who takes it off." 12 When
Ben-hadad heard this message — now he had been drinking with the
kings in the booths — he said to his men, "Take your positions!" And
they took their positions against the city.

708

1 KINGS 709

13 Then a certain prophet came up to King Ahab of Israel and said,
"Thus says the LORD, Have you seen all this great multitude? Look, I will
give it into your hand today; and you shall know that I am the LORD."
14 Ahab said, "By whom?" He said, "Thus says the LORD, By the young
men who serve the district governors." Then he said, "Who shall begin
the battle?" He answered, "You." 15 Then he mustered the young men
who served the district governors, two hundred thirty-two; after them
he mustered all the people of Israel, seven thousand.
16 They went out at noon, while Ben-hadad was drinking himself drunk
in the booths, he and the thirty-two kings allied with him. 17 The
young men who served the district governors went out first. Ben-hadad
had sent out scouts, and they reported to him, "Men have come out
from Samaria." 18 He said, "If they have come out for peace, take them
alive; if they have come out for war, take them alive."
19 But these had already come out of the city: the young men who
served the district governors, and the army that followed them. 20
Each killed his man; the Arameans fled and Israel pursued them, but
King Ben-hadad of Aram escaped on a horse with the cavalry. 21 The
king of Israel went out, attacked the horses and chariots, and defeated
the Arameans with a great slaughter.
22 Then the prophet approached the king of Israel and said to him,
"Come, strengthen yourself, and consider well what you have to do;
for in the spring the king of Aram will come up against you."
23 The servants of the king of Aram said to him, "Their gods are gods
of the hills, and so they were stronger than we; but let us fight against
them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they. 24 Also do
this: remove the kings, each from his post, and put commanders in
place of them; 25 and muster an army like the army that you have lost,
horse for horse, and chariot for chariot; then we will fight against
them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they." He
heeded their voice, and did so.

709

1 KINGS 710

26 In the spring Ben-hadad mustered the Arameans and went up to
Aphek to fight against Israel. 27 After the Israelites had been mustered
and provisioned, they went out to engage them; the people of Israel
encamped opposite them like two little flocks of goats, while the
Arameans filled the country. 28 A man of God approached and said to
the king of Israel, "Thus says the LORD: Because the Arameans have
said, 'The LORD is a god of the hills but he is not a god of the valleys,'
therefore I will give all this great multitude into your hand, and you
shall know that I am the LORD." 29 They encamped opposite one
another seven days. Then on the seventh day the battle began; the
Israelites killed one hundred thousand Aramean foot soldiers in one
day. 30 The rest fled into the city of Aphek; and the wall fell on
twenty-seven thousand men that were left.
Ben-hadad also fled, and entered the city to hide. 31 His servants said
to him, "Look, we have heard that the kings of the house of Israel are
merciful kings; let us put sackcloth around our waists and ropes on our
heads, and go out to the king of Israel; perhaps he will spare your life."
32 So they tied sackcloth around their waists, put ropes on their heads,
went to the king of Israel, and said, "Your servant Ben-hadad says,
'Please let me live.'" And he said, "Is he still alive? He is my brother." 33
Now the men were watching for an omen; they quickly took it up from
him and said, "Yes, Ben-hadad is your brother." Then he said, "Go and
bring him." So Ben-hadad came out to him; and he had him come up
into the chariot. 34 Ben-hadad said to him, "I will restore the towns
that my father took from your father; and you may establish bazaars
for yourself in Damascus, as my father did in Samaria." The king of
Israel responded, "I will let you go on those terms." So he made a
treaty with him and let him go.
35 At the command of the LORD a certain member of a company of
prophets said to another, "Strike me!" But the man refused to strike
him. 36 Then he said to him, "Because you have not obeyed the voice
of the LORD, as soon as you have left me, a lion will kill you." And when
he had left him, a lion met him and killed him. 37 Then he found
another man and said, "Strike me!" So the man hit him, striking and
wounding him. 38 Then the prophet departed, and waited for the king
along the road, disguising himself with a bandage over his eyes. 39 As

710

1 KINGS 711

the king passed by, he cried to the king and said, "Your servant went
out into the thick of the battle; then a soldier turned and brought a
man to me, and said, 'Guard this man; if he is missing, your life shall be
given for his life, or else you shall pay a talent of silver.' 40 While your
servant was busy here and there, he was gone." The king of Israel said
to him, "So shall your judgment be; you yourself have decided it." 41
Then he quickly took the bandage away from his eyes. The king of
Israel recognized him as one of the prophets. 42 Then he said to him,
"Thus says the LORD, 'Because you have let the man go whom I had
devoted to destruction, therefore your life shall be for his life, and your
people for his people.'" 43 The king of Israel set out toward home,
resentful and sullen, and came to Samaria.
[1 Kings 21]
Naboth's vineyard
1 Later the following events took place: Naboth the Jezreelite had a
vineyard in Jezreel, beside the palace of King Ahab of Samaria. 2 And
Ahab said to Naboth, "Give me your vineyard, so that I may have it for
a vegetable garden, because it is near my house; I will give you a better
vineyard for it; or, if it seems good to you, I will give you its value in
money." 3 But Naboth said to Ahab, "The LORD forbid that I should
give you my ancestral inheritance." 4 Ahab went home resentful and
sullen because of what Naboth the Jezreelite had said to him; for he
had said, "I will not give you my ancestral inheritance." He lay down
on his bed, turned away his face, and would not eat.
5 His wife Jezebel came to him and said, "Why are you so depressed
that you will not eat?" 6 He said to her, "Because I spoke to Naboth
the Jezreelite and said to him, 'Give me your vineyard for money; or
else, if you prefer, I will give you another vineyard for it'; but he
answered, 'I will not give you my vineyard.'" 7 His wife Jezebel said to
him, "Do you now govern Israel? Get up, eat some food, and be
cheerful; I will give you the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite."
8 So she wrote letters in Ahab's name and sealed them with his seal;
she sent the letters to the elders and the nobles who lived with Naboth
in his city. 9 She wrote in the letters, "Proclaim a fast, and seat Naboth

711

1 KINGS 712

at the head of the assembly; 10 seat two scoundrels opposite him, and
have them bring a charge against him, saying, 'You have cursed God
and the king.' Then take him out, and stone him to death." 11 The men
of his city, the elders and the nobles who lived in his city, did as Jezebel
had sent word to them. Just as it was written in the letters that she had
sent to them, 12 they proclaimed a fast and seated Naboth at the head
of the assembly. 13 The two scoundrels came in and sat opposite him;
and the scoundrels brought a charge against Naboth, in the presence
of the people, saying, "Naboth cursed God and the king." So they took
him outside the city, and stoned him to death. 14 Then they sent to
Jezebel, saying, "Naboth has been stoned; he is dead."
15 As soon as Jezebel heard that Naboth had been stoned and was
dead, Jezebel said to Ahab, "Go, take possession of the vineyard of
Naboth the Jezreelite, which he refused to give you for money; for
Naboth is not alive, but dead." 16 As soon as Ahab heard that Naboth
was dead, Ahab set out to go down to the vineyard of Naboth the
Jezreelite, to take possession of it.
17 Then the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying: 18 Go
down to meet King Ahab of Israel, who rules in Samaria; he is now in
the vineyard of Naboth, where he has gone to take possession. 19 You
shall say to him, "Thus says the LORD: Have you killed, and also taken
possession?" You shall say to him, "Thus says the LORD: In the place
where dogs licked up the blood of Naboth, dogs will also lick up your
blood."
20 Ahab said to Elijah, "Have you found me, O my enemy?" He
answered, "I have found you. Because you have sold yourself to do
what is evil in the sight of the LORD, 21 I will bring disaster on you; I will
consume you, and will cut off from Ahab every male, bond or free, in
Israel; 22 and I will make your house like the house of Jeroboam son of
Nebat, and like the house of Baasha son of Ahijah, because you have
provoked me to anger and have caused Israel to sin. 23 Also concerning
Jezebel the LORD said, 'The dogs shall eat Jezebel within the bounds of
Jezreel.' 24 Anyone belonging to Ahab who dies in the city the dogs
shall eat; and anyone of his who dies in the open country the birds of
the air shall eat."

712

1 KINGS 713

25 (Indeed, there was no one like Ahab, who sold himself to do what
was evil in the sight of the LORD, urged on by his wife Jezebel. 26 He
acted most abominably in going after idols, as the Amorites had done,
whom the LORD drove out before the Israelites.)
27 When Ahab heard those words, he tore his clothes and put sackcloth
over his bare flesh; he fasted, lay in the sackcloth, and went about
dejectedly. 28 Then the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite: 29
"Have you seen how Ahab has humbled himself before me? Because he
has humbled himself before me, I will not bring the disaster in his days;
but in his son's days I will bring the disaster on his house."
[1 Kings 22]
Ahab, Jehoshaphat, and Ahaziah
1 For three years Aram and Israel continued without war. 2 But in the
third year King Jehoshaphat of Judah came down to the king of Israel.
3 The king of Israel said to his servants, "Do you know that Ramothgilead belongs to us, yet we are doing nothing to take it out of the
hand of the king of Aram?" 4 He said to Jehoshaphat, "Will you go
with me to battle at Ramoth-gilead?" Jehoshaphat replied to the king
of Israel, "I am as you are; my people are your people, my horses are
your horses."
5 But Jehoshaphat also said to the king of Israel, "Inquire first for the
word of the LORD." 6 Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets
together, about four hundred of them, and said to them, "Shall I go to
battle against Ramoth-gilead, or shall I refrain?" They said, "Go up; for
the LORD will give it into the hand of the king." 7 But Jehoshaphat said,
"Is there no other prophet of the LORD here of whom we may inquire?"
8 The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, "There is still one other by
whom we may inquire of the LORD, Micaiah son of Imlah; but I hate
him, for he never prophesies anything favorable about me, but only
disaster." Jehoshaphat said, "Let the king not say such a thing." 9 Then
the king of Israel summoned an officer and said, "Bring quickly Micaiah
son of Imlah." 10 Now the king of Israel and King Jehoshaphat of
Judah were sitting on their thrones, arrayed in their robes, at the
threshing floor at the entrance of the gate of Samaria; and all the

713

1 KINGS 714

prophets were prophesying before them. 11 Zedekiah son of
Chenaanah made for himself horns of iron, and he said, "Thus says the
LORD: With these you shall gore the Arameans until they are
destroyed." 12 All the prophets were prophesying the same and saying,
"Go up to Ramoth-gilead and triumph; the LORD will give it into the
hand of the king."
13 The messenger who had gone to summon Micaiah said to him,
"Look, the words of the prophets with one accord are favorable to the
king; let your word be like the word of one of them, and speak
favorably." 14 But Micaiah said, "As the LORD lives, whatever the LORD
says to me, that I will speak."
15 When he had come to the king, the king said to him, "Micaiah, shall
we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall we refrain?" He answered
him, "Go up and triumph; the LORD will give it into the hand of the
king." 16 But the king said to him, "How many times must I make you
swear to tell me nothing but the truth in the name of the LORD?" 17
Then Micaiah said, "I saw all Israel scattered on the mountains, like
sheep that have no shepherd; and the LORD said, 'These have no
master; let each one go home in peace.'" 18 The king of Israel said to
Jehoshaphat, "Did I not tell you that he would not prophesy anything
favorable about me, but only disaster?"
19 Then Micaiah said, "Therefore hear the word of the LORD: I saw the
LORD sitting on his throne, with all the host of heaven standing beside
him to the right and to the left of him. 20 And the LORD said, 'Who will
entice Ahab, so that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead?' Then
one said one thing, and another said another, 21 until a spirit came
forward and stood before the LORD, saying, 'I will entice him.' 22
'How?' the LORD asked him. He replied, 'I will go out and be a lying
spirit in the mouth of all his prophets.' Then the LORD said, 'You are to
entice him, and you shall succeed; go out and do it.' 23 So you see, the
LORD has put a lying spirit in the mouth of all these your prophets; the
LORD has decreed disaster for you."

714

1 KINGS 715

24 Then Zedekiah son of Chenaanah came up to Micaiah, slapped him
on the cheek, and said, "Which way did the spirit of the LORD pass from
me to speak to you?" 25 Micaiah replied, "You will find out on that
day when you go in to hide in an inner chamber." 26 The king of Israel
then ordered, "Take Micaiah, and return him to Amon the governor of
the city and to Joash the king's son, 27 and say, 'Thus says the king: Put
this fellow in prison, and feed him on reduced rations of bread and
water until I come in peace.'" 28 Micaiah said, "If you return in peace,
the LORD has not spoken by me." And he said, "Hear, you peoples, all
of you!"
29 So the king of Israel and King Jehoshaphat of Judah went up to
Ramoth-gilead. 30 The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, "I will
disguise myself and go into battle, but you wear your robes." So the
king of Israel disguised himself and went into battle. 31 Now the king
of Aram had commanded the thirty-two captains of his chariots, "Fight
with no one small or great, but only with the king of Israel." 32 When
the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, they said, "It is surely the
king of Israel." So they turned to fight against him; and Jehoshaphat
cried out. 33 When the captains of the chariots saw that it was not the
king of Israel, they turned back from pursuing him. 34 But a certain
man drew his bow and unknowingly struck the king of Israel between
the scale armor and the breastplate; so he said to the driver of his
chariot, "Turn around, and carry me out of the battle, for I am
wounded." 35 The battle grew hot that day, and the king was propped
up in his chariot facing the Arameans, until at evening he died; the
blood from the wound had flowed into the bottom of the chariot. 36
Then about sunset a shout went through the army, "Every man to his
city, and every man to his country!"
37 So the king died, and was brought to Samaria; they buried the king
in Samaria. 38 They washed the chariot by the pool of Samaria; the
dogs licked up his blood, and the prostitutes washed themselves in it,
according to the word of the LORD that he had spoken. 39 Now the rest
of the acts of Ahab, and all that he did, and the ivory house that he
built, and all the cities that he built, are they not written in the Book of
the Annals of the Kings of Israel? 40 So Ahab slept with his ancestors;
and his son Ahaziah succeeded him.

715

1 KINGS 716

41 Jehoshaphat son of Asa began to reign over Judah in the fourth year
of King Ahab of Israel. 42 Jehoshaphat was thirty-five years old when
he began to reign, and he reigned twenty-five years in Jerusalem. His
mother's name was Azubah daughter of Shilhi. 43 He walked in all the
way of his father Asa; he did not turn aside from it, doing what was
right in the sight of the LORD; yet the high places were not taken away,
and the people still sacrificed and offered incense on the high places.
44 Jehoshaphat also made peace with the king of Israel.
45 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, and his power that he
showed, and how he waged war, are they not written in the Book of
the Annals of the Kings of Judah? 46 The remnant of the male temple
prostitutes who were still in the land in the days of his father Asa, he
exterminated.
47 There was no king in Edom; a deputy was king. 48 Jehoshaphat
made ships of the Tarshish type to go to Ophir for gold; but they did
not go, for the ships were wrecked at Ezion-geber. 49 Then Ahaziah
son of Ahab said to Jehoshaphat, "Let my servants go with your
servants in the ships," but Jehoshaphat was not willing. 50
Jehoshaphat slept with his ancestors and was buried with his ancestors
in the city of his father David; his son Jehoram succeeded him.
51 Ahaziah son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria in the
seventeenth year of King Jehoshaphat of Judah; he reigned two years
over Israel. 52 He did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, and
walked in the way of his father and mother, and in the way of
Jeroboam son of Nebat, who caused Israel to sin. 53 He served Baal and
worshiped him; he provoked the LORD, the God of Israel, to anger, just
as his father had done.

716

2 KINGS 717

2 KINGS
Introduction
Second Kings, originally joined with 1 Kings as a single work, continues
the story of Israel under its monarchy, which was begun in 1-2 Samuel
and carried forward in 1 Kings. The book opens during the short reign
of Ahaziah king of Israel (mid-ninth century BCE) with the conclusion
of Elijah's mission (chs 1-2). The ministry of Elijah's successor Elisha
occupies the bulk of the subsequent seven chapters (chs 3-9), woven
together with an account of the reign of King Jehoram of Israel, who
was ultimately overthrown by his army commander Jehu (chs 9-10). This
continues a pattern first seen in 1 Kings: Prophets oppose the apostate
northern kings walking in Jeroboam's sins (1 Kings 12.25-13.34), and
their dynasties come to an end, sometimes with great speed, as the
judgment of God falls upon them. The prophets Elijah and Elisha in
some respects go beyond this judgmental role: They are presented as
mitigating the full force of God's wrath, offering the opportunity of
repentance leading to reprieve in the midst of judgment. God's
promised and his compassion are also presented as reasons for the
divine forbearance (e.g., 10.30; 13.23). Eventually, however, description
of the reigns of Israel's kings gives way to description of severe divine
judgment, and the Northern Kingdom is exiled by the Assyrians (ch 17).
Description of Judah also coheres with what we have previously read in
1 Kings, in which the religious situation is by no means described as a
tale of continuous apostasy. Relatively good kings did rule in the gaps
between the wicked kings (1 Kings 15.9-22.50). This pattern is continued
in 2 Kings (e.g., see 8.16-19, 25-27; 12.1-15.38). Toward the end of Judah's
story, indeed, we are presented with two of the most righteous kings
there ever were. Hezekiah and Josiah reformed Israelite worship and
obeyed and trusted in God (18.1-20.21; 22.1-23.20). Yet in the end
Judah's sins, and especially the sins of Manasseh (ch 21), which are
presented as breaking the divine patience, were also punished.
Jerusalem was captured and destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar in 586 BCE,
717

2 KINGS 718

and many inhabitants of Judah were exiled to Babylon (chs 24-25). The
book ends with the future of the Davidic line hanging by the slender
thread of a displaced Judean ruler sitting at the table of the king of
Babylon (25.27-30).
For a discussion of the composition and character of 1-2 Kings overall,
see the Introduction to 1 Kings.
HT

TH

[2 Kings 1]
Ahaziah and Elijah
1 After the death of Ahab, Moab rebelled against Israel.
2 Ahaziah had fallen through the lattice in his upper chamber in
Samaria, and lay injured; so he sent messengers, telling them, "Go,
inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron, whether I shall recover from
this injury." 3 But the angel of the LORD said to Elijah the Tishbite, "Get
up, go to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria, and say to
them, 'Is it because there is no God in Israel that you are going to
inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron?' 4 Now therefore thus says
the LORD, 'You shall not leave the bed to which you have gone, but you
shall surely die.'" So Elijah went.
5 The messengers returned to the king, who said to them, "Why have
you returned?" 6 They answered him, "There came a man to meet us,
who said to us, 'Go back to the king who sent you, and say to him:
Thus says the LORD: Is it because there is no God in Israel that you are
sending to inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron? Therefore you
shall not leave the bed to which you have gone, but shall surely die.'" 7
He said to them, "What sort of man was he who came to meet you and
told you these things?" 8 They answered him, "A hairy man, with a
leather belt around his waist." He said, "It is Elijah the Tishbite."

718

2 KINGS 719

9 Then the king sent to him a captain of fifty with his fifty men. He
went up to Elijah, who was sitting on the top of a hill, and said to him,
"O man of God, the king says, 'Come down.'" 10 But Elijah answered
the captain of fifty, "If I am a man of God, let fire come down from
heaven and consume you and your fifty." Then fire came down from
heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.
11 Again the king sent to him another captain of fifty with his fifty. He
went up and said to him, "O man of God, this is the king's order: Come
down quickly!" 12 But Elijah answered them, "If I am a man of God, let
fire come down from heaven and consume you and your fifty." Then
the fire of God came down from heaven and consumed him and his
fifty.
13 Again the king sent the captain of a third fifty with his fifty. So the
third captain of fifty went up, and came and fell on his knees before
Elijah, and entreated him, "O man of God, please let my life, and the
life of these fifty servants of yours, be precious in your sight. 14 Look,
fire came down from heaven and consumed the two former captains of
fifty men with their fifties; but now let my life be precious in your
sight." 15 Then the angel of the LORD said to Elijah, "Go down with
him; do not be afraid of him." So he set out and went down with him
to the king, 16 and said to him, "Thus says the LORD: Because you have
sent messengers to inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron, — is it
because there is no God in Israel to inquire of his word? — therefore
you shall not leave the bed to which you have gone, but you shall
surely die."
17 So he died according to the word of the LORD that Elijah had spoken.
His brother, Jehoram succeeded him as king in the second year of King
Jehoram son of Jehoshaphat of Judah, because Ahaziah had no son. 18
Now the rest of the acts of Ahaziah that he did, are they not written in
the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Israel?

719

2 KINGS 720

[2 Kings 2]
Elijah gives way to Elisha
1 Now when the LORD was about to take Elijah up to heaven by a
whirlwind, Elijah and Elisha were on their way from Gilgal. 2 Elijah said
to Elisha, "Stay here; for the LORD has sent me as far as Bethel." But
Elisha said, "As the LORD lives, and as you yourself live, I will not leave
you." So they went down to Bethel. 3 The company of prophets who
were in Bethel came out to Elisha, and said to him, "Do you know that
today the LORD will take your master away from you?" And he said,
"Yes, I know; keep silent."
4 Elijah said to him, "Elisha, stay here; for the LORD has sent me to
Jericho." But he said, "As the LORD lives, and as you yourself live, I will
not leave you." So they came to Jericho. 5 The company of prophets
who were at Jericho drew near to Elisha, and said to him, "Do you
know that today the LORD will take your master away from you?" And
he answered, "Yes, I know; be silent."
6 Then Elijah said to him, "Stay here; for the LORD has sent me to the
Jordan." But he said, "As the LORD lives, and as you yourself live, I will
not leave you." So the two of them went on. 7 Fifty men of the
company of prophets also went, and stood at some distance from
them, as they both were standing by the Jordan. 8 Then Elijah took his
mantle and rolled it up, and struck the water; the water was parted to
the one side and to the other, until the two of them crossed on dry
ground.
9 When they had crossed, Elijah said to Elisha, "Tell me what I may do
for you, before I am taken from you." Elisha said, "Please let me inherit
a double share of your spirit." 10 He responded, "You have asked a
hard thing; yet, if you see me as I am being taken from you, it will be
granted you; if not, it will not." 11 As they continued walking and
talking, a chariot of fire and horses of fire separated the two of them,
and Elijah ascended in a whirlwind into heaven. 12 Elisha kept
watching and crying out, "Father, father! The chariots of Israel and its
horsemen!" But when he could no longer see him, he grasped his own
clothes and tore them in two pieces.

720

2 KINGS 721

13 He picked up the mantle of Elijah that had fallen from him, and
went back and stood on the bank of the Jordan. 14 He took the mantle
of Elijah that had fallen from him, and struck the water, saying,
"Where is the LORD, the God of Elijah?" When he had struck the water,
the water was parted to the one side and to the other, and Elisha went
over.
15 When the company of prophets who were at Jericho saw him at a
distance, they declared, "The spirit of Elijah rests on Elisha." They came
to meet him and bowed to the ground before him. 16 They said to him,
"See now, we have fifty strong men among your servants; please let
them go and seek your master; it may be that the spirit of the LORD has
caught him up and thrown him down on some mountain or into some
valley." He responded, "No, do not send them." 17 But when they
urged him until he was ashamed, he said, "Send them." So they sent
fifty men who searched for three days but did not find him. 18 When
they came back to him (he had remained at Jericho), he said to them,
"Did I not say to you, Do not go?"
19 Now the people of the city said to Elisha, "The location of this city is
good, as my lord sees; but the water is bad, and the land is unfruitful."
20 He said, "Bring me a new bowl, and put salt in it." So they brought
it to him. 21 Then he went to the spring of water and threw the salt
into it, and said, "Thus says the LORD, I have made this water
wholesome; from now on neither death nor miscarriage shall come
from it." 22 So the water has been wholesome to this day, according to
the word that Elisha spoke.
23 He went up from there to Bethel; and while he was going up on the
way, some small boys came out of the city and jeered at him, saying,
"Go away, baldhead! Go away, baldhead!" 24 When he turned around
and saw them, he cursed them in the name of the LORD. Then two shebears came out of the woods and mauled forty-two of the boys. 25
From there he went on to Mount Carmel, and then returned to
Samaria.

721

2 KINGS 722

[2 Kings 3]
Elisha and the conquest of Moab
1 In the eighteenth year of King Jehoshaphat of Judah, Jehoram son of
Ahab became king over Israel in Samaria; he reigned twelve years. 2 He
did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, though not like his father
and mother, for he removed the pillar of Baal that his father had
made. 3 Nevertheless he clung to the sin of Jeroboam son of Nebat,
which he caused Israel to commit; he did not depart from it.
4 Now King Mesha of Moab was a sheep breeder, who used to deliver
to the king of Israel one hundred thousand lambs, and the wool of one
hundred thousand rams. 5 But when Ahab died, the king of Moab
rebelled against the king of Israel. 6 So King Jehoram marched out of
Samaria at that time and mustered all Israel. 7 As he went he sent word
to King Jehoshaphat of Judah, "The king of Moab has rebelled against
me; will you go with me to battle against Moab?" He answered, "I will;
I am with you, my people are your people, my horses are your horses."
8 Then he asked, "By which way shall we march?" Jehoram answered,
"By the way of the wilderness of Edom."
9 So the king of Israel, the king of Judah, and the king of Edom set out;
and when they had made a roundabout march of seven days, there
was no water for the army or for the animals that were with them. 10
Then the king of Israel said, "Alas! The LORD has summoned us, three
kings, only to be handed over to Moab." 11 But Jehoshaphat said, "Is
there no prophet of the LORD here, through whom we may inquire of
the LORD?" Then one of the servants of the king of Israel answered,
"Elisha son of Shaphat, who used to pour water on the hands of Elijah,
is here." 12 Jehoshaphat said, "The word of the LORD is with him." So
the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom went down
to him.
13 Elisha said to the king of Israel, "What have I to do with you? Go to
your father's prophets or to your mother's." But the king of Israel said
to him, "No; it is the LORD who has summoned us, three kings, only to
be handed over to Moab." 14 Elisha said, "As the LORD of hosts lives,
whom I serve, were it not that I have regard for King Jehoshaphat of

722

2 KINGS 723

Judah, I would give you neither a look nor a glance. 15 But get me a
musician." And then, while the musician was playing, the power of the
LORD came on him. 16 And he said, "Thus says the LORD, 'I will make this
wadi full of pools.' 17 For thus says the LORD, 'You shall see neither
wind nor rain, but the wadi shall be filled with water, so that you shall
drink, you, your cattle, and your animals.' 18 This is only a trifle in the
sight of the LORD, for he will also hand Moab over to you. 19 You shall
conquer every fortified city and every choice city; every good tree you
shall fell, all springs of water you shall stop up, and every good piece of
land you shall ruin with stones." 20 The next day, about the time of the
morning offering, suddenly water began to flow from the direction of
Edom, until the country was filled with water.
21 When all the Moabites heard that the kings had come up to fight
against them, all who were able to put on armor, from the youngest to
the oldest, were called out and were drawn up at the frontier. 22
When they rose early in the morning, and the sun shone upon the
water, the Moabites saw the water opposite them as red as blood. 23
They said, "This is blood; the kings must have fought together, and
killed one another. Now then, Moab, to the spoil!" 24 But when they
came to the camp of Israel, the Israelites rose up and attacked the
Moabites, who fled before them; as they entered Moab they continued
the attack. 25 The cities they overturned, and on every good piece of
land everyone threw a stone, until it was covered; every spring of
water they stopped up, and every good tree they felled. Only at Kirhareseth did the stone walls remain, until the slingers surrounded and
attacked it. 26 When the king of Moab saw that the battle was going
against him, he took with him seven hundred swordsmen to break
through, opposite the king of Edom; but they could not. 27 Then he
took his firstborn son who was to succeed him, and offered him as a
burnt offering on the wall. And great wrath came upon Israel, so they
withdrew from him and returned to their own land.

723

2 KINGS 724

[2 Kings 4]
Elisha's miracles
1 Now the wife of a member of the company of prophets cried to
Elisha, "Your servant my husband is dead; and you know that your
servant feared the LORD, but a creditor has come to take my two
children as slaves." 2 Elisha said to her, "What shall I do for you? Tell
me, what do you have in the house?" She answered, "Your servant has
nothing in the house, except a jar of oil." 3 He said, "Go outside,
borrow vessels from all your neighbors, empty vessels and not just a
few. 4 Then go in, and shut the door behind you and your children,
and start pouring into all these vessels; when each is full, set it aside." 5
So she left him and shut the door behind her and her children; they
kept bringing vessels to her, and she kept pouring. 6 When the vessels
were full, she said to her son, "Bring me another vessel." But he said to
her, "There are no more." Then the oil stopped flowing. 7 She came
and told the man of God, and he said, "Go sell the oil and pay your
debts, and you and your children can live on the rest."
8 One day Elisha was passing through Shunem, where a wealthy
woman lived, who urged him to have a meal. So whenever he passed
that way, he would stop there for a meal. 9 She said to her husband,
"Look, I am sure that this man who regularly passes our way is a holy
man of God. 10 Let us make a small roof chamber with walls, and put
there for him a bed, a table, a chair, and a lamp, so that he can stay
there whenever he comes to us."
11 One day when he came there, he went up to the chamber and lay
down there. 12 He said to his servant Gehazi, "Call the Shunammite
woman." When he had called her, she stood before him. 13 He said to
him, "Say to her, Since you have taken all this trouble for us, what may
be done for you? Would you have a word spoken on your behalf to the
king or to the commander of the army?" She answered, "I live among
my own people." 14 He said, "What then may be done for her?"
Gehazi answered, "Well, she has no son, and her husband is old." 15 He
said, "Call her." When he had called her, she stood at the door. 16 He
said, "At this season, in due time, you shall embrace a son." She
replied, "No, my lord, O man of God; do not deceive your servant."

724

2 KINGS 725

17 The woman conceived and bore a son at that season, in due time, as
Elisha had declared to her.
18 When the child was older, he went out one day to his father among
the reapers. 19 He complained to his father, "Oh, my head, my head!"
The father said to his servant, "Carry him to his mother." 20 He carried
him and brought him to his mother; the child sat on her lap until noon,
and he died. 21 She went up and laid him on the bed of the man of
God, closed the door on him, and left. 22 Then she called to her
husband, and said, "Send me one of the servants and one of the
donkeys, so that I may quickly go to the man of God and come back
again." 23 He said, "Why go to him today? It is neither new moon nor
sabbath." She said, "It will be all right." 24 Then she saddled the
donkey and said to her servant, "Urge the animal on; do not hold back
for me unless I tell you." 25 So she set out, and came to the man of
God at Mount Carmel.
When the man of God saw her coming, he said to Gehazi his servant,
"Look, there is the Shunammite woman; 26 run at once to meet her,
and say to her, Are you all right? Is your husband all right? Is the child
all right?" She answered, "It is all right." 27 When she came to the man
of God at the mountain, she caught hold of his feet. Gehazi
approached to push her away. But the man of God said, "Let her alone,
for she is in bitter distress; the LORD has hidden it from me and has not
told me." 28 Then she said, "Did I ask my lord for a son? Did I not say,
Do not mislead me?" 29 He said to Gehazi, "Gird up your loins, and
take my staff in your hand, and go. If you meet anyone, give no
greeting, and if anyone greets you, do not answer; and lay my staff on
the face of the child." 30 Then the mother of the child said, "As the
LORD lives, and as you yourself live, I will not leave without you." So he
rose up and followed her. 31 Gehazi went on ahead and laid the staff
on the face of the child, but there was no sound or sign of life. He
came back to meet him and told him, "The child has not awakened."
32 When Elisha came into the house, he saw the child lying dead on his
bed. 33 So he went in and closed the door on the two of them, and
prayed to the LORD. 34 Then he got up on the bed and lay upon the
child, putting his mouth upon his mouth, his eyes upon his eyes, and

725

2 KINGS 726

his hands upon his hands; and while he lay bent over him, the flesh of
the child became warm. 35 He got down, walked once to and fro in the
room, then got up again and bent over him; the child sneezed seven
times, and the child opened his eyes. 36 Elisha summoned Gehazi and
said, "Call the Shunammite woman." So he called her. When she came
to him, he said, "Take your son." 37 She came and fell at his feet,
bowing to the ground; then she took her son and left.
38 When Elisha returned to Gilgal, there was a famine in the land. As
the company of prophets was sitting before him, he said to his servant,
"Put the large pot on, and make some stew for the company of
prophets." 39 One of them went out into the field to gather herbs; he
found a wild vine and gathered from it a lapful of wild gourds, and
came and cut them up into the pot of stew, not knowing what they
were. 40 They served some for the men to eat. But while they were
eating the stew, they cried out, "O man of God, there is death in the
pot!" They could not eat it. 41 He said, "Then bring some flour." He
threw it into the pot, and said, "Serve the people and let them eat."
And there was nothing harmful in the pot.
42 A man came from Baal-shalishah, bringing food from the first fruits
to the man of God: twenty loaves of barley and fresh ears of grain in
his sack. Elisha said, "Give it to the people and let them eat." 43 But his
servant said, "How can I set this before a hundred people?" So he
repeated, "Give it to the people and let them eat, for thus says the
LORD, 'They shall eat and have some left.'" 44 He set it before them,
they ate, and had some left, according to the word of the LORD.
[2 Kings 5]
An Aramean is healed
1 Naaman, commander of the army of the king of Aram, was a great
man and in high favor with his master, because by him the LORD had
given victory to Aram. The man, though a mighty warrior, suffered
from leprosy. 2 Now the Arameans on one of their raids had taken a
young girl captive from the land of Israel, and she served Naaman's
wife. 3 She said to her mistress, "If only my lord were with the prophet
who is in Samaria! He would cure him of his leprosy." 4 So Naaman

726

2 KINGS 727

went in and told his lord just what the girl from the land of Israel had
said. 5 And the king of Aram said, "Go then, and I will send along a
letter to the king of Israel."
He went, taking with him ten talents of silver, six thousand shekels of
gold, and ten sets of garments. 6 He brought the letter to the king of
Israel, which read, "When this letter reaches you, know that I have sent
to you my servant Naaman, that you may cure him of his leprosy." 7
When the king of Israel read the letter, he tore his clothes and said,
"Am I God, to give death or life, that this man sends word to me to
cure a man of his leprosy? Just look and see how he is trying to pick a
quarrel with me."
8 But when Elisha the man of God heard that the king of Israel had
torn his clothes, he sent a message to the king, "Why have you torn
your clothes? Let him come to me, that he may learn that there is a
prophet in Israel." 9 So Naaman came with his horses and chariots, and
halted at the entrance of Elisha's house. 10 Elisha sent a messenger to
him, saying, "Go, wash in the Jordan seven times, and your flesh shall
be restored and you shall be clean." 11 But Naaman became angry and
went away, saying, "I thought that for me he would surely come out,
and stand and call on the name of the LORD his God, and would wave
his hand over the spot, and cure the leprosy! 12 Are not Abana and
Pharpar, the rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel?
Could I not wash in them, and be clean?" He turned and went away in
a rage. 13 But his servants approached and said to him, "Father, if the
prophet had commanded you to do something difficult, would you not
have done it? How much more, when all he said to you was, 'Wash,
and be clean'?" 14 So he went down and immersed himself seven times
in the Jordan, according to the word of the man of God; his flesh was
restored like the flesh of a young boy, and he was clean.
15 Then he returned to the man of God, he and all his company; he
came and stood before him and said, "Now I know that there is no God
in all the earth except in Israel; please accept a present from your
servant." 16 But he said, "As the LORD lives, whom I serve, I will accept
nothing!" He urged him to accept, but he refused. 17 Then Naaman
said, "If not, please let two mule-loads of earth be given to your

727

2 KINGS 728

servant; for your servant will no longer offer burnt offering or sacrifice
to any god except the LORD. 18 But may the LORD pardon your servant
on one count: when my master goes into the house of Rimmon to
worship there, leaning on my arm, and I bow down in the house of
Rimmon, when I do bow down in the house of Rimmon, may the LORD
pardon your servant on this one count." 19 He said to him, "Go in
peace."
But when Naaman had gone from him a short distance, 20 Gehazi, the
servant of Elisha the man of God, thought, "My master has let that
Aramean Naaman off too lightly by not accepting from him what he
offered. As the LORD lives, I will run after him and get something out of
him." 21 So Gehazi went after Naaman. When Naaman saw someone
running after him, he jumped down from the chariot to meet him and
said, "Is everything all right?" 22 He replied, "Yes, but my master has
sent me to say, 'Two members of a company of prophets have just
come to me from the hill country of Ephraim; please give them a talent
of silver and two changes of clothing.'" 23 Naaman said, "Please accept
two talents." He urged him, and tied up two talents of silver in two
bags, with two changes of clothing, and gave them to two of his
servants, who carried them in front of Gehazi. 24 When he came to the
citadel, he took the bags from them, and stored them inside; he
dismissed the men, and they left.
25 He went in and stood before his master; and Elisha said to him,
"Where have you been, Gehazi?" He answered, "Your servant has not
gone anywhere at all." 26 But he said to him, "Did I not go with you in
spirit when someone left his chariot to meet you? Is this a time to
accept money and to accept clothing, olive orchards and vineyards,
sheep and oxen, and male and female slaves? 27 Therefore the leprosy
of Naaman shall cling to you, and to your descendants forever." So he
left his presence leprous, as white as snow.

728

2 KINGS 729

[2 Kings 6]
More miracles
1 Now the company of prophets said to Elisha, "As you see, the place
where we live under your charge is too small for us. 2 Let us go to the
Jordan, and let us collect logs there, one for each of us, and build a
place there for us to live." He answered, "Do so." 3 Then one of them
said, "Please come with your servants." And he answered, "I will." 4 So
he went with them. When they came to the Jordan, they cut down
trees. 5 But as one was felling a log, his ax head fell into the water; he
cried out, "Alas, master! It was borrowed." 6 Then the man of God
said, "Where did it fall?" When he showed him the place, he cut off a
stick, and threw it in there, and made the iron float. 7 He said, "Pick it
up." So he reached out his hand and took it.
8 Once when the king of Aram was at war with Israel, he took counsel
with his officers. He said, "At such and such a place shall be my camp."
9 But the man of God sent word to the king of Israel, "Take care not to
pass this place, because the Arameans are going down there." 10 The
king of Israel sent word to the place of which the man of God spoke.
More than once or twice he warned such a place so that it was on the
alert.
11 The mind of the king of Aram was greatly perturbed because of this;
he called his officers and said to them, "Now tell me who among us
sides with the king of Israel?" 12 Then one of his officers said, "No one,
my lord king. It is Elisha, the prophet in Israel, who tells the king of
Israel the words that you speak in your bedchamber." 13 He said, "Go
and find where he is; I will send and seize him." He was told, "He is in
Dothan." 14 So he sent horses and chariots there and a great army;
they came by night, and surrounded the city.
15 When an attendant of the man of God rose early in the morning
and went out, an army with horses and chariots was all around the city.
His servant said, "Alas, master! What shall we do?" 16 He replied, "Do
not be afraid, for there are more with us than there are with them." 17
Then Elisha prayed: "O LORD, please open his eyes that he may see." So
the LORD opened the eyes of the servant, and he saw; the mountain

729

2 KINGS 730

was full of horses and chariots of fire all around Elisha. 18 When the
Arameans came down against him, Elisha prayed to the LORD, and said,
"Strike this people, please, with blindness." So he struck them with
blindness as Elisha had asked. 19 Elisha said to them, "This is not the
way, and this is not the city; follow me, and I will bring you to the man
whom you seek." And he led them to Samaria.
20 As soon as they entered Samaria, Elisha said, "O LORD, open the eyes
of these men so that they may see." The LORD opened their eyes, and
they saw that they were inside Samaria. 21 When the king of Israel saw
them he said to Elisha, "Father, shall I kill them? Shall I kill them?" 22
He answered, "No! Did you capture with your sword and your bow
those whom you want to kill? Set food and water before them so that
they may eat and drink; and let them go to their master." 23 So he
prepared for them a great feast; after they ate and drank, he sent
them on their way, and they went to their master. And the Arameans
no longer came raiding into the land of Israel.
The siege of Samaria
24 Some time later King Ben-hadad of Aram mustered his entire army;
he marched against Samaria and laid siege to it. 25 As the siege
continued, famine in Samaria became so great that a donkey's head
was sold for eighty shekels of silver, and one-fourth of a kab of dove's
dung for five shekels of silver. 26 Now as the king of Israel was walking
on the city wall, a woman cried out to him, "Help, my lord king!" 27 He
said, "No! Let the LORD help you. How can I help you? From the
threshing floor or from the wine press?" 28 But then the king asked
her, "What is your complaint?" She answered, "This woman said to me,
'Give up your son; we will eat him today, and we will eat my son
tomorrow.' 29 So we cooked my son and ate him. The next day I said to
her, 'Give up your son and we will eat him.' But she has hidden her
son." 30 When the king heard the words of the woman he tore his
clothes — now since he was walking on the city wall, the people could
see that he had sackcloth on his body underneath — 31 and he said,
"So may God do to me, and more, if the head of Elisha son of Shaphat
stays on his shoulders today." 32 So he dispatched a man from his
presence.

730

2 KINGS 731

Now Elisha was sitting in his house, and the elders were sitting with
him. Before the messenger arrived, Elisha said to the elders, "Are you
aware that this murderer has sent someone to take off my head? When
the messenger comes, see that you shut the door and hold it closed
against him. Is not the sound of his master's feet behind him?" 33
While he was still speaking with them, the king came down to him and
said, "This trouble is from the LORD! Why should I hope in the LORD any
longer?" [2 Kings 7] 1 But Elisha said, "Hear the word of the LORD: thus
says the LORD, Tomorrow about this time a measure of choice meal
shall be sold for a shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel, at
the gate of Samaria.' 2 Then the captain on whose hand the king
leaned said to the man of God, "Even if the LORD were to make
windows in the sky, could such a thing happen?" But he said, "You
shall see it with your own eyes, but you shall not eat from it."
3 Now there were four leprous men outside the city gate, who said to
one another, "Why should we sit here until we die? 4 If we say, 'Let us
enter the city,' the famine is in the city, and we shall die there; but if
we sit here, we shall also die. Therefore, let us desert to the Aramean
camp; if they spare our lives, we shall live; and if they kill us, we shall
but die." 5 So they arose at twilight to go to the Aramean camp; but
when they came to the edge of the Aramean camp, there was no one
there at all. 6 For the Lord had caused the Aramean army to hear the
sound of chariots, and of horses, the sound of a great army, so that
they said to one another, "The king of Israel has hired the kings of the
Hittites and the kings of Egypt to fight against us." 7 So they fled away
in the twilight and abandoned their tents, their horses, and their
donkeys leaving the camp just as it was, and fled for their lives. 8 When
these leprous men had come to the edge of the camp, they went into a
tent, ate and drank, carried off silver, gold, and clothing, and went and
hid them. Then they came back, entered another tent, carried off
things from it, and went and hid them.
9 Then they said to one another, "What we are doing is wrong. This is
a day of good news; if we are silent and wait until the morning light,
we will be found guilty; therefore let us go and tell the king's
household." 10 So they came and called to the gatekeepers of the city,
and told them, "We went to the Aramean camp, but there was no one

731

2 KINGS 732

to be seen or heard there, nothing but the horses tied, the donkeys
tied, and the tents as they were." 11 Then the gatekeepers called out
and proclaimed it to the king's household. 12 The king got up in the
night, and said to his servants, "I will tell you what the Arameans have
prepared against us. They know that we are starving; so they have left
the camp to hide themselves in the open country, thinking, 'When they
come out of the city, we shall take them alive and get into the city.'" 13
One of his servants said, "Let some men take five of the remaining
horses, since those left here will suffer the fate of the whole multitude
of Israel that have perished already; let us send and find out." 14 So
they took two mounted men, and the king sent them after the
Aramean army, saying, "Go and find out." 15 So they went after them
as far as the Jordan; the whole way was littered with garments and
equipment that the Arameans had thrown away in their haste. So the
messengers returned, and told the king.
16 Then the people went out, and plundered the camp of the
Arameans. So a measure of choice meal was sold for a shekel, and two
measures of barley for a shekel, according to the word of the LORD. 17
Now the king had appointed the captain on whose hand he leaned to
have charge of the gate; the people trampled him to death in the gate,
just as the man of God had said when the king came down to him. 18
For when the man of God had said to the king, "Two measures of
barley shall be sold for a shekel, and a measure of choice meal for a
shekel, about this time tomorrow in the gate of Samaria," 19 the
captain had answered the man of God, "Even if the LORD were to make
windows in the sky, could such a thing happen?" And he had
answered, "You shall see it with your own eyes, but you shall not eat
from it." 20 It did indeed happen to him; the people trampled him to
death in the gate.
[2 Kings 8]
Elisha and the Shunammite
1 Now Elisha had said to the woman whose son he had restored to life,
"Get up and go with your household, and settle wherever you can; for
the LORD has called for a famine, and it will come on the land for seven
years." 2 So the woman got up and did according to the word of the

732

2 KINGS 733

man of God; she went with her household and settled in the land of
the Philistines seven years. 3 At the end of the seven years, when the
woman returned from the land of the Philistines, she set out to appeal
to the king for her house and her land. 4 Now the king was talking
with Gehazi the servant of the man of God, saying, "Tell me all the
great things that Elisha has done." 5 While he was telling the king how
Elisha had restored a dead person to life, the woman whose son he had
restored to life appealed to the king for her house and her land.
Gehazi said, "My lord king, here is the woman, and here is her son
whom Elisha restored to life." 6 When the king questioned the woman,
she told him. So the king appointed an official for her, saying, "Restore
all that was hers, together with all the revenue of the fields from the
day that she left the land until now."
Elisha and Hazael
7 Elisha went to Damascus while King Ben-hadad of Aram was ill.
When it was told him, "The man of God has come here," 8 the king
said to Hazael, "Take a present with you and go to meet the man of
God. Inquire of the LORD through him, whether I shall recover from this
illness." 9 So Hazael went to meet him, taking a present with him, all
kinds of goods of Damascus, forty camel loads. When he entered and
stood before him, he said, "Your son King Ben-hadad of Aram has sent
me to you, saying, 'Shall I recover from this illness?'" 10 Elisha said to
him, "Go, say to him, 'You shall certainly recover'; but the LORD has
shown me that he shall certainly die." 11 He fixed his gaze and stared at
him, until he was ashamed. Then the man of God wept. 12 Hazael
asked, "Why does my lord weep?" He answered, "Because I know the
evil that you will do to the people of Israel; you will set their fortresses
on fire, you will kill their young men with the sword, dash in pieces
their little ones, and rip up their pregnant women." 13 Hazael said,
"What is your servant, who is a mere dog, that he should do this great
thing?" Elisha answered, "The LORD has shown me that you are to be
king over Aram." 14 Then he left Elisha, and went to his master Benhadad, who said to him, "What did Elisha say to you?" And he
answered, "He told me that you would certainly recover." 15 But the
next day he took the bed-cover and dipped it in water and spread it
over the king's face, until he died. And Hazael succeeded him.

733

2 KINGS 734

Jehoram (also Joram; 851-8543 BCE) and Ahaziah (843-842) of Judah
16 In the fifth year of King Joram son of Ahab of Israel, Jehoram son of
King Jehoshaphat of Judah began to reign. 17 He was thirty-two years
old when he became king, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem. 18
He walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as the house of Ahab had
done, for the daughter of Ahab was his wife. He did what was evil in
the sight of the LORD. 19 Yet the LORD would not destroy Judah, for the
sake of his servant David, since he had promised to give a lamp to him
and to his descendants forever.
20 In his days Edom revolted against the rule of Judah, and set up a
king of their own. 21 Then Joram crossed over to Zair with all his
chariots. He set out by night and attacked the Edomites and their
chariot commanders who had surrounded him; but his army fled home.
22 So Edom has been in revolt against the rule of Judah to this day.
Libnah also revolted at the same time. 23 Now the rest of the acts of
Joram, and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the
Annals of the Kings of Judah? 24 So Joram slept with his ancestors, and
was buried with them in the city of David; his son Ahaziah succeeded
him.
25 In the twelfth year of King Joram son of Ahab of Israel, Ahaziah son
of King Jehoram of Judah began to reign. 26 Ahaziah was twenty-two
years old when he began to reign; he reigned one year in Jerusalem.
His mother's name was Athaliah, a granddaughter of King Omri of
Israel. 27 He also walked in the way of the house of Ahab, doing what
was evil in the sight of the LORD, as the house of Ahab had done, for he
was son-in-law to the house of Ahab.
28 He went with Joram son of Ahab to wage war against King Hazael
of Aram at Ramoth-gilead, where the Arameans wounded Joram. 29
King Joram returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds that the
Arameans had inflicted on him at Ramah, when he fought against King
Hazael of Aram. King Ahaziah son of Jehoram of Judah went down to
see Joram son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he was wounded.

734

2 KINGS 735

[2 Kings 9]
The end of Omri's dynasty
1 Then the prophet Elisha called a member of the company of prophets
and said to him, "Gird up your loins; take this flask of oil in your hand,
and go to Ramoth-gilead. 2 When you arrive, look there for Jehu son
of Jehoshaphat, son of Nimshi; go in and get him to leave his
companions, and take him into an inner chamber. 3 Then take the flask
of oil, pour it on his head, and say, 'Thus says the LORD: I anoint you
king over Israel.' Then open the door and flee; do not linger."
4 So the young man, the young prophet, went to Ramoth-gilead. 5 He
arrived while the commanders of the army were in council, and he
announced, "I have a message for you, commander." "For which one
of us?" asked Jehu. "For you, commander." 6 So Jehu got up and went
inside; the young man poured the oil on his head, saying to him, "Thus
says the LORD the God of Israel: I anoint you king over the people of
the LORD, over Israel. 7 You shall strike down the house of your master
Ahab, so that I may avenge on Jezebel the blood of my servants the
prophets, and the blood of all the servants of the LORD. 8 For the whole
house of Ahab shall perish; I will cut off from Ahab every male, bond
or free, in Israel. 9 I will make the house of Ahab like the house of
Jeroboam son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha son of Ahijah. 10
The dogs shall eat Jezebel in the territory of Jezreel, and no one shall
bury her." Then he opened the door and fled.
11 When Jehu came back to his master's officers, they said to him, "Is
everything all right? Why did that madman come to you?" He
answered them, "You know the sort and how they babble." 12 They
said, "Liar! Come on, tell us!" So he said, "This is just what he said to
me: 'Thus says the LORD, I anoint you king over Israel.'" 13 Then
hurriedly they all took their cloaks and spread them for him on the
bare steps; and they blew the trumpet, and proclaimed, "Jehu is king."
14 Thus Jehu son of Jehoshaphat son of Nimshi conspired against
Joram. Joram with all Israel had been on guard at Ramoth-gilead
against King Hazael of Aram; 15 but King Joram had returned to be
healed in Jezreel of the wounds that the Arameans had inflicted on

735

2 KINGS 736

him, when he fought against King Hazael of Aram. So Jehu said, "If
this is your wish, then let no one slip out of the city to go and tell the
news in Jezreel." 16 Then Jehu mounted his chariot and went to
Jezreel, where Joram was lying ill. King Ahaziah of Judah had come
down to visit Joram.
17 In Jezreel, the sentinel standing on the tower spied the company of
Jehu arriving, and said, "I see a company." Joram said, "Take a
horseman; send him to meet them, and let him say, 'Is it peace?'" 18 So
the horseman went to meet him; he said, "Thus says the king, 'Is it
peace?'" Jehu responded, "What have you to do with peace? Fall in
behind me." The sentinel reported, saying, "The messenger reached
them, but he is not coming back." 19 Then he sent out a second
horseman, who came to them and said, "Thus says the king, 'Is it
peace?'" Jehu answered, "What have you to do with peace? Fall in
behind me." 20 Again the sentinel reported, "He reached them, but he
is not coming back. It looks like the driving of Jehu son of Nimshi; for
he drives like a maniac."
21 Joram said, "Get ready." And they got his chariot ready. Then King
Joram of Israel and King Ahaziah of Judah set out, each in his chariot,
and went to meet Jehu; they met him at the property of Naboth the
Jezreelite. 22 When Joram saw Jehu, he said, "Is it peace, Jehu?" He
answered, "What peace can there be, so long as the many whoredoms
and sorceries of your mother Jezebel continue?" 23 Then Joram reined
about and fled, saying to Ahaziah, "Treason, Ahaziah!" 24 Jehu drew
his bow with all his strength, and shot Joram between the shoulders, so
that the arrow pierced his heart; and he sank in his chariot. 25 Jehu
said to his aide Bidkar, "Lift him out, and throw him on the plot of
ground belonging to Naboth the Jezreelite; for remember, when you
and I rode side by side behind his father Ahab how the LORD uttered
this oracle against him: 26 'For the blood of Naboth and for the blood
of his children that I saw yesterday, says the LORD, I swear I will repay
you on this very plot of ground.' Now therefore lift him out and throw
him on the plot of ground, in accordance with the word of the LORD."

736

2 KINGS 737

27 When King Ahaziah of Judah saw this, he fled in the direction of
Beth-haggan. Jehu pursued him, saying, "Shoot him also!" And they
shot him in the chariot at the ascent to Gur, which is by Ibleam. Then
he fled to Megiddo, and died there. 28 His officers carried him in a
chariot to Jerusalem, and buried him in his tomb with his ancestors in
the city of David.
29 In the eleventh year of Joram son of Ahab, Ahaziah began to reign
over Judah.
30 When Jehu came to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it; she painted her
eyes, and adorned her head, and looked out of the window. 31 As Jehu
entered the gate, she said, "Is it peace, Zimri, murderer of your
master?" 32 He looked up to the window and said, "Who is on my
side? Who?" Two or three eunuchs looked out at him. 33 He said,
"Throw her down." So they threw her down; some of her blood
spattered on the wall and on the horses, which trampled on her. 34
Then he went in and ate and drank; he said, "See to that cursed
woman and bury her; for she is a king's daughter." 35 But when they
went to bury her, they found no more of her than the skull and the
feet and the palms of her hands. 36 When they came back and told
him, he said, "This is the word of the LORD, which he spoke by his
servant Elijah the Tishbite, 'In the territory of Jezreel the dogs shall eat
the flesh of Jezebel; 37 the corpse of Jezebel shall be like dung on the
field in the territory of Jezreel, so that no one can say, This is Jezebel.'"
[2 Kings 10]
The destruction continues
1 Now Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria. So Jehu wrote letters and
sent them to Samaria, to the rulers of Jezreel, to the elders, and to the
guardians of the sons of Ahab, saying, 2 "Since your master's sons are
with you and you have at your disposal chariots and horses, a fortified
city, and weapons, 3 select the son of your master who is the best
qualified, set him on his father's throne, and fight for your master's
house." 4 But they were utterly terrified and said, "Look, two kings
could not withstand him; how then can we stand?" 5 So the steward of
the palace, and the governor of the city, along with the elders and the

737

2 KINGS 738

guardians, sent word to Jehu: "We are your servants; we will do
anything you say. We will not make anyone king; do whatever you
think right." 6 Then he wrote them a second letter, saying, "If you are
on my side, and if you are ready to obey me, take the heads of your
master's sons and come to me at Jezreel tomorrow at this time." Now
the king's sons, seventy persons, were with the leaders of the city, who
were charged with their upbringing. 7 When the letter reached them,
they took the king's sons and killed them, seventy persons; they put
their heads in baskets and sent them to him at Jezreel. 8 When the
messenger came and told him, "They have brought the heads of the
king's sons," he said, "Lay them in two heaps at the entrance of the
gate until the morning." 9 Then in the morning when he went out, he
stood and said to all the people, "You are innocent. It was I who
conspired against my master and killed him; but who struck down all
these? 10 Know then that there shall fall to the earth nothing of the
word of the LORD, which the LORD spoke concerning the house of Ahab;
for the LORD has done what he said through his servant Elijah." 11 So
Jehu killed all who were left of the house of Ahab in Jezreel, all his
leaders, close friends, and priests, until he left him no survivor.
12 Then he set out and went to Samaria. On the way, when he was at
Beth-eked of the Shepherds, 13 Jehu met relatives of King Ahaziah of
Judah and said, "Who are you?" They answered, "We are kin of
Ahaziah; we have come down to visit the royal princes and the sons of
the queen mother." 14 He said, "Take them alive." They took them
alive, and slaughtered them at the pit of Beth-eked, forty-two in all; he
spared none of them.
15 When he left there, he met Jehonadab son of Rechab coming to
meet him; he greeted him, and said to him, "Is your heart as true to
mine as mine is to yours?" Jehonadab answered, "It is." Jehu said, "If it
is, give me your hand." So he gave him his hand. Jehu took him up
with him into the chariot. 16 He said, "Come with me, and see my zeal
for the LORD." So he had him ride in his chariot. 17 When he came to
Samaria, he killed all who were left to Ahab in Samaria, until he had
wiped them out, according to the word of the LORD that he spoke to
Elijah.

738

2 KINGS 739

18 Then Jehu assembled all the people and said to them, "Ahab
offered Baal small service; but Jehu will offer much more. 19 Now
therefore summon to me all the prophets of Baal, all his worshipers,
and all his priests; let none be missing, for I have a great sacrifice to
offer to Baal; whoever is missing shall not live." But Jehu was acting
with cunning in order to destroy the worshipers of Baal. 20 Jehu
decreed, "Sanctify a solemn assembly for Baal." So they proclaimed it.
21 Jehu sent word throughout all Israel; all the worshipers of Baal
came, so that there was no one left who did not come. They entered
the temple of Baal, until the temple of Baal was filled from wall to
wall. 22 He said to the keeper of the wardrobe, "Bring out the
vestments for all the worshipers of Baal." So he brought out the
vestments for them. 23 Then Jehu entered the temple of Baal with
Jehonadab son of Rechab; he said to the worshipers of Baal, "Search
and see that there is no worshiper of the LORD here among you, but
only worshipers of Baal." 24 Then they proceeded to offer sacrifices
and burnt offerings.
Now Jehu had stationed eighty men outside, saying, "Whoever allows
any of those to escape whom I deliver into your hands shall forfeit his
life." 25 As soon as he had finished presenting the burnt offering, Jehu
said to the guards and to the officers, "Come in and kill them; let no
one escape." So they put them to the sword. The guards and the
officers threw them out, and then went into the citadel of the temple
of Baal. 26 They brought out the pillar that was in the temple of Baal,
and burned it. 27 Then they demolished the pillar of Baal, and
destroyed the temple of Baal, and made it a latrine to this day.
28 Thus Jehu wiped out Baal from Israel. 29 But Jehu did not turn aside
from the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat, which he caused Israel to
commit — the golden calves that were in Bethel and in Dan. 30 The
LORD said to Jehu, "Because you have done well in carrying out what I
consider right, and in accordance with all that was in my heart have
dealt with the house of Ahab, your sons of the fourth generation shall
sit on the throne of Israel." 31 But Jehu was not careful to follow the
law of the LORD the God of Israel with all his heart; he did not turn
from the sins of Jeroboam, which he caused Israel to commit.

739

2 KINGS 740

32 In those days the LORD began to trim off parts of Israel. Hazael
defeated them throughout the territory of Israel: 33 from the Jordan
eastward, all the land of Gilead, the Gadites, the Reubenites, and the
Manassites, from Aroer, which is by the Wadi Arnon, that is, Gilead and
Bashan. 34 Now the rest of the acts of Jehu, all that he did, and all his
power, are they not written in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of
Israel? 35 So Jehu slept with his ancestors, and they buried him in
Samaria. His son Jehoahaz succeeded him. 36 The time that Jehu
reigned over Israel in Samaria was twenty-eight years.
[2 Kings 11]
The reign of Athaliah, 842-836 BCE
1 Now when Athaliah, Ahaziah's mother, saw that her son was dead,
she set about to destroy all the royal family. 2 But Jehosheba, King
Joram's daughter, Ahaziah's sister, took Joash son of Ahaziah, and
stole him away from among the king's children who were about to be
killed; she put him and his nurse in a bedroom. Thus she hid him from
Athaliah, so that he was not killed; 3 he remained with her six years,
hidden in the house of the LORD, while Athaliah reigned over the land.
4 But in the seventh year Jehoiada summoned the captains of the
Carites and of the guards and had them come to him in the house of
the LORD. He made a covenant with them and put them under oath in
the house of the LORD; then he showed them the king's son. 5 He
commanded them, "This is what you are to do: one-third of you, those
who go off duty on the sabbath and guard the king's house 6 (another
third being at the gate Sur and a third at the gate behind the guards),
shall guard the palace; 7 and your two divisions that come on duty in
force on the sabbath and guard the house of the LORD 8 shall surround
the king, each with weapons in hand; and whoever approaches the
ranks is to be killed. Be with the king in his comings and goings."
9 The captains did according to all that the priest Jehoiada
commanded; each brought his men who were to go off duty on the
sabbath, with those who were to come on duty on the sabbath, and
came to the priest Jehoiada. 10 The priest delivered to the captains the
spears and shields that had been King David's, which were in the house

740

2 KINGS 741

of the LORD; 11 the guards stood, every man with his weapons in his
hand, from the south side of the house to the north side of the house,
around the altar and the house, to guard the king on every side. 12
Then he brought out the king's son, put the crown on him, and gave
him the covenant; they proclaimed him king, and anointed him; they
clapped their hands and shouted, "Long live the king!"
13 When Athaliah heard the noise of the guard and of the people, she
went into the house of the LORD to the people; 14 when she looked,
there was the king standing by the pillar, according to custom, with
the captains and the trumpeters beside the king, and all the people of
the land rejoicing and blowing trumpets. Athaliah tore her clothes and
cried, "Treason! Treason!" 15 Then the priest Jehoiada commanded the
captains who were set over the army, "Bring her out between the
ranks, and kill with the sword anyone who follows her." For the priest
said, "Let her not be killed in the house of the LORD." 16 So they laid
hands on her; she went through the horses' entrance to the king's
house, and there she was put to death.
17 Jehoiada made a covenant between the LORD and the king and
people, that they should be the LORD's people; also between the king
and the people. 18 Then all the people of the land went to the house
of Baal, and tore it down; his altars and his images they broke in
pieces, and they killed Mattan, the priest of Baal, before the altars. The
priest posted guards over the house of the LORD. 19 He took the
captains, the Carites, the guards, and all the people of the land; then
they brought the king down from the house of the LORD, marching
through the gate of the guards to the king's house. He took his seat on
the throne of the kings. 20 So all the people of the land rejoiced; and
the city was quiet after Athaliah had been killed with the sword at the
king's house.
21 Jehoash was seven years old when he began to reign.

741

2 KINGS 742

[2 Kings 12]
The reign of Joash (also Jehoash; 836-798 BCE)
1 In the seventh year of Jehu, Jehoash began to reign; he reigned forty
years in Jerusalem. His mother's name was Zibiah of Beer-sheba. 2
Jehoash did what was right in the sight of the LORD all his days,
because the priest Jehoiada instructed him. 3 Nevertheless the high
places were not taken away; the people continued to sacrifice and
make offerings on the high places.
4 Jehoash said to the priests, "All the money offered as sacred
donations that is brought into the house of the LORD, the money for
which each person is assessed — the money from the assessment of
persons — and the money from the voluntary offerings brought into
the house of the LORD, 5 let the priests receive from each of the donors;
and let them repair the house wherever any need of repairs is
discovered." 6 But by the twenty-third year of King Jehoash the priests
had made no repairs on the house. 7 Therefore King Jehoash
summoned the priest Jehoiada with the other priests and said to them,
"Why are you not repairing the house? Now therefore do not accept
any more money from your donors but hand it over for the repair of
the house." 8 So the priests agreed that they would neither accept
more money from the people nor repair the house.
9 Then the priest Jehoiada took a chest, made a hole in its lid, and set
it beside the altar on the right side as one entered the house of the
LORD; the priests who guarded the threshold put in it all the money
that was brought into the house of the LORD. 10 Whenever they saw
that there was a great deal of money in the chest, the king's secretary
and the high priest went up, counted the money that was found in the
house of the LORD, and tied it up in bags. 11 They would give the money
that was weighed out into the hands of the workers who had the
oversight of the house of the LORD; then they paid it out to the
carpenters and the builders who worked on the house of the LORD, 12
to the masons and the stonecutters, as well as to buy timber and
quarried stone for making repairs on the house of the LORD, as well as
for any outlay for repairs of the house. 13 But for the house of the LORD
no basins of silver, snuffers, bowls, trumpets, or any vessels of gold, or

742

2 KINGS 743

of silver, were made from the money that was brought into the house
of the LORD, 14 for that was given to the workers who were repairing
the house of the LORD with it. 15 They did not ask an accounting from
those into whose hand they delivered the money to pay out to the
workers, for they dealt honestly. 16 The money from the guilt offerings
and the money from the sin offerings was not brought into the house
of the LORD; it belonged to the priests.
17 At that time King Hazael of Aram went up, fought against Gath, and
took it. But when Hazael set his face to go up against Jerusalem, 18
King Jehoash of Judah took all the votive gifts that Jehoshaphat,
Jehoram, and Ahaziah, his ancestors, the kings of Judah, had
dedicated, as well as his own votive gifts, all the gold that was found in
the treasuries of the house of the LORD and of the king's house, and
sent these to King Hazael of Aram. Then Hazael withdrew from
Jerusalem.
19 Now the rest of the acts of Joash, and all that he did, are they not
written in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Judah? 20 His
servants arose, devised a conspiracy, and killed Joash in the house of
Millo, on the way that goes down to Silla. 21 It was Jozacar son of
Shimeath and Jehozabad son of Shomer, his servants, who struck him
down, so that he died. He was buried with his ancestors in the city of
David; then his son Amaziah succeeded him.
[2 Kings 13]
Jehoahaz (817-800 BCE) and Jehoash (also Joash; 800-784)
1 In the twenty-third year of King Joash son of Ahaziah of Judah,
Jehoahaz son of Jehu began to reign over Israel in Samaria; he reigned
seventeen years. 2 He did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, and
followed the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat, which he caused Israel to
sin; he did not depart from them. 3 The anger of the LORD was kindled
against Israel, so that he gave them repeatedly into the hand of King
Hazael of Aram, then into the hand of Ben-hadad son of Hazael. 4 But
Jehoahaz entreated the LORD, and the LORD heeded him; for he saw the
oppression of Israel, how the king of Aram oppressed them. 5
Therefore the LORD gave Israel a savior, so that they escaped from the

743

2 KINGS 744

hand of the Arameans; and the people of Israel lived in their homes as
formerly. 6 Nevertheless they did not depart from the sins of the house
of Jeroboam, which he caused Israel to sin, but walked in them; the
sacred pole also remained in Samaria. 7 So Jehoahaz was left with an
army of not more than fifty horsemen, ten chariots and ten thousand
footmen; for the king of Aram had destroyed them and made them
like the dust at threshing. 8 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoahaz and
all that he did, including his might, are they not written in the Book of
the Annals of the Kings of Israel? 9 So Jehoahaz slept with his
ancestors, and they buried him in Samaria; then his son Joash
succeeded him.
10 In the thirty-seventh year of King Joash of Judah, Jehoash son of
Jehoahaz began to reign over Israel in Samaria; he reigned sixteen
years. 11 He also did what was evil in the sight of the LORD; he did not
depart from all the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat, which he caused
Israel to sin, but he walked in them. 12 Now the rest of the acts of
Joash, and all that he did, as well as the might with which he fought
against King Amaziah of Judah, are they not written in the Book of the
Annals of the Kings of Israel? 13 So Joash slept with his ancestors, and
Jeroboam sat upon his throne; Joash was buried in Samaria with the
kings of Israel.
14 Now when Elisha had fallen sick with the illness of which he was to
die, King Joash of Israel went down to him, and wept before him,
crying, "My father, my father! The chariots of Israel and its horsemen!"
15 Elisha said to him, "Take a bow and arrows"; so he took a bow and
arrows. 16 Then he said to the king of Israel, "Draw the bow"; and he
drew it. Elisha laid his hands on the king's hands. 17 Then he said,
"Open the window eastward"; and he opened it. Elisha said, "Shoot";
and he shot. Then he said, "The LORD's arrow of victory, the arrow of
victory over Aram! For you shall fight the Arameans in Aphek until you
have made an end of them." 18 He continued, "Take the arrows"; and
he took them. He said to the king of Israel, "Strike the ground with
them"; he struck three times, and stopped. 19 Then the man of God
was angry with him, and said, "You should have struck five or six times;
then you would have struck down Aram until you had made an end of

744

2 KINGS 745

it, but now you will strike down Aram only three times."
20 So Elisha died, and they buried him. Now bands of Moabites used to
invade the land in the spring of the year. 21 As a man was being
buried, a marauding band was seen and the man was thrown into the
grave of Elisha; as soon as the man touched the bones of Elisha, he
came to life and stood on his feet.
22 Now King Hazael of Aram oppressed Israel all the days of Jehoahaz.
23 But the LORD was gracious to them and had compassion on them; he
turned toward them, because of his covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and would not destroy them; nor has he banished them from his
presence until now.
24 When King Hazael of Aram died, his son Ben-hadad succeeded him.
25 Then Jehoash son of Jehoahaz took again from Ben-hadad son of
Hazael the towns that he had taken from his father Jehoahaz in war.
Three times Joash defeated him and recovered the towns of Israel.
[2 Kings 14]
Amaziah, Jeroboam, and Azariah; the reign of Amaziah
1 In the second year of King Joash son of Joahaz of Israel, King
Amaziah son of Joash of Judah, began to reign. 2 He was twenty-five
years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty-nine years in
Jerusalem. His mother's name was Jehoaddin of Jerusalem. 3 He did
what was right in the sight of the LORD, yet not like his ancestor David;
in all things he did as his father Joash had done. 4 But the high places
were not removed; the people still sacrificed and made offerings on
the high places. 5 As soon as the royal power was firmly in his hand he
killed his servants who had murdered his father the king. 6 But he did
not put to death the children of the murderers; according to what is
written in the book of the law of Moses, where the LORD commanded,
"The parents shall not be put to death for the children, or the children
be put to death for the parents; but all shall be put to death for their
own sins."

745

2 KINGS 746

7 He killed ten thousand Edomites in the Valley of Salt and took Sela by
storm; he called it Jokthe-el, which is its name to this day.
8 Then Amaziah sent messengers to King Jehoash son of Jehoahaz, son
of Jehu, of Israel, saying, "Come, let us look one another in the face." 9
King Jehoash of Israel sent word to King Amaziah of Judah, "A
thornbush on Lebanon sent to a cedar on Lebanon, saying, 'Give your
daughter to my son for a wife'; but a wild animal of Lebanon passed by
and trampled down the thornbush. 10 You have indeed defeated
Edom, and your heart has lifted you up. Be content with your glory,
and stay at home; for why should you provoke trouble so that you fall,
you and Judah with you?"
11 But Amaziah would not listen. So King Jehoash of Israel went up; he
and King Amaziah of Judah faced one another in battle at Bethshemesh, which belongs to Judah. 12 Judah was defeated by Israel;
everyone fled home. 13 King Jehoash of Israel captured King Amaziah
of Judah son of Jehoash, son of Ahaziah, at Beth-shemesh; he came to
Jerusalem, and broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the Ephraim
Gate to the Corner Gate, a distance of four hundred cubits. 14 He
seized all the gold and silver, and all the vessels that were found in the
house of the LORD and in the treasuries of the king's house, as well as
hostages; then he returned to Samaria.
15 Now the rest of the acts that Jehoash did, his might, and how he
fought with King Amaziah of Judah, are they not written in the Book
of the Annals of the Kings of Israel? 16 Jehoash slept with his ancestors,
and was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel; then his son
Jeroboam succeeded him.
17 King Amaziah son of Joash of Judah lived fifteen years after the
death of King Jehoash son of Jehoahaz of Israel. 18 Now the rest of the
deeds of Amaziah, are they not written in the Book of the Annals of
the Kings of Judah? 19 They made a conspiracy against him in
Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish. But they sent after him to Lachish,
and killed him there. 20 They brought him on horses; he was buried in
Jerusalem with his ancestors in the city of David. 21 All the people of
Judah took Azariah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king to

746

2 KINGS 747

succeed his father Amaziah. 22 He rebuilt Elath and restored it to
Judah, after King Amaziah slept with his ancestors.
The reign of Jeroboam
23 In the fifteenth year of King Amaziah son of Joash of Judah, King
Jeroboam son of Joash of Israel began to reign in Samaria; he reigned
forty-one years. 24 He did what was evil in the sight of the LORD; he did
not depart from all the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat, which he caused
Israel to sin. 25 He restored the border of Israel from Lebo-hamath as
far as the Sea of the Arabah, according to the word of the LORD, the
God of Israel, which he spoke by his servant Jonah son of Amittai, the
prophet, who was from Gath-hepher. 26 For the LORD saw that the
distress of Israel was very bitter; there was no one left, bond or free,
and no one to help Israel. 27 But the LORD had not said that he would
blot out the name of Israel from under heaven, so he saved them by
the hand of Jeroboam son of Joash.
28 Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, and all that he did, and his
might, how he fought, and how he recovered for Israel Damascus and
Hamath, which had belonged to Judah, are they not written in the
Book of the Annals of the Kings of Israel? 29 Jeroboam slept with his
ancestors, the kings of Israel; his son Zechariah succeeded him.
[2 Kings 15]
The reign of Azariah
1 In the twenty-seventh year of King Jeroboam of Israel King Azariah
son of Amaziah of Judah began to reign. 2 He was sixteen years old
when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty-two years in Jerusalem.
His mother's name was Jecoliah of Jerusalem. 3 He did what was right
in the sight of the LORD, just as his father Amaziah had done. 4
Nevertheless the high places were not taken away; the people still
sacrificed and made offerings on the high places. 5 The LORD struck the
king, so that he was leprous to the day of his death, and lived in a
separate house. Jotham the king's son was in charge of the palace,
governing the people of the land. 6 Now the rest of the acts of
Azariah, and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the

747

2 KINGS 748

Annals of the Kings of Judah? 7 Azariah slept with his ancestors; they
buried him with his ancestors in the city of David; his son Jotham
succeeded him.
Israel's last days
8 In the thirty-eighth year of King Azariah of Judah, Zechariah son of
Jeroboam reigned over Israel in Samaria six months. 9 He did what was
evil in the sight of the LORD, as his ancestors had done. He did not
depart from the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat, which he caused Israel
to sin. 10 Shallum son of Jabesh conspired against him, and struck him
down in public and killed him, and reigned in place of him. 11 Now the
rest of the deeds of Zechariah are written in the Book of the Annals of
the Kings of Israel. 12 This was the promise of the LORD that he gave to
Jehu, "Your sons shall sit on the throne of Israel to the fourth
generation." And so it happened.
13 Shallum son of Jabesh began to reign in the thirty-ninth year of King
Uzziah of Judah; he reigned one month in Samaria. 14 Then Menahem
son of Gadi came up from Tirzah and came to Samaria; he struck down
Shallum son of Jabesh in Samaria and killed him; he reigned in place of
him. 15 Now the rest of the deeds of Shallum, including the conspiracy
that he made, are written in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of
Israel. 16 At that time Menahem sacked Tiphsah, all who were in it and
its territory from Tirzah on; because they did not open it to him, he
sacked it. He ripped open all the pregnant women in it.
17 In the thirty-ninth year of King Azariah of Judah, Menahem son of
Gadi began to reign over Israel; he reigned ten years in Samaria. 18 He
did what was evil in the sight of the LORD; he did not depart all his days
from any of the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat, which he caused Israel
to sin. 19 King Pul of Assyria came against the land; Menahem gave Pul
a thousand talents of silver, so that he might help him confirm his hold
on the royal power. 20 Menahem exacted the money from Israel, that
is, from all the wealthy, fifty shekels of silver from each one, to give to
the king of Assyria. So the king of Assyria turned back, and did not stay
there in the land. 21 Now the rest of the deeds of Menahem, and all
that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Annals of the Kings

748

2 KINGS 749

of Israel? 22 Menahem slept with his ancestors, and his son Pekahiah
succeeded him.
23 In the fiftieth year of King Azariah of Judah, Pekahiah son of
Menahem began to reign over Israel in Samaria; he reigned two years.
24 He did what was evil in the sight of the LORD; he did not turn away
from the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat, which he caused Israel to sin.
25 Pekah son of Remaliah, his captain, conspired against him with fifty
of the Gileadites, and attacked him in Samaria, in the citadel of the
palace along with Argob and Arieh; he killed him, and reigned in place
of him. 26 Now the rest of the deeds of Pekahiah, and all that he did,
are written in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
27 In the fifty-second year of King Azariah of Judah, Pekah son of
Remaliah began to reign over Israel in Samaria; he reigned twenty
years. 28 He did what was evil in the sight of the LORD; he did not
depart from the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat, which he caused Israel
to sin.
29 In the days of King Pekah of Israel, King Tiglath-pileser of Assyria
came and captured Ijon, Abel-beth-maacah, Janoah, Kedesh, Hazor,
Gilead, and Galilee, all the land of Naphtali; and he carried the people
captive to Assyria. 30 Then Hoshea son of Elah made a conspiracy
against Pekah son of Remaliah, attacked him, and killed him; he
reigned in place of him, in the twentieth year of Jotham son of Uzziah.
31 Now the rest of the acts of Pekah, and all that he did, are written in
the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Israel.
Jotham and Ahaz of Judah
32 In the second year of King Pekah son of Remaliah of Israel, King
Jotham son of Uzziah of Judah began to reign. 33 He was twenty-five
years old when he began to reign and reigned sixteen years in
Jerusalem. His mother's name was Jerusha daughter of Zadok. 34 He
did what was right in the sight of the LORD, just as his father Uzziah
had done. 35 Nevertheless the high places were not removed; the
people still sacrificed and made offerings on the high places. He built
the upper gate of the house of the LORD. 36 Now the rest of the acts of

749

2 KINGS 750

Jotham, and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the
Annals of the Kings of Judah? 37 In those days the LORD began to send
King Rezin of Aram and Pekah son of Remaliah against Judah. 38
Jotham slept with his ancestors, and was buried with his ancestors in
the city of David, his ancestor; his son Ahaz succeeded him.
[2 Kings 16]
1 In the seventeenth year of Pekah son of Remaliah, King Ahaz son of
Jotham of Judah began to reign. 2 Ahaz was twenty years old when he
began to reign; he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. He did not do
what was right in the sight of the LORD his God, as his ancestor David
had done, 3 but he walked in the way of the kings of Israel. He even
made his son pass through fire, according to the abominable practices
of the nations whom the LORD drove out before the people of Israel. 4
He sacrificed and made offerings on the high places, on the hills, and
under every green tree.
5 Then King Rezin of Aram and King Pekah son of Remaliah of Israel
came up to wage war on Jerusalem; they besieged Ahaz but could not
conquer him. 6 At that time the king of Edom recovered Elath for
Edom, and drove the Judeans from Elath; and the Edomites came to
Elath, where they live to this day. 7 Ahaz sent messengers to King
Tiglath-pileser of Assyria, saying, "I am your servant and your son.
Come up, and rescue me from the hand of the king of Aram and from
the hand of the king of Israel, who are attacking me." 8 Ahaz also took
the silver and gold found in the house of the LORD and in the treasures
of the king's house, and sent a present to the king of Assyria. 9 The
king of Assyria listened to him; the king of Assyria marched up against
Damascus, and took it, carrying its people captive to Kir; then he killed
Rezin.
10 When King Ahaz went to Damascus to meet King Tiglath-pileser of
Assyria, he saw the altar that was at Damascus. King Ahaz sent to the
priest Uriah a model of the altar, and its pattern, exact in all its details.
11 The priest Uriah built the altar; in accordance with all that King Ahaz
had sent from Damascus, just so did the priest Uriah build it, before
King Ahaz arrived from Damascus. 12 When the king came from

750

2 KINGS 751

Damascus, the king viewed the altar. Then the king drew near to the
altar, went up on it, 13 and offered his burnt offering and his grain
offering, poured his drink offering, and dashed the blood of his
offerings of well-being against the altar. 14 The bronze altar that was
before the LORD he removed from the front of the house, from the
place between his altar and the house of the LORD, and put it on the
north side of his altar. 15 King Ahaz commanded the priest Uriah,
saying, "Upon the great altar offer the morning burnt offering, and
the evening grain offering, and the king's burnt offering, and his grain
offering, with the burnt offering of all the people of the land, their
grain offering, and their drink offering; then dash against it all the
blood of the burnt offering, and all the blood of the sacrifice; but the
bronze altar shall be for me to inquire by." 16 The priest Uriah did
everything that King Ahaz commanded.
17 Then King Ahaz cut off the frames of the stands, and removed the
laver from them; he removed the sea from the bronze oxen that were
under it, and put it on a pediment of stone. 18 The covered portal for
use on the sabbath that had been built inside the palace, and the outer
entrance for the king he removed from the house of the LORD. He did
this because of the king of Assyria. 19 Now the rest of the acts of Ahaz
that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Annals of the Kings
of Judah? 20 Ahaz slept with his ancestors, and was buried with his
ancestors in the city of David; his son Hezekiah succeeded him.
[2 Kings 17]
The end of Israel
1 In the twelfth year of King Ahaz of Judah, Hoshea son of Elah began
to reign in Samaria over Israel; he reigned nine years. 2 He did what
was evil in the sight of the LORD, yet not like the kings of Israel who
were before him. 3 King Shalmaneser of Assyria came up against him;
Hoshea became his vassal, and paid him tribute. 4 But the king of
Assyria found treachery in Hoshea; for he had sent messengers to King
So of Egypt, and offered no tribute to the king of Assyria, as he had
done year by year; therefore the king of Assyria confined him and
imprisoned him.

751

2 KINGS 752

5 Then the king of Assyria invaded all the land and came to Samaria;
for three years he besieged it. 6 In the ninth year of Hoshea the king of
Assyria captured Samaria; he carried the Israelites away to Assyria. He
placed them in Halah, on the Habor, the river of Gozan, and in the
cities of the Medes.
7 This occurred because the people of Israel had sinned against the
LORD their God, who had brought them up out of the land of Egypt
from under the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt. They had worshiped
other gods 8 and walked in the customs of the nations whom the LORD
drove out before the people of Israel, and in the customs that the kings
of Israel had introduced. 9 The people of Israel secretly did things that
were not right against the LORD their God. They built for themselves
high places at all their towns, from watchtower to fortified city; 10 they
set up for themselves pillars and sacred poles on every high hill and
under every green tree; 11 there they made offerings on all the high
places, as the nations did whom the LORD carried away before them.
They did wicked things, provoking the LORD to anger; 12 they served
idols, of which the LORD had said to them, "You shall not do this." 13
Yet the LORD warned Israel and Judah by every prophet and every seer,
saying, "Turn from your evil ways and keep my commandments and my
statutes, in accordance with all the law that I commanded your
ancestors and that I sent to you by my servants the prophets." 14 They
would not listen but were stubborn, as their ancestors had been, who
did not believe in the LORD their God. 15 They despised his statutes, and
his covenant that he made with their ancestors, and the warnings that
he gave them. They went after false idols and became false; they
followed the nations that were around them, concerning whom the
LORD had commanded them that they should not do as they did. 16
They rejected all the commandments of the LORD their God and made
for themselves cast images of two calves; they made a sacred pole,
worshiped all the host of heaven, and served Baal. 17 They made their
sons and their daughters pass through fire; they used divination and
augury; and they sold themselves to do evil in the sight of the LORD,
provoking him to anger. 18 Therefore the LORD was very angry with
Israel and removed them out of his sight; none was left but the tribe of
Judah alone.

752

2 KINGS 753

19 Judah also did not keep the commandments of the LORD their God
but walked in the customs that Israel had introduced. 20 The LORD
rejected all the descendants of Israel; he punished them and gave them
into the hand of plunderers, until he had banished them from his
presence.
21 When he had torn Israel from the house of David, they made
Jeroboam son of Nebat king. Jeroboam drove Israel from following the
LORD and made them commit great sin. 22 The people of Israel
continued in all the sins that Jeroboam committed; they did not depart
from them 23 until the LORD removed Israel out of his sight, as he had
foretold through all his servants the prophets. So Israel was exiled from
their own land to Assyria until this day.
24 The king of Assyria brought people from Babylon, Cuthah, Avva,
Hamath, and Sepharvaim, and placed them in the cities of Samaria in
place of the people of Israel; they took possession of Samaria, and
settled in its cities. 25 When they first settled there, they did not
worship the LORD; therefore the LORD sent lions among them, which
killed some of them. 26 So the king of Assyria was told, "The nations
that you have carried away and placed in the cities of Samaria do not
know the law of the god of the land; therefore he has sent lions
among them; they are killing them, because they do not know the law
of the god of the land." 27 Then the king of Assyria commanded,
"Send there one of the priests whom you carried away from there; let
him go and live there, and teach them the law of the god of the land."
28 So one of the priests whom they had carried away from Samaria
came and lived in Bethel; he taught them how they should worship the
LORD.
29 But every nation still made gods of its own and put them in the
shrines of the high places that the people of Samaria had made, every
nation in the cities in which they lived; 30 the people of Babylon made
Succoth-benoth, the people of Cuth made Nergal, the people of
Hamath made Ashima; 31 the Avvites made Nibhaz and Tartak; the
Sepharvites burned their children in the fire to Adrammelech and
Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim. 32 They also worshiped the LORD
and appointed from among themselves all sorts of people as priests of

753

2 KINGS 754

the high places, who sacrificed for them in the shrines of the high
places. 33 So they worshiped the LORD but also served their own gods,
after the manner of the nations from among whom they had been
carried away. 34 To this day they continue to practice their former
customs.
They do not worship the LORD and they do not follow the statutes or
the ordinances or the law or the commandment that the LORD
commanded the children of Jacob, whom he named Israel. 35 The LORD
had made a covenant with them and commanded them, "You shall not
worship other gods or bow yourselves to them or serve them or
sacrifice to them, 36 but you shall worship the LORD, who brought you
out of the land of Egypt with great power and with an outstretched
arm; you shall bow yourselves to him, and to him you shall sacrifice. 37
The statutes and the ordinances and the law and the commandment
that he wrote for you, you shall always be careful to observe. You shall
not worship other gods; 38 you shall not forget the covenant that I
have made with you. You shall not worship other gods, 39 but you
shall worship the LORD your God; he will deliver you out of the hand of
all your enemies." 40 They would not listen, however, but they
continued to practice their former custom.
41 So these nations worshiped the LORD, but also served their carved
images; to this day their children and their children's children continue
to do as their ancestors did.
[2 Kings 18]
Hezekiah
1 In the third year of King Hoshea son of Elah of Israel, Hezekiah son of
King Ahaz of Judah began to reign. 2 He was twenty-five years old
when he began to reign; he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem.
His mother's name was Abi daughter of Zechariah. 3 He did what was
right in the sight of the LORD just as his ancestor David had done. 4 He
removed the high places, broke down the pillars, and cut down the
sacred pole. He broke in pieces the bronze serpent that Moses had
made, for until those days the people of Israel had made offerings to
it; it was called Nehushtan. 5 He trusted in the LORD the God of Israel;

754

2 KINGS 755

so that there was no one like him among all the kings of Judah after
him, or among those who were before him. 6 For he held fast to the
LORD; he did not depart from following him but kept the
commandments that the LORD commanded Moses. 7 The LORD was with
him; wherever he went, he prospered. He rebelled against the king of
Assyria and would not serve him. 8 He attacked the Philistines as far as
Gaza and its territory, from watchtower to fortified city.
9 In the fourth year of King Hezekiah, which was the seventh year of
King Hoshea son of Elah of Israel, King Shalmaneser of Assyria came up
against Samaria, besieged it, 10 and at the end of three years, took it.
In the sixth year of Hezekiah, which was the ninth year of King Hoshea
of Israel, Samaria was taken. 11 The king of Assyria carried the Israelites
away to Assyria, settled them in Halah, on the Habor, the river of
Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes, 12 because they did not obey the
voice of the LORD their God but transgressed his covenant — all that
Moses the servant of the LORD had commanded; they neither listened
nor obeyed.
The Assyrian assault on Judah
13 In the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah, King Sennacherib of Assyria
came up against all the fortified cities of Judah and captured them. 14
King Hezekiah of Judah sent to the king of Assyria at Lachish, saying, "I
have done wrong; withdraw from me; whatever you impose on me I
will bear." The king of Assyria demanded of King Hezekiah of Judah
three hundred talents of silver and thirty talents of gold. 15 Hezekiah
gave him all the silver that was found in the house of the LORD and in
the treasuries of the king's house. 16 At that time Hezekiah stripped
the gold from the doors of the temple of the LORD, and from the
doorposts that King Hezekiah of Judah had overlaid and gave it to the
king of Assyria. 17 The king of Assyria sent the Tartan, the Rabsaris, and
the Rabshakeh with a great army from Lachish to King Hezekiah at
Jerusalem. They went up and came to Jerusalem. When they arrived,
they came and stood by the conduit of the upper pool, which is on the
highway to the Fuller's Field. 18 When they called for the king, there
came out to them Eliakim son of Hilkiah, who was in charge of the

755

2 KINGS 756

palace, and Shebnah the secretary, and Joah son of Asaph, the
recorder.
19 The Rabshakeh said to them, "Say to Hezekiah: Thus says the great
king, the king of Assyria: On what do you base this confidence of
yours? 20 Do you think that mere words are strategy and power for
war? On whom do you now rely, that you have rebelled against me? 21
See, you are relying now on Egypt, that broken reed of a staff, which
will pierce the hand of anyone who leans on it. Such is Pharaoh king of
Egypt to all who rely on him. 22 But if you say to me, 'We rely on the
LORD our God,' is it not he whose high places and altars Hezekiah has
removed, saying to Judah and to Jerusalem, 'You shall worship before
this altar in Jerusalem'? 23 Come now, make a wager with my master
the king of Assyria: I will give you two thousand horses, if you are able
on your part to set riders on them. 24 How then can you repulse a
single captain among the least of my master's servants, when you rely
on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen? 25 Moreover, is it without the
LORD that I have come up against this place to destroy it? The LORD said
to me, Go up against this land, and destroy it."
26 Then Eliakim son of Hilkiah, and Shebnah, and Joah said to the
Rabshakeh, "Please speak to your servants in the Aramaic language,
for we understand it; do not speak to us in the language of Judah
within the hearing of the people who are on the wall." 27 But the
Rabshakeh said to them, "Has my master sent me to speak these words
to your master and to you, and not to the people sitting on the wall,
who are doomed with you to eat their own dung and to drink their
own urine?"
28 Then the Rabshakeh stood and called out in a loud voice in the
language of Judah, "Hear the word of the great king, the king of
Assyria! 29 Thus says the king: 'Do not let Hezekiah deceive you, for he
will not be able to deliver you out of my hand. 30 Do not let Hezekiah
make you rely on the LORD by saying, The LORD will surely deliver us,
and this city will not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.' 31
Do not listen to Hezekiah; for thus says the king of Assyria: 'Make your
peace with me and come out to me; then every one of you will eat
from your own vine and your own fig tree, and drink water from your

756

2 KINGS 757

own cistern, 32 until I come and take you away to a land like your own
land, a land of grain and wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of
olive oil and honey, that you may live and not die. Do not listen to
Hezekiah when he misleads you by saying, The LORD will deliver us. 33
Has any of the gods of the nations ever delivered its land out of the
hand of the king of Assyria? 34 Where are the gods of Hamath and
Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivvah? Have they
delivered Samaria out of my hand? 35 Who among all the gods of the
countries have delivered their countries out of my hand, that the LORD
should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?'"
36 But the people were silent and answered him not a word, for the
king's command was, "Do not answer him." 37 Then Eliakim son of
Hilkiah, who was in charge of the palace, and Shebna the secretary,
and Joah son of Asaph, the recorder, came to Hezekiah with their
clothes torn and told him the words of the Rabshakeh.
[2 Kings 19]
1 When King Hezekiah heard it, he tore his clothes, covered himself
with sackcloth, and went into the house of the LORD. 2 And he sent
Eliakim, who was in charge of the palace, and Shebna the secretary,
and the senior priests, covered with sackcloth, to the prophet Isaiah
son of Amoz. 3 They said to him, "Thus says Hezekiah, This day is a day
of distress, of rebuke, and of disgrace; children have come to the birth,
and there is no strength to bring them forth. 4 It may be that the LORD
your God heard all the words of the Rabshakeh, whom his master the
king of Assyria has sent to mock the living God, and will rebuke the
words that the LORD your God has heard; therefore lift up your prayer
for the remnant that is left." 5 When the servants of King Hezekiah
came to Isaiah, 6 Isaiah said to them, "Say to your master, 'Thus says
the LORD: Do not be afraid because of the words that you have heard,
with which the servants of the king of Assyria have reviled me. 7 I
myself will put a spirit in him, so that he shall hear a rumor and return
to his own land; I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.'"

757

2 KINGS 758

8 The Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria fighting
against Libnah; for he had heard that the king had left Lachish. 9
When the king heard concerning King Tirhakah of Ethiopia, "See, he
has set out to fight against you," he sent messengers again to
Hezekiah, saying, 10 "Thus shall you speak to King Hezekiah of Judah:
Do not let your God on whom you rely deceive you by promising that
Jerusalem will not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria. 11 See,
you have heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands,
destroying them utterly. Shall you be delivered? 12 Have the gods of
the nations delivered them, the nations that my predecessors
destroyed, Gozan, Haran, Rezeph, and the people of Eden who were in
Telassar? 13 Where is the king of Hamath, the king of Arpad, the king
of the city of Sepharvaim, the king of Hena, or the king of Ivvah?"
14 Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers and
read it; then Hezekiah went up to the house of the LORD and spread it
before the LORD. 15 And Hezekiah prayed before the LORD, and said: "O
LORD the God of Israel, who are enthroned above the cherubim, you
are God, you alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth; you have made
heaven and earth. 16 Incline your ear, O LORD, and hear; open your
eyes, O LORD, and see; hear the words of Sennacherib, which he has
sent to mock the living God. 17 Truly, O LORD, the kings of Assyria have
laid waste the nations and their lands, 18 and have hurled their gods
into the fire, though they were no gods but the work of human hands
— wood and stone — and so they were destroyed. 19 So now, O LORD
our God, save us, I pray you, from his hand, so that all the kingdoms of
the earth may know that you, O LORD, are God alone."
20 Then Isaiah son of Amoz sent to Hezekiah, saying, "Thus says the
LORD, the God of Israel: I have heard your prayer to me about King
Sennacherib of Assyria. 21 This is the word that the LORD has spoken
concerning him:
She despises you, she scorns you —
virgin daughter Zion;
she tosses her head — behind your back,
daughter Jerusalem.

758

2 KINGS 759

22 "Whom have you mocked and reviled?
Against whom have you raised your voice
and haughtily lifted your eyes?
Against the Holy One of Israel!
23 By your messengers you have mocked the Lord,
and you have said, 'With my many chariots
I have gone up the heights of the mountains,
to the far recesses of Lebanon;
I felled its tallest cedars,
its choicest cypresses;
I entered its farthest retreat,
its densest forest.
24 I dug wells
and drank foreign waters,
I dried up with the sole of my foot
all the streams of Egypt.'
25 "Have you not heard
that I determined it long ago?
I planned from days of old
what now I bring to pass,
that you should make fortified cities
crash into heaps of ruins,
26 while their inhabitants, shorn of strength,
are dismayed and confounded;
they have become like plants of the field
and like tender grass,
like grass on the housetops,
blighted before it is grown.
27 "But I know your rising and your sitting,
your going out and coming in,
and your raging against me.

759

2 KINGS 760

28 Because you have raged against me
and your arrogance has come to my ears,
I will put my hook in your nose
and my bit in your mouth;
I will turn you back on the way
by which you came.
29 "And this shall be the sign for you: This year you shall eat what
grows of itself, and in the second year what springs from that; then in
the third year sow, reap, plant vineyards, and eat their fruit. 30 The
surviving remnant of the house of Judah shall again take root
downward, and bear fruit upward; 31 for from Jerusalem a remnant
shall go out, and from Mount Zion a band of survivors. The zeal of the
LORD of hosts will do this.
32 "Therefore thus says the LORD concerning the king of Assyria: He
shall not come into this city, shoot an arrow there, come before it with
a shield, or cast up a siege ramp against it. 33 By the way that he came,
by the same he shall return; he shall not come into this city, says the
LORD. 34 For I will defend this city to save it, for my own sake and for
the sake of my servant David."
35 That very night the angel of the LORD set out and struck down one
hundred eighty-five thousand in the camp of the Assyrians; when
morning dawned, they were all dead bodies. 36 Then King Sennacherib
of Assyria left, went home, and lived at Nineveh. 37 As he was
worshiping in the house of his god Nisroch, his sons Adrammelech and
Sharezer killed him with the sword, and they escaped into the land of
Ararat. His son Esar-haddon succeeded him.
[2 Kings 20]
Hezekiah's illness and recovery
1 In those days Hezekiah became sick and was at the point of death.
The prophet Isaiah son of Amoz came to him, and said to him, "Thus
says the LORD: Set your house in order, for you shall die; you shall not
recover." 2 Then Hezekiah turned his face to the wall and prayed to
the LORD: 3 "Remember now, O LORD, I implore you, how I have walked

760

2 KINGS 761

before you in faithfulness with a whole heart, and have done what is
good in your sight." Hezekiah wept bitterly. 4 Before Isaiah had gone
out of the middle court, the word of the LORD came to him: 5 "Turn
back, and say to Hezekiah prince of my people, Thus says the LORD, the
God of your ancestor David: I have heard your prayer, I have seen your
tears; indeed, I will heal you; on the third day you shall go up to the
house of the LORD. 6 I will add fifteen years to your life. I will deliver
you and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria; I will defend
this city for my own sake and for my servant David's sake." 7 Then
Isaiah said, "Bring a lump of figs. Let them take it and apply it to the
boil, so that he may recover."
8 Hezekiah said to Isaiah, "What shall be the sign that the LORD will
heal me, and that I shall go up to the house of the LORD on the third
day?" 9 Isaiah said, "This is the sign to you from the LORD, that the LORD
will do the thing that he has promised: the shadow has now advanced
ten intervals; shall it retreat ten intervals?" 10 Hezekiah answered, "It is
normal for the shadow to lengthen ten intervals; rather let the shadow
retreat ten intervals." 11 The prophet Isaiah cried to the LORD; and he
brought the shadow back the ten intervals, by which the sun had
declined on the dial of Ahaz.
12 At that time King Merodach-baladan son of Baladan of Babylon sent
envoys with letters and a present to Hezekiah, for he had heard that
Hezekiah had been sick. 13 Hezekiah welcomed them; he showed them
all his treasure house, the silver, the gold, the spices, the precious oil,
his armory, all that was found in his storehouses; there was nothing in
his house or in all his realm that Hezekiah did not show them. 14 Then
the prophet Isaiah came to King Hezekiah, and said to him, "What did
these men say? From where did they come to you?" Hezekiah
answered, "They have come from a far country, from Babylon." 15 He
said, "What have they seen in your house?" Hezekiah answered, "They
have seen all that is in my house; there is nothing in my storehouses
that I did not show them."
16 Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah, "Hear the word of the LORD: 17 Days
are coming when all that is in your house, and that which your
ancestors have stored up until this day, shall be carried to Babylon;

761

2 KINGS 762

nothing shall be left, says the LORD. 18 Some of your own sons who are
born to you shall be taken away; they shall be eunuchs in the palace of
the king of Babylon." 19 Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah, "The word of
the LORD that you have spoken is good." For he thought, "Why not, if
there will be peace and security in my days?"
20 The rest of the deeds of Hezekiah, all his power, how he made the
pool and the conduit and brought water into the city, are they not
written in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Judah? 21 Hezekiah
slept with his ancestors; and his son Manasseh succeeded him.
[2 Kings 21]
Manasseh and Amon
1 Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign; he reigned
fifty-five years in Jerusalem. His mother's name was Hephzibah. 2 He
did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, following the abominable
practices of the nations that the LORD drove out before the people of
Israel. 3 For he rebuilt the high places that his father Hezekiah had
destroyed; he erected altars for Baal, made a sacred pole, as King Ahab
of Israel had done, worshiped all the host of heaven, and served them.
4 He built altars in the house of the LORD, of which the LORD had said,
"In Jerusalem I will put my name." 5 He built altars for all the host of
heaven in the two courts of the house of the LORD. 6 He made his son
pass through fire; he practiced soothsaying and augury, and dealt with
mediums and with wizards. He did much evil in the sight of the LORD,
provoking him to anger. 7 The carved image of Asherah that he had
made he set in the house of which the LORD said to David and to his
son Solomon, "In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out
of all the tribes of Israel, I will put my name forever; 8 I will not cause
the feet of Israel to wander any more out of the land that I gave to
their ancestors, if only they will be careful to do according to all that I
have commanded them, and according to all the law that my servant
Moses commanded them." 9 But they did not listen; Manasseh misled
them to do more evil than the nations had done that the LORD
destroyed before the people of Israel.

762

2 KINGS 763

10 The LORD said by his servants the prophets, 11 "Because King
Manasseh of Judah has committed these abominations, has done
things more wicked than all that the Amorites did, who were before
him, and has caused Judah also to sin with his idols; 12 therefore thus
says the LORD, the God of Israel, I am bringing upon Jerusalem and
Judah such evil that the ears of everyone who hears of it will tingle. 13 I
will stretch over Jerusalem the measuring line for Samaria, and the
plummet for the house of Ahab; I will wipe Jerusalem as one wipes a
dish, wiping it and turning it upside down. 14 I will cast off the
remnant of my heritage, and give them into the hand of their enemies;
they shall become a prey and a spoil to all their enemies, 15 because
they have done what is evil in my sight and have provoked me to
anger, since the day their ancestors came out of Egypt, even to this
day."
16 Moreover Manasseh shed very much innocent blood, until he had
filled Jerusalem from one end to another, besides the sin that he
caused Judah to sin so that they did what was evil in the sight of the
LORD.
17 Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, all that he did, and the sin
that he committed, are they not written in the Book of the Annals of
the Kings of Judah? 18 Manasseh slept with his ancestors, and was
buried in the garden of his house, in the garden of Uzza. His son Amon
succeeded him.
19 Amon was twenty-two years old when he began to reign; he
reigned two years in Jerusalem. His mother's name was Meshullemeth
daughter of Haruz of Jotbah. 20 He did what was evil in the sight of
the LORD, as his father Manasseh had done. 21 He walked in all the way
in which his father walked, served the idols that his father served, and
worshiped them; 22 he abandoned the LORD, the God of his ancestors,
and did not walk in the way of the LORD. 23 The servants of Amon
conspired against him, and killed the king in his house. 24 But the
people of the land killed all those who had conspired against King
Amon, and the people of the land made his son Josiah king in place of
him. 25 Now the rest of the acts of Amon that he did, are they not
written in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Judah? 26 He was

763

2 KINGS 764

buried in his tomb in the garden of Uzza; then his son Josiah succeeded
him.
[2 Kings 22]
Josiah (640-609 BCE)
1 Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign; he reigned thirtyone years in Jerusalem. His mother's name was Jedidah daughter of
Adaiah of Bozkath. 2 He did what was right in the sight of the LORD,
and walked in all the way of his father David; he did not turn aside to
the right or to the left.
3 In the eighteenth year of King Josiah, the king sent Shaphan son of
Azaliah, son of Meshullam, the secretary, to the house of the LORD,
saying, 4 "Go up to the high priest Hilkiah, and have him count the
entire sum of the money that has been brought into the house of the
LORD, which the keepers of the threshold have collected from the
people; 5 let it be given into the hand of the workers who have the
oversight of the house of the LORD; let them give it to the workers who
are at the house of the LORD, repairing the house, 6 that is, to the
carpenters, to the builders, to the masons; and let them use it to buy
timber and quarried stone to repair the house. 7 But no accounting
shall be asked from them for the money that is delivered into their
hand, for they deal honestly."
8 The high priest Hilkiah said to Shaphan the secretary, "I have found
the book of the law in the house of the LORD." When Hilkiah gave the
book to Shaphan, he read it. 9 Then Shaphan the secretary came to the
king, and reported to the king, "Your servants have emptied out the
money that was found in the house, and have delivered it into the
hand of the workers who have oversight of the house of the LORD." 10
Shaphan the secretary informed the king, "The priest Hilkiah has given
me a book." Shaphan then read it aloud to the king.
11 When the king heard the words of the book of the law, he tore his
clothes. 12 Then the king commanded the priest Hilkiah, Ahikam son of
Shaphan, Achbor son of Micaiah, Shaphan the secretary, and the king's
servant Asaiah, saying, 13 "Go, inquire of the LORD for me, for the

764

2 KINGS 765

people, and for all Judah, concerning the words of this book that has
been found; for great is the wrath of the LORD that is kindled against
us, because our ancestors did not obey the words of this book, to do
according to all that is written concerning us."
14 So the priest Hilkiah, Ahikam, Achbor, Shaphan, and Asaiah went to
the prophetess Huldah the wife of Shallum son of Tikvah, son of
Harhas, keeper of the wardrobe; she resided in Jerusalem in the Second
Quarter, where they consulted her. 15 She declared to them, "Thus says
the LORD, the God of Israel: Tell the man who sent you to me, 16 Thus
says the LORD, I will indeed bring disaster on this place and on its
inhabitants — all the words of the book that the king of Judah has
read. 17 Because they have abandoned me and have made offerings to
other gods, so that they have provoked me to anger with all the work
of their hands, therefore my wrath will be kindled against this place,
and it will not be quenched. 18 But as to the king of Judah, who sent
you to inquire of the LORD, thus shall you say to him, Thus says the
LORD, the God of Israel: Regarding the words that you have heard, 19
because your heart was penitent, and you humbled yourself before the
LORD, when you heard how I spoke against this place, and against its
inhabitants, that they should become a desolation and a curse, and
because you have torn your clothes and wept before me, I also have
heard you, says the LORD. 20 Therefore, I will gather you to your
ancestors, and you shall be gathered to your grave in peace; your eyes
shall not see all the disaster that I will bring on this place." They took
the message back to the king.
[2 Kings 23]
1 Then the king directed that all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem
should be gathered to him. 2 The king went up to the house of the
LORD, and with him went all the people of Judah, all the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the priests, the prophets, and all the people, both small and
great; he read in their hearing all the words of the book of the
covenant that had been found in the house of the LORD. 3 The king
stood by the pillar and made a covenant before the LORD, to follow the
LORD, keeping his commandments, his decrees, and his statutes, with all

765

2 KINGS 766

his heart and all his soul, to perform the words of this covenant that
were written in this book. All the people joined in the covenant.
4 The king commanded the high priest Hilkiah, the priests of the
second order, and the guardians of the threshold, to bring out of the
temple of the LORD all the vessels made for Baal, for Asherah, and for
all the host of heaven; he burned them outside Jerusalem in the fields
of the Kidron, and carried their ashes to Bethel. 5 He deposed the
idolatrous priests whom the kings of Judah had ordained to make
offerings in the high places at the cities of Judah and around
Jerusalem; those also who made offerings to Baal, to the sun, the
moon, the constellations, and all the host of the heavens. 6 He brought
out the image of Asherah from the house of the LORD, outside
Jerusalem, to the Wadi Kidron, burned it at the Wadi Kidron, beat it to
dust and threw the dust of it upon the graves of the common people. 7
He broke down the houses of the male temple prostitutes that were in
the house of the LORD, where the women did weaving for Asherah. 8
He brought all the priests out of the towns of Judah, and defiled the
high places where the priests had made offerings, from Geba to Beersheba; he broke down the high places of the gates that were at the
entrance of the gate of Joshua the governor of the city, which were on
the left at the gate of the city. 9 The priests of the high places,
however, did not come up to the altar of the LORD in Jerusalem, but ate
unleavened bread among their kindred. 10 He defiled Topheth, which
is in the valley of Ben-hinnom, so that no one would make a son or a
daughter pass through fire as an offering to Molech. 11 He removed
the horses that the kings of Judah had dedicated to the sun, at the
entrance to the house of the LORD, by the chamber of the eunuch
Nathan-melech, which was in the precincts; then he burned the
chariots of the sun with fire. 12 The altars on the roof of the upper
chamber of Ahaz, which the kings of Judah had made, and the altars
that Manasseh had made in the two courts of the house of the LORD,
he pulled down from there and broke in pieces, and threw the rubble
into the Wadi Kidron. 13 The king defiled the high places that were
east of Jerusalem, to the south of the Mount of Destruction, which
King Solomon of Israel had built for Astarte the abomination of the
Sidonians, for Chemosh the abomination of Moab, and for Milcom the

766

2 KINGS 767

abomination of the Ammonites. 14 He broke the pillars in pieces, cut
down the sacred poles, and covered the sites with human bones.
15 Moreover, the altar at Bethel, the high place erected by Jeroboam
son of Nebat, who caused Israel to sin — he pulled down that altar
along with the high place. He burned the high place, crushing it to
dust; he also burned the sacred pole. 16 As Josiah turned, he saw the
tombs there on the mount; and he sent and took the bones out of the
tombs, and burned them on the altar, and defiled it, according to the
word of the LORD that the man of God proclaimed, when Jeroboam
stood by the altar at the festival; he turned and looked up at the tomb
of the man of God who had predicted these things. 17 Then he said,
"What is that monument that I see?" The people of the city told him,
"It is the tomb of the man of God who came from Judah and predicted
these things that you have done against the altar at Bethel." 18 He
said, "Let him rest; let no one move his bones." So they let his bones
alone, with the bones of the prophet who came out of Samaria. 19
Moreover, Josiah removed all the shrines of the high places that were
in the towns of Samaria, which kings of Israel had made, provoking the
LORD to anger; he did to them just as he had done at Bethel. 20 He
slaughtered on the altars all the priests of the high places who were
there, and burned human bones on them. Then he returned to
Jerusalem.
21 The king commanded all the people, "Keep the passover to the LORD
your God as prescribed in this book of the covenant." 22 No such
passover had been kept since the days of the judges who judged Israel,
even during all the days of the kings of Israel and of the kings of
Judah; 23 but in the eighteenth year of King Josiah this passover was
kept to the LORD in Jerusalem.
24 Moreover Josiah put away the mediums, wizards, teraphim, idols,
and all the abominations that were seen in the land of Judah and in
Jerusalem, so that he established the words of the law that were
written in the book that the priest Hilkiah had found in the house of
the LORD. 25 Before him there was no king like him, who turned to the
LORD with all his heart, with all his soul, and with all his might,
according to all the law of Moses; nor did any like him arise after him.

767

2 KINGS 768

26 Still the LORD did not turn from the fierceness of his great wrath, by
which his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the
provocations with which Manasseh had provoked him. 27 The LORD
said, "I will remove Judah also out of my sight, as I have removed
Israel; and I will reject this city that I have chosen, Jerusalem, and the
house of which I said, My name shall be there."
28 Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and all that he did, are they not
written in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Judah? 29 In his days
Pharaoh Neco king of Egypt went up to the king of Assyria to the river
Euphrates. King Josiah went to meet him; but when Pharaoh Neco met
him at Megiddo, he killed him. 30 His servants carried him dead in a
chariot from Megiddo, brought him to Jerusalem, and buried him in his
own tomb. The people of the land took Jehoahaz son of Josiah,
anointed him, and made him king in place of his father.
The end of Judah
31 Jehoahaz was twenty-three years old when he began to reign; he
reigned three months in Jerusalem. His mother's name was Hamutal
daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. 32 He did what was evil in the sight of
the LORD, just as his ancestors had done. 33 Pharaoh Neco confined him
at Riblah in the land of Hamath, so that he might not reign in
Jerusalem, and imposed tribute on the land of one hundred talents of
silver and a talent of gold. 34 Pharaoh Neco made Eliakim son of Josiah
king in place of his father Josiah, and changed his name to Jehoiakim.
But he took Jehoahaz away; he came to Egypt, and died there. 35
Jehoiakim gave the silver and the gold to Pharaoh, but he taxed the
land in order to meet Pharaoh's demand for money. He exacted the
silver and the gold from the people of the land, from all according to
their assessment, to give it to Pharaoh Neco.
36 Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he began to reign; he
reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. His mother's name was Zebidah
daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah. 37 He did what was evil in the sight of
the LORD, just as all his ancestors had done.

768

2 KINGS 769

[2 Kings 24]
1 In his days King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came up; Jehoiakim
became his servant for three years; then he turned and rebelled against
him. 2 The LORD sent against him bands of the Chaldeans, bands of the
Arameans, bands of the Moabites, and bands of the Ammonites; he
sent them against Judah to destroy it, according to the word of the
LORD that he spoke by his servants the prophets. 3 Surely this came
upon Judah at the command of the LORD, to remove them out of his
sight, for the sins of Manasseh, for all that he had committed, 4 and
also for the innocent blood that he had shed; for he filled Jerusalem
with innocent blood, and the LORD was not willing to pardon. 5 Now
the rest of the deeds of Jehoiakim, and all that he did, are they not
written in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Judah? 6 So
Jehoiakim slept with his ancestors; then his son Jehoiachin succeeded
him. 7 The king of Egypt did not come again out of his land, for the
king of Babylon had taken over all that belonged to the king of Egypt
from the Wadi of Egypt to the River Euphrates.
8 Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he began to reign; he
reigned three months in Jerusalem. His mother's name was Nehushta
daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem. 9 He did what was evil in the sight
of the LORD, just as his father had done.
10 At that time the servants of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came
up to Jerusalem, and the city was besieged. 11 King Nebuchadnezzar of
Babylon came to the city, while his servants were besieging it; 12 King
Jehoiachin of Judah gave himself up to the king of Babylon, himself,
his mother, his servants, his officers, and his palace officials. The king of
Babylon took him prisoner in the eighth year of his reign.
13 He carried off all the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the
treasures of the king's house; he cut in pieces all the vessels of gold in
the temple of the LORD, which King Solomon of Israel had made, all this
as the LORD had foretold. 14 He carried away all Jerusalem, all the
officials, all the warriors, ten thousand captives, all the artisans and the
smiths; no one remained, except the poorest people of the land. 15 He
carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon; the king's mother, the king's

769

2 KINGS 770

wives, his officials, and the elite of the land, he took into captivity from
Jerusalem to Babylon. 16 The king of Babylon brought captive to
Babylon all the men of valor, seven thousand, the artisans and the
smiths, one thousand, all of them strong and fit for war. 17 The king of
Babylon made Mattaniah, Jehoiachin's uncle, king in his place, and
changed his name to Zedekiah.
18 Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he began to reign; he
reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. His mother's name was Hamutal
daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. 19 He did what was evil in the sight of
the LORD, just as Jehoiakim had done. 20 Indeed, Jerusalem and Judah
so angered the LORD that he expelled them from his presence.
Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon. [2 Kings 25] 1 And in the
ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, on the tenth day of the
month, King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came with all his army
against Jerusalem, and laid siege to it; they built siegeworks against it
all around. 2 So the city was besieged until the eleventh year of King
Zedekiah. 3 On the ninth day of the fourth month the famine became
so severe in the city that there was no food for the people of the land.
4 Then a breach was made in the city wall; the king with all the soldiers
fled by night by the way of the gate between the two walls, by the
king's garden, though the Chaldeans were all around the city. They
went in the direction of the Arabah. 5 But the army of the Chaldeans
pursued the king, and overtook him in the plains of Jericho; all his
army was scattered, deserting him. 6 Then they captured the king and
brought him up to the king of Babylon at Riblah, who passed sentence
on him. 7 They slaughtered the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, then
put out the eyes of Zedekiah; they bound him in fetters and took him
to Babylon.
8 In the fifth month, on the seventh day of the month — which was
the nineteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon —
Nebuzaradan, the captain of the bodyguard, a servant of the king of
Babylon, came to Jerusalem. 9 He burned the house of the LORD, the
king's house, and all the houses of Jerusalem; every great house he
burned down. 10 All the army of the Chaldeans who were with the
captain of the guard broke down the walls around Jerusalem. 11

770

2 KINGS 771

Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried into exile the rest of the
people who were left in the city and the deserters who had defected to
the king of Babylon — all the rest of the population. 12 But the captain
of the guard left some of the poorest people of the land to be
vinedressers and tillers of the soil.
13 The bronze pillars that were in the house of the LORD, as well as the
stands and the bronze sea that were in the house of the LORD, the
Chaldeans broke in pieces, and carried the bronze to Babylon. 14 They
took away the pots, the shovels, the snuffers, the dishes for incense,
and all the bronze vessels used in the temple service, 15 as well as the
firepans and the basins. What was made of gold the captain of the
guard took away for the gold, and what was made of silver, for the
silver. 16 As for the two pillars, the one sea, and the stands, which
Solomon had made for the house of the LORD, the bronze of all these
vessels was beyond weighing. 17 The height of the one pillar was
eighteen cubits, and on it was a bronze capital; the height of the
capital was three cubits; latticework and pomegranates, all of bronze,
were on the capital all around. The second pillar had the same, with
the latticework.
18 The captain of the guard took the chief priest Seraiah, the second
priest Zephaniah, and the three guardians of the threshold; 19 from the
city he took an officer who had been in command of the soldiers, and
five men of the king's council who were found in the city; the secretary
who was the commander of the army who mustered the people of the
land; and sixty men of the people of the land who were found in the
city. 20 Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took them, and brought
them to the king of Babylon at Riblah. 21 The king of Babylon struck
them down and put them to death at Riblah in the land of Hamath. So
Judah went into exile out of its land.
22 He appointed Gedaliah son of Ahikam son of Shaphan as governor
over the people who remained in the land of Judah, whom King
Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon had left. 23 Now when all the captains of
the forces and their men heard that the king of Babylon had appointed
Gedaliah as governor, they came with their men to Gedaliah at
Mizpah, namely, Ishmael son of Nethaniah, Johanan son of Kareah,

771

2 KINGS 772

Seraiah son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite, and Jaazaniah son of the
Maacathite. 24 Gedaliah swore to them and their men, saying, "Do not
be afraid because of the Chaldean officials; live in the land, serve the
king of Babylon, and it shall be well with you." 25 But in the seventh
month, Ishmael son of Nethaniah son of Elishama, of the royal family,
came with ten men; they struck down Gedaliah so that he died, along
with the Judeans and Chaldeans who were with him at Mizpah. 26
Then all the people, high and low, and the captains of the forces set
out and went to Egypt; for they were afraid of the Chaldeans.
27 In the thirty-seventh year of the exile of King Jehoiachin of Judah, in
the twelfth month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, King Evilmerodach of Babylon, in the year that he began to reign, released King
Jehoiachin of Judah from prison; 28 he spoke kindly to him, and gave
him a seat above the other seats of the kings who were with him in
Babylon. 29 So Jehoiachin put aside his prison clothes. Every day of his
life he dined regularly in the king's presence. 30 For his allowance, a
regular allowance was given him by the king, a portion every day, as
long as he lived.

772

1 CHRONICLES 773

1 CHRONICLES
Introduction
Like many books in the Bible, Chronicles was originally anonymous and
untitled. The title ascribed to it by the early rabbis, "the book of the
events of the days" ("seper dibre hayyamim") suggests that this is the
book referred to often in Kings (e.g., 1 Kings 14.19), where one may
find additional material about individual kings. The name Chronicles in
the Septuagint, Paralipomena, "the things left out," similarly testifies
that Chronicles records the events left out of earlier biblical history.
This understanding of Chronicles is not accepted by most modern
scholars. It was St. Jerome's description of the book as a "chronicle," a
summary of divine history, that has proved to be most influential in the
history of modern interpretation.
There is little doubt that the author lived in Jerusalem and had great
familiarity with the Temple and its assorted traditions. Many scholars
have suggested that the anonymous author of Chronicles also
composed Ezra-Nehemiah. Since Ezra begins where Chronicles ends,
with Cyrus's decree allowing the exiled Jews to return home and
rebuild the Temple, some scholars assume that these books are a
unified work of a single author or editor. Other scholars think that
linguistic, thematic, and historiographical differences between
Chronicles and Ezra-Nehemiah are too great to warrant positing a
common authorship for Chronicles, Ezra, and Nehemiah. Seen in this
latter perspective, the Chronicler's History, which begins with the first
person (Adam) and ends with the Babylonian exile and Cyrus the
Great's summons to the exiled Jews to return home (2 Chr 36.21-23),
must be separated from the postexilic history of Ezra-Nehemiah. This
latter approach makes the most sense. Although there are significant
similarities between the Chronicles, Ezra, and Nehemiah, the
differences outweigh the similarities, and one individual is unlikely to

773

1 CHRONICLES 774

have written all three works. Hence, in the following annotation, "the
Chronicler" designates the author of Chronicles.
The Chronicler wrote during the Persian period (539-332 BCE), after
much of the literature of the Hebrew Bible had already been written,
and he draws extensively upon this rich literary tradition. The
dependence of Chronicles upon Genesis is evident in the genealogies (1
Chr 1-9); the dependence upon Samuel is clear in the narration of Saul's
demise and David's reign (1 Chr 10-29); and the dependence upon Kings
is unmistakable in the narration of Solomon and the Judahite kingdom
(2 Chr 1-36). The Chronicler's work is also informed by a variety of
earlier biblical texts. Citations from or allusions to the Torah, Joshua,
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, the Psalms, and Ruth all appear in Chronicles.
In fact, one of the significant issues that the Chronicler must deal with
is how all of these authoritative sources may be reconciled. Scholars
generally agree that the Chronicler also had access to some nonbiblical
sources, but the nature and extent of these sources are disputed.
It is difficult to date Chronicles precisely, beyond noting that it is
postexilic. A range of over three hundred and fifty years, from the late
sixth to the mid-second century BCE, has been suggested for its date of
composition. Of the possibilities, a date in the fourth century seems
most plausible, because it would account for both the author's studious
references to a variety of other biblical writings and those literary
features within the work that anticipate some familiar features of
Jewish Hellenistic writings. But there are no specific references, no
absolute synchronisms, and no extrabiblical citations that could
definitely situate the book within a given decade or quarter-century.
Chronicles has three major sections: the genealogies (1 Chr 1-9), the
history of the United Monarch (1 Chr 10-2 Chr 9), and the history of the
Judahite monarchy (2 Chr 10-36). The first section, which forms the
introduction to the work, begins with Adam (1 Chr 1), but focuses upon
the identity, interrelationships, and location of Israel's twelve tribes (1
Chr 2-9). Such genealogies, which are found in traditional societies,
explain and justify the place and function of various individuals,
people, and institutions. In the case of 1 Chr 1-8, the Chronicler stresses
the ties between Israel and the land. The very scope and structure of

774

1 CHRONICLES 775

the Chronicler's genealogical system underscore the indivisibility of
Israel. Within this larger structure, Judah, Levi, and Benjamin receive by
far the most extensive genealogies. In the Chronicler's work, these
three tribes are deemed critical to preserving Israel's distinctive legacy.
The list of those Jews who returned from exile (1 Chr 9) concludes these
chapters by highlighting the continuity between postexilic Judah (the
Persian province of Yehud) and earlier Israel.
The Chronicler's coverage of the monarchy proceeds according to a
fundamentally historical outline. After briefly addressing and
condemning the reign of Saul (1 Chr 10), the Chronicler devotes most of
his attention to the highly successful reigns of David (1 Chr 11-29) and
Solomon (2 Chr 1-9), which clearly represent a high point of the history.
The rest of the book engages the emergence, continuation, and fall of
the kingdom of Judah (2 Chr 10-36). By placing David and Solomon's
achievements at the center of Israelite history, the author underscores
the prominence of those Israelite institutions he believed developed,
were consolidated, or were transformed during this period — the
Aaronic priesthood; the Levites in all their responsibilities as singers,
teachers, administrators, and ancillaries to the priests; the Davidic
dynasty; and last but not least, the Temple itself. Having portrayed the
establishment of Israel's normative political and cultic institutions in
the time of David and Solomon, the Chronicler never reneges on their
pertinence to the live of all Israelites in later centuries.
Following the death of Solomon and the ascension of his son
Rehoboam, the ten northern tribes secede from southern rule (2 Chr
11.1-17). Whereas the author of Kings follows synchronistically the
course of both the Northern and Southern Kingdoms, the Chronicler
concentrates his attention upon the tribes of Judah, Benjamin, and
Levi, who make up the Southern Kingdom of Judah (2 Chr 11.5-6, 12, 1317, 23). In Chronicles the course of the Judahite monarchy is
characterized by both defeats and successes. The Chronicler
consistently documents the achievements of Judah's best kings —
Abijah (2 Chr 13.2-21), Asa (2 Chr 14.1-6; 15.8-15), Jehoshaphat (2 Chr 17.19; 19.4-11), Hezekiah (2 Chr 29-31), and Josiah (2 Chr 34.1-7) — to
institute reforms, reunite the people, and recover lost territories. Major
regressions occur in the reigns of Ahaz (2 Chr 28), Manasseh (2 Chr 33.1-

775

1 CHRONICLES 776

11), and the final kings of Judah (2 Chr 36.1-13). In depicting their
history, the Chronicler is largely dependent on Kings, but as the
episode concerning Manasseh's repentance and restoration (2 Chr
33.12-19; cf. 2 Kings 21.1-16) demonstrates, he may revise these sources
so they fit his theology. Throughout the work, God sends prophets to
warn monarchs, leaders, and people alike about the consequences of
their actions, imploring them to repent. This is seen especially in his
commentary on the defeat and exile of Judah, in which the Chronicler
states that Judah was exiled only after the Lord sent a steady supply of
prophets to stir the people and priestly leaders to reform, but their
warnings went unheeded (2 Chr 36.14-16).
Both Kings and Chronicles end by describing events from the sixth
century BCE, but Cyrus's decree, commending the return of the
Babylonian exiles to Judah (2 Chr 36.22-23), offers a clearer hope for
the future than the conclusion of Kings. In this manner, Chronicles
contains and relativizes the tremendous tragedy of the Babylonian
deportations soberly depicted in 2 Kings 24-25. Thus Chronicles, with its
positive ending and emphasis on the power of repentance, may be
seen as more optimistic than the history of Samuel-Kings, which it has
rewritten.

[1 Chronicles 1]
From the first person to Israel: a universal genealogy
1 Adam, Seth, Enosh; 2 Kenan, Mahalalel, Jared; 3 Enoch, Methuselah,
Lamech; 4 Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
Descendants of Noah
5 The descendants of Japheth: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal,
Meshech, and Tiras. 6 The descendants of Gomer: Ashkenaz, Diphath,
and Togarmah. 7 The descendants of Javan: Elishah, Tarshish, Kittim,
and Rodanim.

776

1 CHRONICLES 777

8 The descendants of Ham: Cush, Egypt, Put, and Canaan. 9 The
descendants of Cush: Seba, Havilah, Sabta, Raama, and Sabteca. The
descendants of Raamah: Sheba and Dedan. 10 Cush became the father
of Nimrod; he was the first to be a mighty one on the earth.
11 Egypt became the father of Ludim, Anamim, Lehabim, Naphtuhim, 12
Pathrusim, Casluhim, and Caphtorim, from whom the Philistines come.
13 Canaan became the father of Sidon his firstborn, and Heth, 14 and
the Jebusites, the Amorites, the Girgashites, 15 the Hivites, the Arkites,
the Sinites, 16 the Arvadites, the Zemarites, and the Hamathites.
17 The descendants of Shem: Elam, Asshur, Arpachshad, Lud, Aram, Uz,
Hul, Gether, and Meshech. 18 Arpachshad became the father of Shelah;
and Shelah became the father of Eber. 19 To Eber were born two sons:
the name of the one was Peleg (for in his days the earth was divided),
and the name of his brother Joktan. 20 Joktan became the father of
Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah, 21 Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah, 22
Ebal, Abimael, Sheba, 23 Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab; all these were the
descendants of Joktan.
Shem's genealogy
24 Shem, Arpachshad, Shelah; 25 Eber, Peleg, Reu; 26 Serug, Nahor,
Terah; 27 Abram, that is, Abraham.
28 The sons of Abraham: Isaac and Ishmael. 29 These are their
genealogies: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebaioth; and Kedar, Adbeel,
Mibsam, 30 Mishma, Dumah, Massa, Hadad, Tema, 31 Jetur, Naphish,
and Kedemah. These are the sons of Ishmael. 32 The sons of Keturah,
Abraham's concubine: she bore Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian,
Ishbak, and Shuah. The sons of Jokshan: Sheba and Dedan. 33 The sons
of Midian: Ephah, Epher, Hanoch, Abida, and Eldaah. All these were
the descendants of Keturah.
34 Abraham became the father of Isaac. The sons of Isaac: Esau and
Israel. 35 The sons of Esau: Eliphaz, Reuel, Jeush, Jalam, and Korah. 36

777

1 CHRONICLES 778

The sons of Eliphaz: Teman, Omar, Zephi, Gatam, Kenaz, Timna, and
Amalek. 37 The sons of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah.
38 The sons of Seir: Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah, Dishon, Ezer, and
Dishan. 39 The sons of Lotan: Hori and Homam; and Lotan's sister was
Timna. 40 The sons of Shobal: Alian, Manahath, Ebal, Shephi, and
Onam. The sons of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah. 41 The sons of Anah:
Dishon. The sons of Dishon: Hamran, Eshban, Ithran, and Cheran. 42
The sons of Ezer: Bilhan, Zaavan, and Jaakan. The sons of Dishan: Uz
and Aran.
43 These are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom before any
king reigned over the Israelites: Bela son of Beor, whose city was called
Dinhabah. 44 When Bela died, Jobab son of Zerah of Bozrah succeeded
him. 45 When Jobab died, Husham of the land of the Temanites
succeeded him. 46 When Husham died, Hadad son of Bedad, who
defeated Midian in the country of Moab, succeeded him; and the name
of his city was Avith. 47 When Hadad died, Samlah of Masrekah
succeeded him. 48 When Samlah died, Shaul of Rehoboth on the
Euphrates succeeded him. 49 When Shaul died, Baal-hanan son of
Achbor succeeded him. 50 When Baal-hanan died, Hadad succeeded
him; the name of his city was Pai, and his wife's name Mehetabel
daughter of Matred, daughter of Me-zahab. 51 And Hadad died.
The clans of Edom were: clans Timna, Aliah, Jetheth, 52 Oholibamah,
Elah, Pinon, 53 Kenaz, Teman, Mibzar, 54 Magdiel, and Iram; these are
the clans of Edom.
[1 Chronicles 2]
1 These are the sons of Israel: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar,
Zebulun, 2 Dan, Joseph, Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad, and Asher. 3 The sons
of Judah: Er, Onan, and Shelah; these three the Canaanite woman
Bath-shua bore to him. Now Er, Judah's firstborn, was wicked in the
sight of the LORD, and he put him to death. 4 His daughter-in-law
Tamar also bore him Perez and Zerah. Judah had five sons in all.

778

1 CHRONICLES 779

5 The sons of Perez: Hezron and Hamul. 6 The sons of Zerah: Zimri,
Ethan, Heman, Calcol, and Dara, five in all. 7 The sons of Carmi: Achar,
the troubler of Israel, who transgressed in the matter of the devoted
thing; 8 and Ethan's son was Azariah.
9 The sons of Hezron, who were born to him: Jerahmeel, Ram, and
Chelubai. 10 Ram became the father of Amminadab, and Amminadab
became the father of Nahshon, prince of the sons of Judah. 11 Nahshon
became the father of Salma, Salma of Boaz, 12 Boaz of Obed, Obed of
Jesse. 13 Jesse became the father of Eliab his firstborn, Abinadab the
second, Shimea the third, 14 Nethanel the fourth, Raddai the fifth, 15
Ozem the sixth, David the seventh; 16 and their sisters were Zeruiah
and Abigail. The sons of Zeruiah: Abishai, Joab, and Asahel, three. 17
Abigail bore Amasa, and the father of Amasa was Jether the
Ishmaelite.
18 Caleb son of Hezron had children by his wife Azubah, and by
Jerioth; these were her sons: Jesher, Shobab, and Ardon. 19 When
Azubah died, Caleb married Ephrath, who bore him Hur. 20 Hur
became the father of Uri, and Uri became the father of Bezalel.
21 Afterward Hezron went in to the daughter of Machir father of
Gilead, whom he married when he was sixty years old; and she bore
him Segub; 22 and Segub became the father of Jair, who had twentythree towns in the land of Gilead. 23 But Geshur and Aram took from
them Havvoth-jair, Kenath and its villages, sixty towns. All these were
descendants of Machir, father of Gilead. 24 After the death of Hezron,
in Caleb-ephrathah, Abijah wife of Hezron bore him Ashhur, father of
Tekoa.
25 The sons of Jerahmeel, the firstborn of Hezron: Ram his firstborn,
Bunah, Oren, Ozem, and Ahijah. 26 Jerahmeel also had another wife,
whose name was Atarah; she was the mother of Onam. 27 The sons of
Ram, the firstborn of Jerahmeel: Maaz, Jamin, and Eker. 28 The sons of
Onam: Shammai and Jada. The sons of Shammai: Nadab and Abishur.
29 The name of Abishur's wife was Abihail, and she bore him Ahban
and Molid. 30 The sons of Nadab: Seled and Appaim; and Seled died
childless. 31 The son of Appaim: Ishi. The son of Ishi: Sheshan. The son

779

1 CHRONICLES 780

of Sheshan: Ahlai. 32 The sons of Jada, Shammai's brother: Jether and
Jonathan; and Jether died childless. 33 The sons of Jonathan: Peleth
and Zaza. These were the descendants of Jerahmeel. 34 Now Sheshan
had no sons, only daughters; but Sheshan had an Egyptian slave, whose
name was Jarha. 35 So Sheshan gave his daughter in marriage to his
slave Jarha; and she bore him Attai. 36 Attai became the father of
Nathan, and Nathan of Zabad. 37 Zabad became the father of Ephlal,
and Ephlal of Obed. 38 Obed became the father of Jehu, and Jehu of
Azariah. 39 Azariah became the father of Helez, and Helez of Eleasah.
40 Eleasah became the father of Sismai, and Sismai of Shallum. 41
Shallum became the father of Jekamiah, and Jekamiah of Elishama.
42 The sons of Caleb brother of Jerahmeel: Mesha his firstborn, who
was father of Ziph. The sons of Mareshah father of Hebron. 43 The sons
of Hebron: Korah, Tappuah, Rekem, and Shema. 44 Shema became
father of Raham, father of Jorkeam; and Rekem became the father of
Shammai. 45 The son of Shammai: Maon; and Maon was the father of
Beth-zur. 46 Ephah also, Caleb's concubine, bore Haran, Moza, and
Gazez; and Haran became the father of Gazez. 47 The sons of Jahdai:
Regem, Jotham, Geshan, Pelet, Ephah, and Shaaph. 48 Maacah, Caleb's
concubine, bore Sheber and Tirhanah. 49 She also bore Shaaph father
of Madmannah, Sheva father of Machbenah and father of Gibea; and
the daughter of Caleb was Achsah. 50 These were the descendants of
Caleb.
The sons of Hur the firstborn of Ephrathah: Shobal father of Kiriathjearim, 51 Salma father of Bethlehem, and Hareph father of Bethgader. 52 Shobal father of Kiriath-jearim had other sons: Haroeh, half
of the Menuhoth. 53 And the families of Kiriath-jearim: the Ithrites, the
Puthites, the Shumathites, and the Mishraites; from these came the
Zorathites and the Eshtaolites. 54 The sons of Salma: Bethlehem, the
Netophathites, Atroth-beth-joab, and half of the Manahathites, the
Zorites. 55 The families also of the scribes that lived at Jabez: the
Tirathites, the Shimeathites, and the Sucathites. These are the Kenites
who came from Hammath, father of the house of Rechab.

780

1 CHRONICLES 781

[1 Chronicles 3]
The descendants of David
1 These are the sons of David who were born to him in Hebron: the
firstborn Amnon, by Ahinoam the Jezreelite; the second Daniel, by
Abigail the Carmelite; 2 the third Absalom, son of Maacah, daughter of
King Talmai of Geshur; the fourth Adonijah, son of Haggith; 3 the fifth
Shephatiah, by Abital; the sixth Ithream, by his wife Eglah; 4 six were
born to him in Hebron, where he reigned for seven years and six
months. And he reigned thirty-three years in Jerusalem. 5 These were
born to him in Jerusalem: Shimea, Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon, four
by Bath-shua, daughter of Ammiel; 6 then Ibhar, Elishama, Eliphelet, 7
Nogah, Nepheg, Japhia, 8 Elishama, Eliada, and Eliphelet, nine. 9 All
these were David's sons, besides the sons of the concubines; and Tamar
was their sister.
10 The descendants of Solomon: Rehoboam, Abijah his son, Asa his son,
Jehoshaphat his son, 11 Joram his son, Ahaziah his son, Joash his son, 12
Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, Jotham his son, 13 Ahaz his son,
Hezekiah his son, Manasseh his son, 14 Amon his son, Josiah his son. 15
The sons of Josiah: Johanan the firstborn, the second Jehoiakim, the
third Zedekiah, the fourth Shallum. 16 The descendants of Jehoiakim:
Jeconiah his son, Zedekiah his son; 17 and the sons of Jeconiah, the
captive: Shealtiel his son, 18 Malchiram, Pedaiah, Shenazzar, Jekamiah,
Hoshama, and Nedabiah; 19 The sons of Pedaiah: Zerubbabel and
Shimei; and the sons of Zerubbabel: Meshullam and Hananiah, and
Shelomith was their sister; 20 and Hashubah, Ohel, Berechiah,
Hasadiah, and Jushab-hesed, five. 21 The sons of Hananiah: Pelatiah
and Jeshaiah, his son Rephaiah, his son Arnan, his son Obadiah, his son
Shecaniah. 22 The son of Shecaniah: Shemaiah. And the sons of
Shemaiah: Hattush, Igal, Bariah, Neariah, and Shaphat, six. 23 The sons
of Neariah: Elioenai, Hizkiah, and Azrikam, three. 24 The sons of
Elioenai: Hodaviah, Eliashib, Pelaiah, Akkub, Johanan, Delaiah, and
Anani, seven.

781

1 CHRONICLES 782

[1 Chronicles 4]
Descendants of Judah
1 The sons of Judah: Perez, Hezron, Carmi, Hur, and Shobal. 2 Reaiah
son of Shobal became the father of Jahath, and Jahath became the
father of Ahumai and Lahad. These were the families of the Zorathites.
3 These were the sons of Etam: Jezreel, Ishma, and Idbash; and the
name of their sister was Hazzelelponi, 4 and Penuel was the father of
Gedor, and Ezer the father of Hushah. These were the sons of Hur, the
firstborn of Ephrathah, the father of Bethlehem. 5 Ashhur father of
Tekoa had two wives, Helah and Naarah; 6 Naarah bore him Ahuzzam,
Hepher, Temeni, and Haahashtari. These were the sons of Naarah. 7
The sons of Helah: Zereth, Izhar, and Ethnan. 8 Koz became the father
of Anub, Zobebah, and the families of Aharhel son of Harum. 9 Jabez
was honored more than his brothers; and his mother named him Jabez,
saying, "Because I bore him in pain." 10 Jabez called on the God of
Israel, saying, "Oh that you would bless me and enlarge my border,
and that your hand might be with me, and that you would keep me
from hurt and harm!" And God granted what he asked. 11 Chelub the
brother of Shuhah became the father of Mehir, who was the father of
Eshton. 12 Eshton became the father of Beth-rapha, Paseah, and
Tehinnah the father of Ir-nahash. These are the men of Recah. 13 The
sons of Kenaz: Othniel and Seraiah; and the sons of Othniel: Hathath
and Meonothai. 14 Meonothai became the father of Ophrah; and
Seraiah became the father of Joab father of Ge-harashim, so-called
because they were artisans. 15 The sons of Caleb son of Jephunneh: Iru,
Elah, and Naam; and the son of Elah: Kenaz. 16 The sons of Jehallelel:
Ziph, Ziphah, Tiria, and Asarel. 17 The sons of Ezrah: Jether, Mered,
Epher, and Jalon. These are the sons of Bithiah, daughter of Pharaoh,
whom Mered married; and she conceived and bore Miriam, Shammai,
and Ishbah father of Eshtemoa. 18 And his Judean wife bore Jered
father of Gedor, Heber father of Soco, and Jekuthiel father of Zanoah.
19 The sons of the wife of Hodiah, the sister of Naham, were the
fathers of Keilah the Garmite and Eshtemoa the Maacathite. 20 The
sons of Shimon: Amnon, Rinnah, Ben-hanan, and Tilon. The sons of Ishi:
Zoheth and Ben-zoheth. 21 The sons of Shelah son of Judah: Er father
of Lecah, Laadah father of Mareshah, and the families of the guild of
linen workers at Beth-ashbea; 22 and Jokim, and the men of Cozeba,

782

1 CHRONICLES 783

and Joash, and Saraph, who married into Moab but returned to Lehem
(now the records are ancient). 23 These were the potters and
inhabitants of Netaim and Gederah; they lived there with the king in
his service.
Descendants of Simeon
24 The sons of Simeon: Nemuel, Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, Shaul; 25 Shallum
was his son, Mibsam his son, Mishma his son. 26 The sons of Mishma:
Hammuel his son, Zaccur his son, Shimei his son. 27 Shimei had sixteen
sons and six daughters; but his brothers did not have many children,
nor did all their family multiply like the Judeans. 28 They lived in Beersheba, Moladah, Hazar-shual, 29 Bilhah, Ezem, Tolad, 30 Bethuel,
Hormah, Ziklag, 31 Beth-marcaboth, Hazar-susim, Beth-biri, and
Shaaraim. These were their towns until David became king. 32 And
their villages were Etam, Ain, Rimmon, Tochen, and Ashan, five towns,
33 along with all their villages that were around these towns as far as
Baal. These were their settlements. And they kept a genealogical
record.
34 Meshobab, Jamlech, Joshah son of Amaziah, 35 Joel, Jehu son of
Joshibiah son of Seraiah son of Asiel, 36 Elioenai, Jaakobah,
Jeshohaiah, Asaiah, Adiel, Jesimiel, Benaiah, 37 Ziza son of Shiphi son
of Allon son of Jedaiah son of Shimri son of Shemaiah — 38 these
mentioned by name were leaders in their families, and their clans
increased greatly. 39 They journeyed to the entrance of Gedor, to the
east side of the valley, to seek pasture for their flocks, 40 where they
found rich, good pasture, and the land was very broad, quiet, and
peaceful; for the former inhabitants there belonged to Ham. 41 These,
registered by name, came in the days of King Hezekiah of Judah, and
attacked their tents and the Meunim who were found there, and
exterminated them to this day, and settled in their place, because there
was pasture there for their flocks. 42 And some of them, five hundred
men of the Simeonites, went to Mount Seir, having as their leaders
Pelatiah, Neariah, Rephaiah, and Uzziel, sons of Ishi; 43 they destroyed
the remnant of the Amalekites that had escaped, and they have lived
there to this day.

783

1 CHRONICLES 784

[1 Chronicles 5]
The descendants of Reuben
1 The sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel. (He was the firstborn, but
because he defiled his father's bed his birthright was given to the sons
of Joseph son of Israel, so that he is not enrolled in the genealogy
according to the birthright; 2 though Judah became prominent among
his brothers and a ruler came from him, yet the birthright belonged to
Joseph.) 3 The sons of Reuben, the firstborn of Israel: Hanoch, Pallu,
Hezron, and Carmi. 4 The sons of Joel: Shemaiah his son, Gog his son,
Shimei his son, 5 Micah his son, Reaiah his son, Baal his son, 6 Beerah
his son, whom King Tilgath-pilneser of Assyria carried away into exile;
he was a chieftain of the Reubenites. 7 And his kindred by their
families, when the genealogy of their generations was reckoned: the
chief, Jeiel, and Zechariah, 8 and Bela son of Azaz, son of Shema, son
of Joel, who lived in Aroer, as far as Nebo and Baal-meon. 9 He also
lived to the east as far as the beginning of the desert this side of the
Euphrates, because their cattle had multiplied in the land of Gilead. 10
And in the days of Saul they made war on the Hagrites, who fell by
their hand; and they lived in their tents throughout all the region east
of Gilead.
The descendants of Gad
11 The sons of Gad lived beside them in the land of Bashan as far as
Salecah: 12 Joel the chief, Shapham the second, Janai, and Shaphat in
Bashan. 13 And their kindred according to their clans: Michael,
Meshullam, Sheba, Jorai, Jacan, Zia, and Eber, seven. 14 These were the
sons of Abihail son of Huri, son of Jaroah, son of Gilead, son of
Michael, son of Jeshishai, son of Jahdo, son of Buz; 15 Ahi son of
Abdiel, son of Guni, was chief in their clan; 16 and they lived in Gilead,
in Bashan and in its towns, and in all the pasture lands of Sharon to
their limits. 17 All of these were enrolled by genealogies in the days of
King Jotham of Judah, and in the days of King Jeroboam of Israel.

784

1 CHRONICLES 785

The wars of the Transjordan tribes
18 The Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh had
valiant warriors, who carried shield and sword, and drew the bow,
expert in war, forty-four thousand seven hundred sixty, ready for
service. 19 They made war on the Hagrites, Jetur, Naphish, and Nodab;
20 and when they received help against them, the Hagrites and all who
were with them were given into their hands, for they cried to God in
the battle, and he granted their entreaty because they trusted in him.
21 They captured their livestock: fifty thousand of their camels, two
hundred fifty thousand sheep, two thousand donkeys, and one
hundred thousand captives. 22 Many fell slain, because the war was of
God. And they lived in their territory until the exile.
The descendants of Half-Manasseh; the exile of the Transjordan tribes
23 The members of the half-tribe of Manasseh lived in the land; they
were very numerous from Bashan to Baal-hermon, Senir, and Mount
Hermon. 24 These were the heads of their clans: Epher, Ishi, Eliel,
Azriel, Jeremiah, Hodaviah, and Jahdiel, mighty warriors, famous men,
heads of their clans. 25 But they transgressed against the God of their
ancestors, and prostituted themselves to the gods of the peoples of the
land, whom God had destroyed before them. 26 So the God of Israel
stirred up the spirit of King Pul of Assyria, the spirit of King Tilgathpilneser of Assyria, and he carried them away, namely, the Reubenites,
the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, and brought them to
Halah, Habor, Hara, and the river Gozan, to this day.
[1 Chronicles 6]
The descendants of Levi
1 The sons of Levi: Gershom, Kohath, and Merari. 2 The sons of Kohath:
Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel. 3 The children of Amram: Aaron,
Moses, and Miriam. The sons of Aaron: Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and
Ithamar. 4 Eleazar became the father of Phinehas, Phinehas of Abishua,
5 Abishua of Bukki, Bukki of Uzzi, 6 Uzzi of Zerahiah, Zerahiah of
Meraioth, 7 Meraioth of Amariah, Amariah of Ahitub, 8 Ahitub of
Zadok, Zadok of Ahimaaz, 9 Ahimaaz of Azariah, Azariah of Johanan,

785

1 CHRONICLES 786

10 and Johanan of Azariah (it was he who served as priest in the house
that Solomon built in Jerusalem). 11 Azariah became the father of
Amariah, Amariah of Ahitub, 12 Ahitub of Zadok, Zadok of Shallum, 13
Shallum of Hilkiah, Hilkiah of Azariah, 14 Azariah of Seraiah, Seraiah of
Jehozadak; 15 and Jehozadak went into exile when the LORD sent Judah
and Jerusalem into exile by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar.
16 The sons of Levi: Gershom, Kohath, and Merari. 17 These are the
names of the sons of Gershom: Libni and Shimei. 18 The sons of
Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel. 19 The sons of Merari:
Mahli and Mushi. These are the clans of the Levites according to their
ancestry. 20 Of Gershom: Libni his son, Jahath his son, Zimmah his son,
21 Joah his son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, Jeatherai his son. 22 The
sons of Kohath: Amminadab his son, Korah his son, Assir his son, 23
Elkanah his son, Ebiasaph his son, Assir his son, 24 Tahath his son, Uriel
his son, Uzziah his son, and Shaul his son. 25 The sons of Elkanah:
Amasai and Ahimoth, 26 Elkanah his son, Zophai his son, Nahath his
son, 27 Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, Elkanah his son. 28 The sons of
Samuel: Joel his firstborn, the second Abijah. 29 The sons of Merari:
Mahli, Libni his son, Shimei his son, Uzzah his son, 30 Shimea his son,
Haggiah his son, and Asaiah his son.
31 These are the men whom David put in charge of the service of song
in the house of the LORD, after the ark came to rest there. 32 They
ministered with song before the tabernacle of the tent of meeting,
until Solomon had built the house of the LORD in Jerusalem; and they
performed their service in due order. 33 These are the men who served;
and their sons were: Of the Kohathites: Heman, the singer, son of Joel,
son of Samuel, 34 son of Elkanah, son of Jeroham, son of Eliel, son of
Toah, 35 son of Zuph, son of Elkanah, son of Mahath, son of Amasai, 36
son of Elkanah, son of Joel, son of Azariah, son of Zephaniah, 37 son of
Tahath, son of Assir, son of Ebiasaph, son of Korah, 38 son of Izhar, son
of Kohath, son of Levi, son of Israel; 39 and his brother Asaph, who
stood on his right, namely, Asaph son of Berechiah, son of Shimea, 40
son of Michael, son of Baaseiah, son of Malchijah, 41 son of Ethni, son
of Zerah, son of Adaiah, 42 son of Ethan, son of Zimmah, son of Shimei,
43 son of Jahath, son of Gershom, son of Levi. 44 On the left were their
kindred the sons of Merari: Ethan son of Kishi, son of Abdi, son of

786

1 CHRONICLES 787

Malluch, 45 son of Hashabiah, son of Amaziah, son of Hilkiah, 46 son of
Amzi, son of Bani, son of Shemer, 47 son of Mahli, son of Mushi, son of
Merari, son of Levi; 48 and their kindred the Levites were appointed
for all the service of the tabernacle of the house of God.
49 But Aaron and his sons made offerings on the altar of burnt
offering and on the altar of incense, doing all the work of the most
holy place, to make atonement for Israel, according to all that Moses
the servant of God had commanded. 50 These are the sons of Aaron:
Eleazar his son, Phinehas his son, Abishua his son, 51 Bukki his son, Uzzi
his son, Zerahiah his son, 52 Meraioth his son, Amariah his son, Ahitub
his son, 53 Zadok his son, Ahimaaz his son.
54 These are their dwelling places according to their settlements within
their borders: to the sons of Aaron of the families of Kohathites — for
the lot fell to them first — 55 to them they gave Hebron in the land of
Judah and its surrounding pasture lands, 56 but the fields of the city
and its villages they gave to Caleb son of Jephunneh. 57 To the sons of
Aaron they gave the cities of refuge: Hebron, Libnah with its pasture
lands, Jattir, Eshtemoa with its pasture lands, 58 Hilen with its pasture
lands, Debir with its pasture lands, 59 Ashan with its pasture lands, and
Beth-shemesh with its pasture lands. 60 From the tribe of Benjamin,
Geba with its pasture lands, Alemeth with its pasture lands, and
Anathoth with its pasture lands. All their towns throughout their
families were thirteen.
61 To the rest of the Kohathites were given by lot out of the family of
the tribe, out of the half-tribe, the half of Manasseh, ten towns. 62 To
the Gershomites according to their families were allotted thirteen
towns out of the tribes of Issachar, Asher, Naphtali, and Manasseh in
Bashan. 63 To the Merarites according to their families were allotted
twelve towns out of the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Zebulun. 64 So the
people of Israel gave the Levites the towns with their pasture lands. 65
They also gave them by lot out of the tribes of Judah, Simeon, and
Benjamin these towns that are mentioned by name.

787

1 CHRONICLES 788

66 And some of the families of the sons of Kohath had towns of their
territory out of the tribe of Ephraim. 67 They were given the cities of
refuge: Shechem with its pasture lands in the hill country of Ephraim,
Gezer with its pasture lands, 68 Jokmeam with its pasture lands, Bethhoron with its pasture lands, 69 Aijalon with its pasture lands, Gathrimmon with its pasture lands; 70 and out of the half-tribe of
Manasseh, Aner with its pasture lands, and Bileam with its pasture
lands, for the rest of the families of the Kohathites.
71 To the Gershomites: out of the half-tribe of Manasseh: Golan in
Bashan with its pasture lands and Ashtaroth with its pasture lands; 72
and out of the tribe of Issachar: Kedesh with its pasture lands,
Daberath with its pasture lands, 73 Ramoth with its pasture lands, and
Anem with its pasture lands; 74 out of the tribe of Asher: Mashal with
its pasture lands, Abdon with its pasture lands, 75 Hukok with its
pasture lands, and Rehob with its pasture lands; 76 and out of the tribe
of Naphtali: Kedesh in Galilee with its pasture lands, Hammon with its
pasture lands, and Kiriathaim with its pasture lands. 77 To the rest of
the Merarites out of the tribe of Zebulun: Rimmono with its pasture
lands, Tabor with its pasture lands, 78 and across the Jordan from
Jericho, on the east side of the Jordan, out of the tribe of Reuben:
Bezer in the steppe with its pasture lands, Jahzah with its pasture
lands, 79 Kedemoth with its pasture lands, and Mephaath with its
pasture lands; 80 and out of the tribe of Gad: Ramoth in Gilead with its
pasture lands, Mahanaim with its pasture lands, 81 Heshbon with its
pasture lands, and Jazer with its pasture lands.
[1 Chronicles 7]
The descendants of Issachar
1 The sons of Issachar: Tola, Puah, Jashub, and Shimron, four. 2 The sons
of Tola: Uzzi, Rephaiah, Jeriel, Jahmai, Ibsam, and Shemuel, heads of
their ancestral houses, namely of Tola, mighty warriors of their
generations, their number in the days of David being twenty-two
thousand six hundred. 3 The son of Uzzi: Izrahiah. And the sons of
Izrahiah: Michael, Obadiah, Joel, and Isshiah, five, all of them chiefs; 4
and along with them, by their generations, according to their ancestral
houses, were units of the fighting force, thirty-six thousand, for they

788

1 CHRONICLES 789

had many wives and sons. 5 Their kindred belonging to all the families
of Issachar were in all eighty-seven thousand mighty warriors, enrolled
by genealogy.
The descendants of Benjamin
6 The sons of Benjamin: Bela, Becher, and Jediael, three. 7 The sons of
Bela: Ezbon, Uzzi, Uzziel, Jerimoth, and Iri, five, heads of ancestral
houses, mighty warriors; and their enrollment by genealogies was
twenty-two thousand thirty-four. 8 The sons of Becher: Zemirah, Joash,
Eliezer, Elioenai, Omri, Jeremoth, Abijah, Anathoth, and Alemeth. All
these were the sons of Becher; 9 and their enrollment by genealogies,
according to their generations, as heads of their ancestral houses,
mighty warriors, was twenty thousand two hundred. 10 The sons of
Jediael: Bilhan. And the sons of Bilhan: Jeush, Benjamin, Ehud,
Chenaanah, Zethan, Tarshish, and Ahishahar. 11 All these were the sons
of Jediael according to the heads of their ancestral houses, mighty
warriors, seventeen thousand two hundred, ready for service in war. 12
And Shuppim and Huppim were the sons of Ir, Hushim the son of Aher.
The descendants of Naphtali
13 The descendants of Naphtali: Jahziel, Guni, Jezer, and Shallum, the
descendants of Bilhah.
The descendants of Manasseh
14 The sons of Manasseh: Asriel, whom his Aramean concubine bore;
she bore Machir the father of Gilead. 15 And Machir took a wife for
Huppim and for Shuppim. The name of his sister was Maacah. And the
name of the second was Zelophehad; and Zelophehad had daughters.
16 Maacah the wife of Machir bore a son, and she named him Peresh;
the name of his brother was Sheresh; and his sons were Ulam and
Rekem. 17 The son of Ulam: Bedan. These were the sons of Gilead son
of Machir, son of Manasseh. 18 And his sister Hammolecheth bore
Ishhod, Abiezer, and Mahlah. 19 The sons of Shemida were Ahian,
Shechem, Likhi, and Aniam.

789

1 CHRONICLES 790

The descendants of Ephraim
20 The sons of Ephraim: Shuthelah, and Bered his son, Tahath his son,
Eleadah his son, Tahath his son, 21 Zabad his son, Shuthelah his son,
and Ezer and Elead. Now the people of Gath, who were born in the
land, killed them, because they came down to raid their cattle. 22 And
their father Ephraim mourned many days, and his brothers came to
comfort him. 23 Ephraim went in to his wife, and she conceived and
bore a son; and he named him Beriah, because disaster had befallen his
house. 24 His daughter was Sheerah, who built both Lower and Upper
Beth-horon, and Uzzen-sheerah. 25 Rephah was his son, Resheph his
son, Telah his son, Tahan his son, 26 Ladan his son, Ammihud his son,
Elishama his son, 27 Nun his son, Joshua his son. 28 Their possessions
and settlements were Bethel and its towns, and eastward Naaran, and
westward Gezer and its towns, Shechem and its towns, as far as Ayyah
and its towns; 29 also along the borders of the Manassites, Beth-shean
and its towns, Taanach and its towns, Megiddo and its towns, Dor and
its towns. In these lived the sons of Joseph son of Israel.
The descendants of Asher
30 The sons of Asher: Imnah, Ishvah, Ishvi, Beriah, and their sister
Serah. 31 The sons of Beriah: Heber and Malchiel, who was the father
of Birzaith. 32 Heber became the father of Japhlet, Shomer, Hotham,
and their sister Shua. 33 The sons of Japhlet: Pasach, Bimhal, and
Ashvath. These are the sons of Japhlet. 34 The sons of Shemer: Ahi,
Rohgah, Hubbah, and Aram. 35 The sons of Helem his brother: Zophah,
Imna, Shelesh, and Amal. 36 The sons of Zophah: Suah, Harnepher,
Shual, Beri, Imrah, 37 Bezer, Hod, Shamma, Shilshah, Ithran, and Beera.
38 The sons of Jether: Jephunneh, Pispa, and Ara. 39 The sons of Ulla:
Arah, Hanniel, and Rizia. 40 All of these were men of Asher, heads of
ancestral houses, select mighty warriors, chief of the princes. Their
number enrolled by genealogies, for service in war, was twenty-six
thousand men.

790

1 CHRONICLES 791

[1 Chronicles 8]
The descendants of Benjamin
1 Benjamin became the father of Bela his firstborn, Ashbel the second,
Aharah the third, 2 Nohah the fourth, and Rapha the fifth. 3 And Bela
had sons: Addar, Gera, Abihud, 4 Abishua, Naaman, Ahoah, 5 Gera,
Shephuphan, and Huram. 6 These are the sons of Ehud (they were
heads of ancestral houses of the inhabitants of Geba, and they were
carried into exile to Manahath): 7 Naaman, Ahijah, and Gera, that is,
Heglam, who became the father of Uzza and Ahihud. 8 And Shaharaim
had sons in the country of Moab after he had sent away his wives
Hushim and Baara. 9 He had sons by his wife Hodesh: Jobab, Zibia,
Mesha, Malcam, 10 Jeuz, Sachia, and Mirmah. These were his sons,
heads of ancestral houses. 11 He also had sons by Hushim: Abitub and
Elpaal. 12 The sons of Elpaal: Eber, Misham, and Shemed, who built
Ono and Lod with its towns, 13 and Beriah and Shema (they were heads
of ancestral houses of the inhabitants of Aijalon, who put to flight the
inhabitants of Gath); 14 and Ahio, Shashak, and Jeremoth. 15 Zebadiah,
Arad, Eder, 16 Michael, Ishpah, and Joha were sons of Beriah. 17
Zebadiah, Meshullam, Hizki, Heber, 18 Ishmerai, Izliah, and Jobab were
the sons of Elpaal. 19 Jakim, Zichri, Zabdi, 20 Elienai, Zillethai, Eliel, 21
Adaiah, Beraiah, and Shimrath were the sons of Shimei. 22 Ishpan,
Eber, Eliel, 23 Abdon, Zichri, Hanan, 24 Hananiah, Elam, Anthothijah, 25
Iphdeiah, and Penuel were the sons of Shashak. 26 Shamsherai,
Shehariah, Athaliah, 27 Jaareshiah, Elijah, and Zichri were the sons of
Jeroham. 28 These were the heads of ancestral houses, according to
their generations, chiefs. These lived in Jerusalem.
29 Jeiel the father of Gibeon lived in Gibeon, and the name of his wife
was Maacah. 30 His firstborn son: Abdon, then Zur, Kish, Baal, Nadab,
31 Gedor, Ahio, Zecher, 32 and Mikloth, who became the father of
Shimeah. Now these also lived opposite their kindred in Jerusalem,
with their kindred. 33 Ner became the father of Kish, Kish of Saul, Saul
of Jonathan, Malchishua, Abinadab, and Esh-baal; 34 and the son of
Jonathan was Merib-baal; and Merib-baal became the father of Micah.
35 The sons of Micah: Pithon, Melech, Tarea, and Ahaz. 36 Ahaz
became the father of Jehoaddah; and Jehoaddah became the father of
Alemeth, Azmaveth, and Zimri; Zimri became the father of Moza. 37

791

1 CHRONICLES 792

Moza became the father of Binea; Raphah was his son, Eleasah his son,
Azel his son. 38 Azel had six sons, and these are their names: Azrikam,
Bocheru, Ishmael, Sheariah, Obadiah, and Hanan; all these were the
sons of Azel. 39 The sons of his brother Eshek: Ulam his firstborn, Jeush
the second, and Eliphelet the third. 40 The sons of Ulam were mighty
warriors, archers, having many children and grandchildren, one
hundred fifty. All these were Benjaminites.
[1 Chronicles 9]
The genealogies of Jerusalem families in postexilic Judah
1 So all Israel was enrolled by genealogies; and these are written in the
Book of the Kings of Israel. And Judah was taken into exile in Babylon
because of their unfaithfulness. 2 Now the first to live again in their
possessions in their towns were Israelites, priests, Levites, and temple
servants.
3 And some of the people of Judah, Benjamin, Ephraim, and Manasseh
lived in Jerusalem: 4 Uthai son of Ammihud, son of Omri, son of Imri,
son of Bani, from the sons of Perez son of Judah. 5 And of the
Shilonites: Asaiah the firstborn, and his sons. 6 Of the sons of Zerah:
Jeuel and their kin, six hundred ninety. 7 Of the Benjaminites: Sallu son
of Meshullam, son of Hodaviah, son of Hassenuah, 8 Ibneiah son of
Jeroham, Elah son of Uzzi, son of Michri, and Meshullam son of
Shephatiah, son of Reuel, son of Ibnijah; 9 and their kindred according
to their generations, nine hundred fifty-six. All these were heads of
families according to their ancestral houses.
10 Of the priests: Jedaiah, Jehoiarib, Jachin, 11 and Azariah son of
Hilkiah, son of Meshullam, son of Zadok, son of Meraioth, son of
Ahitub, the chief officer of the house of God; 12 and Adaiah son of
Jeroham, son of Pashhur, son of Malchijah, and Maasai son of Adiel,
son of Jahzerah, son of Meshullam, son of Meshillemith, son of Immer;
13 besides their kindred, heads of their ancestral houses, one thousand
seven hundred sixty, qualified for the work of the service of the house
of God.

792

1 CHRONICLES 793

14 Of the Levites: Shemaiah son of Hasshub, son of Azrikam, son of
Hashabiah, of the sons of Merari; 15 and Bakbakkar, Heresh, Galal, and
Mattaniah son of Mica, son of Zichri, son of Asaph; 16 and Obadiah son
of Shemaiah, son of Galal, son of Jeduthun, and Berechiah son of Asa,
son of Elkanah, who lived in the villages of the Netophathites.
17 The gatekeepers were: Shallum, Akkub, Talmon, Ahiman; and their
kindred Shallum was the chief, 18 stationed previously in the king's
gate on the east side. These were the gatekeepers of the camp of the
Levites. 19 Shallum son of Kore, son of Ebiasaph, son of Korah, and his
kindred of his ancestral house, the Korahites, were in charge of the
work of the service, guardians of the thresholds of the tent, as their
ancestors had been in charge of the camp of the LORD, guardians of the
entrance. 20 And Phinehas son of Eleazar was chief over them in
former times; the LORD was with him. 21 Zechariah son of Meshelemiah
was gatekeeper at the entrance of the tent of meeting. 22 All these,
who were chosen as gatekeepers at the thresholds, were two hundred
twelve. They were enrolled by genealogies in their villages. David and
the seer Samuel established them in their office of trust. 23 So they and
their descendants were in charge of the gates of the house of the LORD,
that is, the house of the tent, as guards. 24 The gatekeepers were on
the four sides, east, west, north, and south; 25 and their kindred who
were in their villages were obliged to come in every seven days, in turn,
to be with them; 26 for the four chief gatekeepers, who were Levites,
were in charge of the chambers and the treasures of the house of God.
27 And they would spend the night near the house of God; for on them
lay the duty of watching, and they had charge of opening it every
morning.
28 Some of them had charge of the utensils of service, for they were
required to count them when they were brought in and taken out. 29
Others of them were appointed over the furniture, and over all the
holy utensils, also over the choice flour, the wine, the oil, the incense,
and the spices. 30 Others, of the sons of the priests, prepared the
mixing of the spices, 31 and Mattithiah, one of the Levites, the firstborn
of Shallum the Korahite, was in charge of making the flat cakes. 32
Also some of their kindred of the Kohathites had charge of the rows of
bread, to prepare them for each sabbath.

793

1 CHRONICLES 794

33 Now these are the singers, the heads of ancestral houses of the
Levites, living in the chambers of the temple free from other service,
for they were on duty day and night. 34 These were heads of ancestral
houses of the Levites, according to their generations; these leaders
lived in Jerusalem.
35 In Gibeon lived the father of Gibeon, Jeiel, and the name of his wife
was Maacah. 36 His firstborn son was Abdon, then Zur, Kish, Baal, Ner,
Nadab, 37 Gedor, Ahio, Zechariah, and Mikloth; 38 and Mikloth
became the father of Shimeam; and these also lived opposite their
kindred in Jerusalem, with their kindred. 39 Ner became the father of
Kish, Kish of Saul, Saul of Jonathan, Malchishua, Abinadab, and Eshbaal; 40 and the son of Jonathan was Merib-baal; and Merib-baal
became the father of Micah. 41 The sons of Micah: Pithon, Melech,
Tahrea, and Ahaz; 42 and Ahaz became the father of Jarah, and Jarah
of Alemeth, Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri became the father of
Moza. 43 Moza became the father of Binea; and Rephaiah was his son,
Eleasah his son, Azel his son. 44 Azel had six sons, and these are their
names: Azrikam, Bocheru, Ishmael, Sheariah, Obadiah, and Hanan;
these were the sons of Azel.
[1 Chronicles 10]
The demise of Saul
1 Now the Philistines fought against Israel; and the men of Israel fled
before the Philistines, and fell slain on Mount Gilboa. 2 The Philistines
overtook Saul and his sons; and the Philistines killed Jonathan and
Abinadab and Malchishua, sons of Saul. 3 The battle pressed hard on
Saul; and the archers found him, and he was wounded by the archers. 4
Then Saul said to his armor-bearer, "Draw your sword, and thrust me
through with it, so that these uncircumcised may not come and make
sport of me." But his armor-bearer was unwilling, for he was terrified.
So Saul took his own sword and fell on it. 5 When his armor-bearer saw
that Saul was dead, he also fell on his sword and died. 6 Thus Saul died;
he and his three sons and all his house died together. 7 When all the
men of Israel who were in the valley saw that the army had fled and
that Saul and his sons were dead, they abandoned their towns and
fled; and the Philistines came and occupied them.

794

1 CHRONICLES 795

8 The next day when the Philistines came to strip the dead, they found
Saul and his sons fallen on Mount Gilboa. 9 They stripped him and took
his head and his armor, and sent messengers throughout the land of
the Philistines to carry the good news to their idols and to the people.
10 They put his armor in the temple of their gods, and fastened his
head in the temple of Dagon. 11 But when all Jabesh-gilead heard
everything that the Philistines had done to Saul, 12 all the valiant
warriors got up and took away the body of Saul and the bodies of his
sons, and brought them to Jabesh. Then they buried their bones under
the oak in Jabesh, and fasted seven days.
13 So Saul died for his unfaithfulness; he was unfaithful to the LORD in
that he did not keep the command of the LORD; moreover, he had
consulted a medium, seeking guidance, 14 and did not seek guidance
from the LORD. Therefore the LORD put him to death and turned the
kingdom over to David son of Jesse.
[1 Chronicles 11]
The impressive beginnings of David's reign
1 Then all Israel gathered together to David at Hebron and said, "See,
we are your bone and flesh. 2 For some time now, even while Saul was
king, it was you who commanded the army of Israel. The LORD your
God said to you: It is you who shall be shepherd of my people Israel,
you who shall be ruler over my people Israel." 3 So all the elders of
Israel came to the king at Hebron, and David made a covenant with
them at Hebron before the LORD. And they anointed David king over
Israel, according to the word of the LORD by Samuel.
4 David and all Israel marched to Jerusalem, that is Jebus, where the
Jebusites were, the inhabitants of the land. 5 The inhabitants of Jebus
said to David, "You will not come in here." Nevertheless David took
the stronghold of Zion, now the city of David. 6 David had said,
"Whoever attacks the Jebusites first shall be chief and commander."
And Joab son of Zeruiah went up first, so he became chief. 7 David
resided in the stronghold; therefore it was called the city of David. 8
He built the city all around, from the Millo in complete circuit; and

795

1 CHRONICLES 796

Joab repaired the rest of the city. 9 And David became greater and
greater, for the LORD of hosts was with him.
10 Now these are the chiefs of David's warriors, who gave him strong
support in his kingdom, together with all Israel, to make him king,
according to the word of the LORD concerning Israel. 11 This is an
account of David's mighty warriors: Jashobeam, son of Hachmoni, was
chief of the Three; he wielded his spear against three hundred whom
he killed at one time.
12 And next to him among the three warriors was Eleazar son of Dodo,
the Ahohite. 13 He was with David at Pas-dammim when the Philistines
were gathered there for battle. There was a plot of ground full of
barley. Now the people had fled from the Philistines, 14 but he and
David took their stand in the middle of the plot, defended it, and killed
the Philistines; and the LORD saved them by a great victory.
15 Three of the thirty chiefs went down to the rock to David at the cave
of Adullam, while the army of Philistines was encamped in the valley of
Rephaim. 16 David was then in the stronghold; and the garrison of the
Philistines was then at Bethlehem. 17 David said longingly, "O that
someone would give me water to drink from the well of Bethlehem
that is by the gate!" 18 Then the Three broke through the camp of the
Philistines, and drew water from the well of Bethlehem that was by the
gate, and they brought it to David. But David would not drink of it; he
poured it out to the LORD, 19 and said, "My God forbid that I should do
this. Can I drink the blood of these men? For at the risk of their lives
they brought it." Therefore he would not drink it. The three warriors
did these things.
20 Now Abishai, the brother of Joab, was chief of the Thirty. With his
spear he fought against three hundred and killed them, and won a
name beside the Three. 21 He was the most renowned of the Thirty,
and became their commander; but he did not attain to the Three.
22 Benaiah son of Jehoiada was a valiant man of Kabzeel, a doer of
great deeds; he struck down two sons of Ariel of Moab. He also went
down and killed a lion in a pit on a day when snow had fallen. 23 And

796

1 CHRONICLES 797

he killed an Egyptian, a man of great stature, five cubits tall. The
Egyptian had in his hand a spear like a weaver's beam; but Benaiah
went against him with a staff, snatched the spear out of the Egyptian's
hand, and killed him with his own spear. 24 Such were the things
Benaiah son of Jehoiada did, and he won a name beside the three
warriors. 25 He was renowned among the Thirty, but he did not attain
to the Three. And David put him in charge of his bodyguard.
26 The warriors of the armies were Asahel brother of Joab, Elhanan son
of Dodo of Bethlehem, 27 Shammoth of Harod, Helez the Pelonite, 28
Ira son of Ikkesh of Tekoa, Abiezer of Anathoth, 29 Sibbecai the
Hushathite, Ilai the Ahohite, 30 Maharai of Netophah, Heled son of
Baanah of Netophah, 31 Ithai son of Ribai of Gibeah of the
Benjaminites, Benaiah of Pirathon, 32 Hurai of the wadis of Gaash,
Abiel the Arbathite, 33 Azmaveth of Baharum, Eliahba of Shaalbon, 34
Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan son of Shagee the Hararite, 35 Ahiam
son of Sachar the Hararite, Eliphal son of Ur, 36 Hepher the
Mecherathite, Ahijah the Pelonite, 37 Hezro of Carmel, Naarai son of
Ezbai, 38 Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar son of Hagri, 39 Zelek the
Ammonite, Naharai of Beeroth, the armor-bearer of Joab son of
Zeruiah, 40 Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite, 41 Uriah the Hittite, Zabad
son of Ahlai, 42 Adina son of Shiza the Reubenite, a leader of the
Reubenites, and thirty with him, 43 Hanan son of Maacah, and
Joshaphat the Mithnite, 44 Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jeiel
sons of Hotham the Aroerite, 45 Jediael son of Shimri, and his brother
Joha the Tizite, 46 Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeribai and Joshaviah sons of
Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabite, 47 Eliel, and Obed, and Jaasiel the
Mezobaite.
[1 Chronicles 12]
David's national prestige and power grown
1 The following are those who came to David at Ziklag, while he could
not move about freely because of Saul son of Kish; they were among
the mighty warriors who helped him in war. 2 They were archers, and
could shoot arrows and sling stones with either the right hand or the
left; they were Benjaminites, Saul's kindred. 3 The chief was Ahiezer,
then Joash, both sons of Shemaah of Gibeah; also Jeziel and Pelet sons

797

1 CHRONICLES 798

of Azmaveth; Beracah, Jehu of Anathoth, 4 Ishmaiah of Gibeon, a
warrior among the Thirty and a leader over the Thirty; Jeremiah,
Jahaziel, Johanan, Jozabad of Gederah, 5 Eluzai, Jerimoth, Bealiah,
Shemariah, Shephatiah the Haruphite; 6 Elkanah, Isshiah, Azarel,
Joezer, and Jashobeam, the Korahites; 7 and Joelah and Zebadiah, sons
of Jeroham of Gedor.
8 From the Gadites there went over to David at the stronghold in the
wilderness mighty and experienced warriors, expert with shield and
spear, whose faces were like the faces of lions, and who were swift as
gazelles on the mountains: 9 Ezer the chief, Obadiah second, Eliab
third, 10 Mishmannah fourth, Jeremiah fifth, 11 Attai sixth, Eliel
seventh, 12 Johanan eighth, Elzabad ninth, 13 Jeremiah tenth,
Machbannai eleventh. 14 These Gadites were officers of the army, the
least equal to a hundred and the greatest to a thousand. 15 These are
the men who crossed the Jordan in the first month, when it was
overflowing all its banks, and put to flight all those in the valleys, to
the east and to the west.
16 Some Benjaminites and Judahites came to the stronghold to David.
17 David went out to meet them and said to them, "If you have come
to me in friendship, to help me, then my heart will be knit to you; but
if you have come to betray me to my adversaries, though my hands
have done no wrong, then may the God of our ancestors see and give
judgment." 18 Then the spirit came upon Amasai, chief of the Thirty,
and he said,
"We are yours, O David;
and with you, O son of Jesse!
Peace, peace to you,
and peace to the one who helps you!
For your God is the one who helps you."
Then David received them, and made them officers of his troops.
19 Some of the Manassites deserted to David when he came with the
Philistines for the battle against Saul. (Yet he did not help them, for
the rulers of the Philistines took counsel and sent him away, saying,

798

1 CHRONICLES 799

"He will desert to his master Saul at the cost of our heads.") 20 As he
went to Ziklag these Manassites deserted to him: Adnah, Jozabad,
Jediael, Michael, Jozabad, Elihu, and Zillethai, chiefs of the thousands
in Manasseh. 21 They helped David against the band of raiders, for they
were all warriors and commanders in the army. 22 Indeed from day to
day people kept coming to David to help him, until there was a great
army, like an army of God.
23 These are the numbers of the divisions of the armed troops who
came to David in Hebron to turn the kingdom of Saul over to him,
according to the word of the LORD. 24 The people of Judah bearing
shield and spear numbered six thousand eight hundred armed troops.
25 Of the Simeonites, mighty warriors, seven thousand one hundred. 26
Of the Levites four thousand six hundred. 27 Jehoiada, leader of the
house of Aaron, and with him three thousand seven hundred. 28
Zadok, a young warrior, and twenty-two commanders from his own
ancestral house. 29 Of the Benjaminites, the kindred of Saul, three
thousand, of whom the majority had continued to keep their
allegiance to the house of Saul. 30 Of the Ephraimites, twenty
thousand eight hundred, mighty warriors, notables in their ancestral
houses. 31 Of the half-tribe of Manasseh, eighteen thousand, who were
expressly named to come and make David king. 32 Of Issachar, those
who had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do,
two hundred chiefs, and all their kindred under their command. 33 Of
Zebulun, fifty thousand seasoned troops, equipped for battle with all
the weapons of war, to help David with singleness of purpose. 34 Of
Naphtali, a thousand commanders, with whom there were thirty-seven
thousand armed with shield and spear. 35 Of the Danites, twenty-eight
thousand six hundred equipped for battle. 36 Of Asher, forty thousand
seasoned troops ready for battle. 37 Of the Reubenites and Gadites and
the half-tribe of Manasseh from beyond the Jordan, one hundred
twenty thousand armed with all the weapons of war.
38 All these, warriors arrayed in battle order, came to Hebron with full
intent to make David king over all Israel; likewise all the rest of Israel
were of a single mind to make David king. 39 They were there with
David for three days, eating and drinking, for their kindred had
provided for them. 40 And also their neighbors, from as far away as

799

1 CHRONICLES 800

Issachar and Zebulun and Naphtali, came bringing food on donkeys,
camels, mules, and oxen — abundant provisions of meal, cakes of figs,
clusters of raisins, wine, oil, oxen, and sheep, for there was joy in Israel.
[1 Chronicles 13]
David and the ark, Part I
1 David consulted with the commanders of the thousands and of the
hundreds, with every leader. 2 David said to the whole assembly of
Israel, "If it seems good to you, and if it is the will of the LORD our God,
let us send abroad to our kindred who remain in all the land of Israel,
including the priests and Levites in the cities that have pasture lands,
that they may come together to us. 3 Then let us bring again the ark of
our God to us; for we did not turn to it in the days of Saul." 4 The
whole assembly agreed to do so, for the thing pleased all the people.
5 So David assembled all Israel from the Shihor of Egypt to Lebohamath, to bring the ark of God from Kiriath-jearim. 6 And David and
all Israel went up to Baalah, that is, to Kiriath-jearim, which belongs to
Judah, to bring up from there the ark of God, the LORD, who is
enthroned on the cherubim, which is called by his name. 7 They carried
the ark of God on a new cart, from the house of Abinadab, and Uzzah
and Ahio were driving the cart. 8 David and all Israel were dancing
before God with all their might, with song and lyres and harps and
tambourines and cymbals and trumpets.
9 When they came to the threshing floor of Chidon, Uzzah put out his
hand to hold the ark, for the oxen shook it. 10 The anger of the LORD
was kindled against Uzzah; he struck him down because he put out his
hand to the ark; and he died there before God. 11 David was angry
because the LORD had burst out against Uzzah; so that place is called
Perez-uzzah to this day. 12 David was afraid of God that day; he said,
"How can I bring the ark of God into my care?" 13 So David did not
take the ark into his care into the city of David; he took it instead to
the house of Obed-edom the Gittite. 14 The ark of God remained with
the household of Obed-edom in his house three months, and the LORD
blessed the household of Obed-edom and all that he had.

800

1 CHRONICLES 801

[1 Chronicles 14]
David's success in Jerusalem
1 King Hiram of Tyre sent messengers to David, along with cedar logs,
and masons and carpenters to build a house for him. 2 David then
perceived that the LORD had established him as king over Israel, and
that his kingdom was highly exalted for the sake of his people Israel.
3 David took more wives in Jerusalem, and David became the father of
more sons and daughters. 4 These are the names of the children whom
he had in Jerusalem: Shammua, Shobab, and Nathan; Solomon, 5 Ibhar,
Elishua, and Elpelet; 6 Nogah, Nepheg, and Japhia; 7 Elishama,
Beeliada, and Eliphelet.
Philistine attacks
8 When the Philistines heard that David had been anointed king over
all Israel, all the Philistines went up in search of David; and David heard
of it and went out against them. 9 Now the Philistines had come and
made a raid in the valley of Rephaim. 10 David inquired of God, "Shall I
go up against the Philistines? Will you give them into my hand?" The
LORD said to him, "Go up, and I will give them into your hand." 11 So he
went up to Baal-perazim, and David defeated them there. David said,
"God has burst out against my enemies by my hand, like a bursting
flood." Therefore that place is called Baal-perazim. 12 They abandoned
their gods there, and at David's command they were burned.
13 Once again the Philistines made a raid in the valley. 14 When David
again inquired of God, God said to him, "You shall not go up after
them; go around and come on them opposite the balsam trees. 15
When you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the balsam trees,
then go out to battle; for God has gone out before you to strike down
the army of the Philistines." 16 David did as God had commanded him,
and they struck down the Philistine army from Gibeon to Gezer. 17 The
fame of David went out into all lands, and the LORD brought the fear
of him on all nations.

801

1 CHRONICLES 802

[1 Chronicles 15]
David and the ark, Part II
1 David built houses for himself in the city of David, and he prepared a
place for the ark of God and pitched a tent for it. 2 Then David
commanded that no one but the Levites were to carry the ark of God,
for the LORD had chosen them to carry the ark of the LORD and to
minister to him forever. 3 David assembled all Israel in Jerusalem to
bring up the ark of the LORD to its place, which he had prepared for it.
4 Then David gathered together the descendants of Aaron and the
Levites: 5 of the sons of Kohath, Uriel the chief, with one hundred
twenty of his kindred; 6 of the sons of Merari, Asaiah the chief, with
two hundred twenty of his kindred; 7 of the sons of Gershom, Joel the
chief, with one hundred thirty of his kindred; 8 of the sons of
Elizaphan, Shemaiah the chief, with two hundred of his kindred; 9 of
the sons of Hebron, Eliel the chief, with eighty of his kindred; 10 of the
sons of Uzziel, Amminadab the chief, with one hundred twelve of his
kindred.
11 David summoned the priests Zadok and Abiathar, and the Levites
Uriel, Asaiah, Joel, Shemaiah, Eliel, and Amminadab. 12 He said to
them, "You are the heads of families of the Levites; sanctify yourselves,
you and your kindred, so that you may bring up the ark of the LORD,
the God of Israel, to the place that I have prepared for it. 13 Because
you did not carry it the first time, the LORD our God burst out against
us, because we did not give it proper care." 14 So the priests and the
Levites sanctified themselves to bring up the ark of the LORD, the God
of Israel. 15 And the Levites carried the ark of God on their shoulders
with the poles, as Moses had commanded according to the word of the
LORD.
16 David also commanded the chiefs of the Levites to appoint their
kindred as the singers to play on musical instruments, on harps and
lyres and cymbals, to raise loud sounds of joy. 17 So the Levites
appointed Heman son of Joel; and of his kindred Asaph son of
Berechiah; and of the sons of Merari, their kindred, Ethan son of
Kushaiah; 18 and with them their kindred of the second order,
Zechariah, Jaaziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Benaiah,

802

1 CHRONICLES 803

Maaseiah, Mattithiah, Eliphelehu, and Mikneiah, and the gatekeepers
Obed-edom and Jeiel. 19 The singers Heman, Asaph, and Ethan were to
sound bronze cymbals; 20 Zechariah, Aziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni,
Eliab, Maaseiah, and Benaiah were to play harps according to Alamoth;
21 but Mattithiah, Eliphelehu, Mikneiah, Obed-edom, Jeiel, and
Azaziah were to lead with lyres according to the Sheminith. 22
Chenaniah, leader of the Levites in music, was to direct the music, for
he understood it. 23 Berechiah and Elkanah were to be gatekeepers for
the ark. 24 Shebaniah, Joshaphat, Nethanel, Amasai, Zechariah,
Benaiah, and Eliezer, the priests, were to blow the trumpets before the
ark of God. Obed-edom and Jehiah also were to be gatekeepers for the
ark.
25 So David and the elders of Israel, and the commanders of the
thousands, went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD from
the house of Obed-edom with rejoicing. 26 And because God helped
the Levites who were carrying the ark of the covenant of the LORD,
they sacrificed seven bulls and seven rams. 27 David was clothed with a
robe of fine linen, as also were all the Levites who were carrying the
ark, and the singers, and Chenaniah the leader of the music of the
singers; and David wore a linen ephod. 28 So all Israel brought up the
ark of the covenant of the LORD with shouting, to the sound of the
horn, trumpets, and cymbals, and made loud music on harps and lyres.
Michal and all Israel
29 As the ark of the covenant of the LORD came to the city of David,
Michal daughter of Saul looked out of the window, and saw King
David leaping and dancing; and she despised him in her heart.
[1 Chronicles 16]
1 They brought in the ark of God, and set it inside the tent that David
had pitched for it; and they offered burnt offerings and offerings of
well-being before God. 2 When David had finished offering the burnt
offerings and the offerings of well-being, he blessed the people in the
name of the LORD; 3 and he distributed to every person in Israel — man

803

1 CHRONICLES 804

and woman alike — to each a loaf of bread, a portion of meat, and a
cake of raisins.
Staffing the national sanctuaries
4 He appointed certain of the Levites as ministers before the ark of the
LORD, to invoke, to thank, and to praise the LORD, the God of Israel. 5
Asaph was the chief, and second to him Zechariah, Jeiel, Shemiramoth,
Jehiel, Mattithiah, Eliab, Benaiah, Obed-edom, and Jeiel, with harps
and lyres; Asaph was to sound the cymbals, 6 and the priests Benaiah
and Jahaziel were to blow trumpets regularly, before the ark of the
covenant of God.
7 Then on that day David first appointed the singing of praises to the
LORD by Asaph and his kindred.
8 O give thanks to the LORD, call on his name,
make known his deeds among the peoples.
9 Sing to him, sing praises to him,
tell of all his wonderful works.
10 Glory in his holy name;
let the hearts of those who seek the LORD rejoice.
11 Seek the LORD and his strength,
seek his presence continually.
12 Remember the wonderful works he has done,
his miracles, and the judgments he uttered,
13 O offspring of his servant Israel,
children of Jacob, his chosen ones.
14 He is the LORD our God;
his judgments are in all the earth.
15 Remember his covenant forever,
the word that he commanded, for a thousand generations,
16 the covenant that he made with Abraham,
his sworn promise to Isaac,
17 which he confirmed to Jacob as a statute,
to Israel as an everlasting covenant,

804

1 CHRONICLES 805

18 saying, "To you I will give the land of Canaan
as your portion for an inheritance."
19 When they were few in number,
of little account, and strangers in the land,
20 wandering from nation to nation,
from one kingdom to another people,
21 he allowed no one to oppress them;
he rebuked kings on their account,
22 saying, "Do not touch my anointed ones;
do my prophets no harm."
23 Sing to the LORD, all the earth.
Tell of his salvation from day to day.
24 Declare his glory among the nations,
his marvelous works among all the peoples.
25 For great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised;
he is to be revered above all gods.
26 For all the gods of the peoples are idols,
but the LORD made the heavens.
27 Honor and majesty are before him;
strength and joy are in his place.
28 Ascribe to the LORD, O families of the peoples,
ascribe to the LORD glory and strength.
29 Ascribe to the LORD the glory due his name;
bring an offering, and come before him.
Worship the LORD in holy splendor;
30 tremble before him, all the earth.
The world is firmly established; it shall never be moved.
31 Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice,
and let them say among the nations, "The LORD is king!"
32 Let the sea roar, and all that fills it;
let the field exult, and everything in it.
33 Then shall the trees of the forest sing for joy
before the LORD, for he comes to judge the earth.
34 O give thanks to the LORD, for he is good;
for his steadfast love endures forever.

805

1 CHRONICLES 806

35 Say also:
"Save us, O God of our salvation,
and gather and rescue us from among the nations,
that we may give thanks to your holy name,
and glory in your praise.
36 Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel,
from everlasting to everlasting."
Then all the people said "Amen!" and praised the LORD.
37 David left Asaph and his kinsfolk there before the ark of the
covenant of the LORD to minister regularly before the ark as each day
required, 38 and also Obed-edom and his sixty-eight kinsfolk; while
Obed-edom son of Jeduthun and Hosah were to be gatekeepers. 39
And he left the priest Zadok and his kindred the priests before the
tabernacle of the LORD in the high place that was at Gibeon, 40 to offer
burnt offerings to the LORD on the altar of burnt offering regularly,
morning and evening, according to all that is written in the law of the
LORD that he commanded Israel. 41 With them were Heman and
Jeduthun, and the rest of those chosen and expressly named to render
thanks to the LORD, for his steadfast love endures forever. 42 Heman
and Jeduthun had with them trumpets and cymbals for the music, and
instruments for sacred song. The sons of Jeduthun were appointed to
the gate.
43 Then all the people departed to their homes, and David went home
to bless his household.
[1 Chronicles 17]
The promises to David
1 Now when David settled in his house, David said to the prophet
Nathan, "I am living in a house of cedar, but the ark of the covenant of
the LORD is under a tent." 2 Nathan said to David, "Do all that you have
in mind, for God is with you."
3 But that same night the word of the LORD came to Nathan, saying: 4
Go and tell my servant David: Thus says the LORD: You shall not build
me a house to live in. 5 For I have not lived in a house since the day I

806

1 CHRONICLES 807

brought out Israel to this very day, but I have lived in a tent and a
tabernacle. 6 Wherever I have moved about among all Israel, did I ever
speak a word with any of the judges of Israel, whom I commanded to
shepherd my people, saying, Why have you not built me a house of
cedar? 7 Now therefore thus you shall say to my servant David: Thus
says the LORD of hosts: I took you from the pasture, from following the
sheep, to be ruler over my people Israel; 8 and I have been with you
wherever you went, and have cut off all your enemies before you; and
I will make for you a name, like the name of the great ones of the
earth. 9 I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and will plant them,
so that they may live in their own place, and be disturbed no more;
and evildoers shall wear them down no more, as they did formerly, 10
from the time that I appointed judges over my people Israel; and I will
subdue all your enemies.
Moreover I declare to you that the LORD will build you a house. 11
When your days are fulfilled to go to be with your ancestors, I will raise
up your offspring after you, one of your own sons, and I will establish
his kingdom. 12 He shall build a house for me, and I will establish his
throne forever. 13 I will be a father to him, and he shall be a son to me.
I will not take my steadfast love from him, as I took it from him who
was before you, 14 but I will confirm him in my house and in my
kingdom forever, and his throne shall be established forever. 15 In
accordance with all these words and all this vision, Nathan spoke to
David.
16 Then King David went in and sat before the LORD, and said, "Who
am I, O LORD God, and what is my house, that you have brought me
thus far? 17 And even this was a small thing in your sight, O God; you
have also spoken of your servant's house for a great while to come.
You regard me as someone of high rank, O LORD God! 18 And what
more can David say to you for honoring your servant? You know your
servant. 19 For your servant's sake, O LORD, and according to your own
heart, you have done all these great deeds, making known all these
great things. 20 There is no one like you, O LORD, and there is no God
besides you, according to all that we have heard with our ears. 21 Who
is like your people Israel, one nation on the earth whom God went to
redeem to be his people, making for yourself a name for great and

807

1 CHRONICLES 808

terrible things, in driving out nations before your people whom you
redeemed from Egypt? 22 And you made your people Israel to be your
people forever; and you, O LORD, became their God.
23 "And now, O LORD, as for the word that you have spoken concerning
your servant and concerning his house, let it be established forever,
and do as you have promised. 24 Thus your name will be established
and magnified forever in the saying, 'The LORD of hosts, the God of
Israel, is Israel's God'; and the house of your servant David will be
established in your presence. 25 For you, my God, have revealed to
your servant that you will build a house for him; therefore your servant
has found it possible to pray before you. 26 And now, O LORD, you are
God, and you have promised this good thing to your servant; 27
therefore may it please you to bless the house of your servant, that it
may continue forever before you. For you, O LORD, have blessed and
are blessed forever."
[1 Chronicles 18]
The kingdom expanded
1 Some time afterward, David attacked the Philistines and subdued
them; he took Gath and its villages from the Philistines.
2 He defeated Moab, and the Moabites became subject to David and
brought tribute.
3 David also struck down King Hadadezer of Zobah, toward Hamath, as
he went to set up a monument at the river Euphrates. 4 David took
from him one thousand chariots, seven thousand cavalry, and twenty
thousand foot soldiers. David hamstrung all the chariot horses, but left
one hundred of them. 5 When the Arameans of Damascus came to
help King Hadadezer of Zobah, David killed twenty-two thousand
Arameans. 6 Then David put garrisons in Aram of Damascus; and the
Arameans became subject to David, and brought tribute. The LORD
gave victory to David wherever he went. 7 David took the gold shields
that were carried by the servants of Hadadezer, and brought them to
Jerusalem. 8 From Tibhath and from Cun, cities of Hadadezer, David

808

1 CHRONICLES 809

took a vast quantity of bronze; with it Solomon made the bronze sea
and the pillars and the vessels of bronze.
9 When King Tou of Hamath heard that David had defeated the whole
army of King Hadadezer of Zobah, 10 he sent his son Hadoram to King
David, to greet him and to congratulate him, because he had fought
against Hadadezer and defeated him. Now Hadadezer had often been
at war with Tou. He sent all sorts of articles of gold, of silver, and of
bronze; 11 these also King David dedicated to the LORD, together with
the silver and gold that he had carried off from all the nations, from
Edom, Moab, the Ammonites, the Philistines, and Amalek.
12 Abishai son of Zeruiah killed eighteen thousand Edomites in the
Valley of Salt. 13 He put garrisons in Edom; and all the Edomites
became subject to David. And the LORD gave victory to David wherever
he went.
14 So David reigned over all Israel; and he administered justice and
equity to all his people. 15 Joab son of Zeruiah was over the army;
Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was recorder; 16 Zadok son of Ahitub and
Ahimelech son of Abiathar were priests; Shavsha was secretary; 17
Benaiah son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites;
and David's sons were the chief officials in the service of the king.
[1 Chronicles 19]
1 Some time afterward, King Nahash of the Ammonites died, and his
son succeeded him. 2 David said, "I will deal loyally with Hanun son of
Nahash, for his father dealt loyally with me." So David sent messengers
to console him concerning his father. When David's servants came to
Hanun in the land of the Ammonites, to console him, 3 the officials of
the Ammonites said to Hanun, "Do you think, because David has sent
consolers to you, that he is honoring your father? Have not his servants
come to you to search and to overthrow and to spy out the land?" 4 So
Hanun seized David's servants, shaved them, cut off their garments in
the middle at their hips, and sent them away; 5 and they departed.
When David was told about the men, he sent messengers to them, for

809

1 CHRONICLES 810

they felt greatly humiliated. The king said, "Remain at Jericho until
your beards have grown, and then return."
6 When the Ammonites saw that they had made themselves odious to
David, Hanun and the Ammonites sent a thousand talents of silver to
hire chariots and cavalry from Mesopotamia, from Aram-maacah and
from Zobah. 7 They hired thirty-two thousand chariots and the king of
Maacah with his army, who came and camped before Medeba. And the
Ammonites were mustered from their cities and came to battle. 8
When David heard of it, he sent Joab and all the army of the warriors.
9 The Ammonites came out and drew up in battle array at the entrance
of the city, and the kings who had come were by themselves in the
open country.
10 When Joab saw that the line of battle was set against him both in
front and in the rear, he chose some of the picked men of Israel and
arrayed them against the Arameans; 11 the rest of his troops he put in
the charge of his brother Abishai, and they were arrayed against the
Ammonites. 12 He said, "If the Arameans are too strong for me, then
you shall help me; but if the Ammonites are too strong for you, then I
will help you. 13 Be strong, and let us be courageous for our people
and for the cities of our God; and may the LORD do what seems good to
him." 14 So Joab and the troops who were with him advanced toward
the Arameans for battle; and they fled before him. 15 When the
Ammonites saw that the Arameans fled, they likewise fled before
Abishai, Joab's brother, and entered the city. Then Joab came to
Jerusalem.
16 But when the Arameans saw that they had been defeated by Israel,
they sent messengers and brought out the Arameans who were
beyond the Euphrates, with Shophach the commander of the army of
Hadadezer at their head. 17 When David was informed, he gathered all
Israel together, crossed the Jordan, came to them, and drew up his
forces against them. When David set the battle in array against the
Arameans, they fought with him. 18 The Arameans fled before Israel;
and David killed seven thousand Aramean charioteers and forty
thousand foot soldiers, and also killed Shophach the commander of
their army. 19 When the servants of Hadadezer saw that they had been

810

1 CHRONICLES 811

defeated by Israel, they made peace with David, and became subject to
him. So the Arameans were not willing to help the Ammonites any
more.
[1 Chronicles 20]
1 In the spring of the year, the time when kings go out to battle, Joab
led out the army, ravaged the country of the Ammonites, and came
and besieged Rabbah. But David remained at Jerusalem. Joab attacked
Rabbah, and overthrew it. 2 David took the crown of Milcom from his
head; he found that it weighed a talent of gold, and in it was a
precious stone; and it was placed on David's head. He also brought out
the booty of the city, a very great amount. 3 He brought out the
people who were in it, and set them to work with saws and iron picks
and axes. Thus David did to all the cities of the Ammonites. Then David
and all the people returned to Jerusalem.
4 After this, war broke out with the Philistines at Gezer; then Sibbecai
the Hushathite killed Sippai, who was one of the descendants of the
giants; and the Philistines were subdued. 5 Again there was war with
the Philistines; and Elhanan son of Jair killed Lahmi the brother of
Goliath the Gittite, the shaft of whose spear was like a weaver's beam.
6 Again there was war at Gath, where there was a man of great size,
who had six fingers on each hand, and six toes on each foot, twentyfour in number; he also was descended from the giants. 7 When he
taunted Israel, Jonathan son of Shimea, David's brother, killed him. 8
These were descended from the giants in Gath; they fell by the hand of
David and his servants.
[1 Chronicles 21]
David the repentant sinner
1 Satan stood up against Israel, and incited David to count the people
of Israel. 2 So David said to Joab and the commanders of the army,
"Go, number Israel, from Beer-sheba to Dan, and bring me a report, so
that I may know their number." 3 But Joab said, "May the LORD
increase the number of his people a hundredfold! Are they not, my
lord the king, all of them my lord's servants? Why then should my lord

811

1 CHRONICLES 812

require this? Why should he bring guilt on Israel?" 4 But the king's
word prevailed against Joab. So Joab departed and went throughout
all Israel, and came back to Jerusalem. 5 Joab gave the total count of
the people to David. In all Israel there were one million one hundred
thousand men who drew the sword, and in Judah four hundred
seventy thousand who drew the sword. 6 But he did not include Levi
and Benjamin in the numbering, for the king's command was
abhorrent to Joab.
7 But God was displeased with this thing, and he struck Israel. 8 David
said to God, "I have sinned greatly in that I have done this thing. But
now, I pray you, take away the guilt of your servant; for I have done
very foolishly." 9 The LORD spoke to Gad, David's seer, saying, 10 "Go
and say to David, 'Thus says the LORD: Three things I offer you; choose
one of them, so that I may do it to you.'" 11 So Gad came to David and
said to him, "Thus says the LORD, 'Take your choice: 12 either three
years of famine; or three months of devastation by your foes, while the
sword of your enemies overtakes you; or three days of the sword of the
LORD, pestilence on the land, and the angel of the LORD destroying
throughout all the territory of Israel.' Now decide what answer I shall
return to the one who sent me." 13 Then David said to Gad, "I am in
great distress; let me fall into the hand of the LORD, for his mercy is very
great; but let me not fall into human hands."
14 So the LORD sent a pestilence on Israel; and seventy thousand
persons fell in Israel. 15 And God sent an angel to Jerusalem to destroy
it; but when he was about to destroy it, the LORD took note and
relented concerning the calamity; he said to the destroying angel,
"Enough! Stay your hand." The angel of the LORD was then standing by
the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite. 16 David looked up and saw
the angel of the LORD standing between earth and heaven, and in his
hand a drawn sword stretched out over Jerusalem. Then David and the
elders, clothed in sackcloth, fell on their faces. 17 And David said to
God, "Was it not I who gave the command to count the people? It is I
who have sinned and done very wickedly. But these sheep, what have
they done? Let your hand, I pray, O LORD my God, be against me and
against my father's house; but do not let your people be plagued!"

812

1 CHRONICLES 813

18 Then the angel of the LORD commanded Gad to tell David that he
should go up and erect an altar to the LORD on the threshing floor of
Ornan the Jebusite. 19 So David went up following Gad's instructions,
which he had spoken in the name of the LORD. 20 Ornan turned and
saw the angel; and while his four sons who were with him hid
themselves, Ornan continued to thresh wheat. 21 As David came to
Ornan, Ornan looked and saw David; he went out from the threshing
floor, and did obeisance to David with his face to the ground. 22 David
said to Ornan, "Give me the site of the threshing floor that I may build
on it an altar to the LORD — give it to me at its full price — so that the
plague may be averted from the people." 23 Then Ornan said to David,
"Take it; and let my lord the king do what seems good to him; see, I
present the oxen for burnt offerings, and the threshing sledges for the
wood, and the wheat for a grain offering. I give it all." 24 But King
David said to Ornan, "No; I will buy them for the full price. I will not
take for the LORD what is yours, nor offer burnt offerings that cost me
nothing." 25 So David paid Ornan six hundred shekels of gold by
weight for the site. 26 David built there an altar to the LORD and
presented burnt offerings and offerings of well-being. He called upon
the LORD, and he answered him with fire from heaven on the altar of
burnt offering. 27 Then the LORD commanded the angel, and he put his
sword back into its sheath.
28 At that time, when David saw that the LORD had answered him at
the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite, he made his sacrifices there.
29 For the tabernacle of the LORD, which Moses had made in the
wilderness, and the altar of burnt offering were at that time in the
high place at Gibeon; 30 but David could not go before it to inquire of
God, for he was afraid of the sword of the angel of the LORD. [1
Chronicles 22] 1 Then David said, "Here shall be the house of the LORD
God and here the altar of burnt offering for Israel."
[1 Chronicles 22]
David prepares for the construction of the Temple
2 David gave orders to gather together the aliens who were residing in
the land of Israel, and he set stonecutters to prepare dressed stones for
building the house of God. 3 David also provided great stores of iron

813

1 CHRONICLES 814

for nails for the doors of the gates and for clamps, as well as bronze in
quantities beyond weighing, 4 and cedar logs without number — for
the Sidonians and Tyrians brought great quantities of cedar to David. 5
For David said, "My son Solomon is young and inexperienced, and the
house that is to be built for the LORD must be exceedingly magnificent,
famous and glorified throughout all lands; I will therefore make
preparation for it." So David provided materials in great quantity
before his death.
6 Then he called for his son Solomon and charged him to build a house
for the LORD, the God of Israel. 7 David said to Solomon, "My son, I had
planned to build a house to the name of the LORD my God. 8 But the
word of the LORD came to me, saying, 'You have shed much blood and
have waged great wars; you shall not build a house to my name,
because you have shed so much blood in my sight on the earth. 9 See, a
son shall be born to you; he shall be a man of peace. I will give him
peace from all his enemies on every side; for his name shall be
Solomon, and I will give peace and quiet to Israel in his days. 10 He
shall build a house for my name. He shall be a son to me, and I will be a
father to him, and I will establish his royal throne in Israel forever.' 11
Now, my son, the LORD be with you, so that you may succeed in
building the house of the LORD your God, as he has spoken concerning
you. 12 Only, may the LORD grant you discretion and understanding, so
that when he gives you charge over Israel you may keep the law of the
LORD your God. 13 Then you will prosper if you are careful to observe
the statutes and the ordinances that the LORD commanded Moses for
Israel. Be strong and of good courage. Do not be afraid or dismayed. 14
With great pains I have provided for the house of the LORD one
hundred thousand talents of gold, one million talents of silver, and
bronze and iron beyond weighing, for there is so much of it; timber
and stone too I have provided. To these you must add more. 15 You
have an abundance of workers: stonecutters, masons, carpenters, and
all kinds of artisans without number, skilled in working 16 gold, silver,
bronze, and iron. Now begin the work, and the LORD be with you."
17 David also commanded all the leaders of Israel to help his son
Solomon, saying, 18 "Is not the LORD your God with you? Has he not
given you peace on every side? For he has delivered the inhabitants of

814

1 CHRONICLES 815

the land into my hand; and the land is subdued before the LORD and his
people. 19 Now set your mind and heart to seek the LORD your God. Go
and build the sanctuary of the LORD God so that the ark of the
covenant of the LORD and the holy vessels of God may be brought into
a house built for the name of the LORD."
[1 Chronicles 23]
Establishing a national administration
1 When David was old and full of days, he made his son Solomon king
over Israel.
2 David assembled all the leaders of Israel and the priests and the
Levites. 3 The Levites, thirty years old and upward, were counted, and
the total was thirty-eight thousand. 4 "Twenty-four thousand of
these," David said, "shall have charge of the work in the house of the
LORD, six thousand shall be officers and judges, 5 four thousand
gatekeepers, and four thousand shall offer praises to the LORD with the
instruments that I have made for praise." 6 And David organized them
in divisions corresponding to the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and
Merari.
7 The sons of Gershon were Ladan and Shimei. 8 The sons of Ladan:
Jehiel the chief, Zetham, and Joel, three. 9 The sons of Shimei:
Shelomoth, Haziel, and Haran, three. These were the heads of families
of Ladan. 10 And the sons of Shimei: Jahath, Zina, Jeush, and Beriah.
These four were the sons of Shimei. 11 Jahath was the chief, and Zizah
the second; but Jeush and Beriah did not have many sons, so they were
enrolled as a single family.
12 The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel, four. 13 The
sons of Amram: Aaron and Moses. Aaron was set apart to consecrate
the most holy things, so that he and his sons forever should make
offerings before the LORD, and minister to him and pronounce blessings
in his name forever; 14 but as for Moses the man of God, his sons were
to be reckoned among the tribe of Levi. 15 The sons of Moses: Gershom
and Eliezer. 16 The sons of Gershom: Shebuel the chief. 17 The sons of
Eliezer: Rehabiah the chief; Eliezer had no other sons, but the sons of

815

1 CHRONICLES 816

Rehabiah were very numerous. 18 The sons of Izhar: Shelomith the
chief. 19 The sons of Hebron: Jeriah the chief, Amariah the second,
Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth. 20 The sons of Uzziel:
Micah the chief and Isshiah the second.
21 The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. The sons of Mahli: Eleazar and
Kish. 22 Eleazar died having no sons, but only daughters; their kindred,
the sons of Kish, married them. 23 The sons of Mushi: Mahli, Eder, and
Jeremoth, three.
24 These were the sons of Levi by their ancestral houses, the heads of
families as they were enrolled according to the number of the names
of the individuals from twenty years old and upward who were to do
the work for the service of the house of the LORD. 25 For David said,
"The LORD, the God of Israel, has given rest to his people; and he
resides in Jerusalem forever. 26 And so the Levites no longer need to
carry the tabernacle or any of the things for its service" — 27 for
according to the last words of David these were the number of the
Levites from twenty years old and upward — 28 "but their duty shall
be to assist the descendants of Aaron for the service of the house of
the LORD, having the care of the courts and the chambers, the cleansing
of all that is holy, and any work for the service of the house of God; 29
to assist also with the rows of bread, the choice flour for the grain
offering, the wafers of unleavened bread, the baked offering, the
offering mixed with oil, and all measures of quantity or size. 30 And
they shall stand every morning, thanking and praising the LORD, and
likewise at evening, 31 and whenever burnt offerings are offered to the
LORD on sabbaths, new moons, and appointed festivals, according to
the number required of them, regularly before the LORD. 32 Thus they
shall keep charge of the tent of meeting and the sanctuary, and shall
attend the descendants of Aaron, their kindred, for the service of the
house of the LORD."
[1 Chronicles 24]
David's priestly appointments
1 The divisions of the descendants of Aaron were these. The sons of
Aaron: Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. 2 But Nadab and Abihu

816

1 CHRONICLES 817

died before their father, and had no sons; so Eleazar and Ithamar
became the priests. 3 Along with Zadok of the sons of Eleazar, and
Ahimelech of the sons of Ithamar, David organized them according to
the appointed duties in their service. 4 Since more chief men were
found among the sons of Eleazar than among the sons of Ithamar, they
organized them under sixteen heads of ancestral houses of the sons of
Eleazar, and eight of the sons of Ithamar. 5 They organized them by
lot, all alike, for there were officers of the sanctuary and officers of
God among both the sons of Eleazar and the sons of Ithamar. 6 The
scribe Shemaiah son of Nethanel, a Levite, recorded them in the
presence of the king, and the officers, and Zadok the priest, and
Ahimelech son of Abiathar, and the heads of ancestral houses of the
priests and of the Levites; one ancestral house being chosen for Eleazar
and one chosen for Ithamar.
7 The first lot fell to Jehoiarib, the second to Jedaiah, 8 the third to
Harim, the fourth to Seorim, 9 the fifth to Malchijah, the sixth to
Mijamin, 10 the seventh to Hakkoz, the eighth to Abijah, 11 the ninth
to Jeshua, the tenth to Shecaniah, 12 the eleventh to Eliashib, the
twelfth to Jakim, 13 the thirteenth to Huppah, the fourteenth to
Jeshebeab, 14 the fifteenth to Bilgah, the sixteenth to Immer, 15 the
seventeenth to Hezir, the eighteenth to Happizzez, 16 the nineteenth
to Pethahiah, the twentieth to Jehezkel, 17 the twenty-first to Jachin,
the twenty-second to Gamul, 18 the twenty-third to Delaiah, the
twenty-fourth to Maaziah. 19 These had as their appointed duty in
their service to enter the house of the LORD according to the procedure
established for them by their ancestor Aaron, as the LORD God of Israel
had commanded him.
20 And of the rest of the sons of Levi: of the sons of Amram, Shubael;
of the sons of Shubael, Jehdeiah. 21 Of Rehabiah: of the sons of
Rehabiah, Isshiah the chief. 22 Of the Izharites, Shelomoth; of the sons
of Shelomoth, Jahath. 23 The sons of Hebron: Jeriah the chief, Amariah
the second, Jahaziel the third, Jekameam the fourth. 24 The sons of
Uzziel, Micah; of the sons of Micah, Shamir. 25 The brother of Micah,
Isshiah; of the sons of Isshiah, Zechariah. 26 The sons of Merari: Mahli
and Mushi. The sons of Jaaziah: Beno. 27 The sons of Merari: of
Jaaziah, Beno, Shoham, Zaccur, and Ibri. 28 Of Mahli: Eleazar, who had

817

1 CHRONICLES 818

no sons. 29 Of Kish, the sons of Kish: Jerahmeel. 30 The sons of Mushi:
Mahli, Eder, and Jerimoth. These were the sons of the Levites according
to their ancestral houses. 31 These also cast lots corresponding to their
kindred, the descendants of Aaron, in the presence of King David,
Zadok, Ahimelech, and the heads of ancestral houses of the priests and
of the Levites, the chief as well as the youngest brother.
[1 Chronicles 25]
The singers
1 David and the officers of the army also set apart for the service the
sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and of Jeduthun, who should prophesy
with lyres, harps, and cymbals. The list of those who did the work and
of their duties was: 2 Of the sons of Asaph: Zaccur, Joseph, Nethaniah,
and Asarelah, sons of Asaph, under the direction of Asaph, who
prophesied under the direction of the king. 3 Of Jeduthun, the sons of
Jeduthun: Gedaliah, Zeri, Jeshaiah, Shimei, Hashabiah, and Mattithiah,
six, under the direction of their father Jeduthun, who prophesied with
the lyre in thanksgiving and praise to the LORD. 4 Of Heman, the sons
of Heman: Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shebuel, and Jerimoth,
Hananiah,
Hanani,
Eliathah,
Giddalti,
and
Romamti-ezer,
Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, Mahazioth. 5 All these were the sons
of Heman the king's seer, according to the promise of God to exalt
him; for God had given Heman fourteen sons and three daughters. 6
They were all under the direction of their father for the music in the
house of the LORD with cymbals, harps, and lyres for the service of the
house of God. Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman were under the order of
the king. 7 They and their kindred, who were trained in singing to the
LORD, all of whom were skillful, numbered two hundred eighty-eight. 8
And they cast lots for their duties, small and great, teacher and pupil
alike.
9 The first lot fell for Asaph to Joseph; the second to Gedaliah, to him
and his brothers and his sons, twelve; 10 the third to Zaccur, his sons
and his brothers, twelve; 11 the fourth to Izri, his sons and his brothers,
twelve; 12 the fifth to Nethaniah, his sons and his brothers, twelve; 13
the sixth to Bukkiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve; 14 the seventh
to Jesarelah, his sons and his brothers, twelve; 15 the eighth to

818

1 CHRONICLES 819

Jeshaiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve; 16 the ninth to Mattaniah,
his sons and his brothers, twelve; 17 the tenth to Shimei, his sons and
his brothers, twelve; 18 the eleventh to Azarel, his sons and his
brothers, twelve; 19 the twelfth to Hashabiah, his sons and his brothers,
twelve; 20 to the thirteenth, Shubael, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
21 to the fourteenth, Mattithiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve; 22 to
the fifteenth, to Jeremoth, his sons and his brothers, twelve; 23 to the
sixteenth, to Hananiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve; 24 to the
seventeenth, to Joshbekashah, his sons and his brothers, twelve; 25 to
the eighteenth, to Hanani, his sons and his brothers, twelve; 26 to the
nineteenth, to Mallothi, his sons and his brothers, twelve; 27 to the
twentieth, to Eliathah, his sons and his brothers, twelve; 28 to the
twenty-first, to Hothir, his sons and his brothers, twelve; 29 to the
twenty-second, to Giddalti, his sons and his brothers, twelve; 30 to the
twenty-third, to Mahazioth, his sons and his brothers, twelve; 31 to the
twenty-fourth, to Romamti-ezer, his sons and his brothers, twelve.
[1 Chronicles 26]
The gatekeepers
1 As for the divisions of the gatekeepers: of the Korahites,
Meshelemiah son of Kore, of the sons of Asaph. 2 Meshelemiah had
sons: Zechariah the firstborn, Jediael the second, Zebadiah the third,
Jathniel the fourth, 3 Elam the fifth, Jehohanan the sixth, Eliehoenai
the seventh. 4 Obed-edom had sons: Shemaiah the firstborn,
Jehozabad the second, Joah the third, Sachar the fourth, Nethanel the
fifth, 5 Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Peullethai the eighth;
for God blessed him. 6 Also to his son Shemaiah sons were born who
exercised authority in their ancestral houses, for they were men of
great ability. 7 The sons of Shemaiah: Othni, Rephael, Obed, and
Elzabad, whose brothers were able men, Elihu and Semachiah. 8 All
these, sons of Obed-edom with their sons and brothers, were able men
qualified for the service; sixty-two of Obed-edom. 9 Meshelemiah had
sons and brothers, able men, eighteen. 10 Hosah, of the sons of Merari,
had sons: Shimri the chief (for though he was not the firstborn, his
father made him chief), 11 Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah the third,
Zechariah the fourth: all the sons and brothers of Hosah totaled
thirteen.

819

1 CHRONICLES 820

12 These divisions of the gatekeepers, corresponding to their leaders,
had duties, just as their kindred did, ministering in the house of the
LORD; 13 and they cast lots by ancestral houses, small and great alike,
for their gates. 14 The lot for the east fell to Shelemiah. They cast lots
also for his son Zechariah, a prudent counselor, and his lot came out
for the north. 15 Obed-edom's came out for the south, and to his sons
was allotted the storehouse. 16 For Shuppim and Hosah it came out for
the west, at the gate of Shallecheth on the ascending road. Guard
corresponded to guard. 17 On the east there were six Levites each day,
on the north four each day, on the south four each day, as well as two
and two at the storehouse; 18 and for the colonnade on the west there
were four at the road and two at the colonnade. 19 These were the
divisions of the gatekeepers among the Korahites and the sons of
Merari.
Treasurers, regional officials, and judges
20 And of the Levites, Ahijah had charge of the treasuries of the house
of God and the treasuries of the dedicated gifts. 21 The sons of Ladan,
the sons of the Gershonites belonging to Ladan, the heads of families
belonging to Ladan the Gershonite: Jehieli.
22 The sons of Jehieli, Zetham and his brother Joel, were in charge of
the treasuries of the house of the LORD. 23 Of the Amramites, the
Izharites, the Hebronites, and the Uzzielites: 24 Shebuel son of
Gershom, son of Moses, was chief officer in charge of the treasuries. 25
His brothers: from Eliezer were his son Rehabiah, his son Jeshaiah, his
son Joram, his son Zichri, and his son Shelomoth. 26 This Shelomoth
and his brothers were in charge of all the treasuries of the dedicated
gifts that King David, and the heads of families, and the officers of the
thousands and the hundreds, and the commanders of the army, had
dedicated. 27 From booty won in battles they dedicated gifts for the
maintenance of the house of the LORD. 28 Also all that Samuel the seer,
and Saul son of Kish, and Abner son of Ner, and Joab son of Zeruiah
had dedicated — all dedicated gifts were in the care of Shelomoth and
his brothers.

820

1 CHRONICLES 821

29 Of the Izharites, Chenaniah and his sons were appointed to outside
duties for Israel, as officers and judges. 30 Of the Hebronites,
Hashabiah and his brothers, one thousand seven hundred men of
ability, had the oversight of Israel west of the Jordan for all the work
of the LORD and for the service of the king. 31 Of the Hebronites, Jerijah
was chief of the Hebronites. (In the fortieth year of David's reign
search was made, of whatever genealogy or family, and men of great
ability among them were found at Jazer in Gilead.) 32 King David
appointed him and his brothers, two thousand seven hundred men of
ability, heads of families, to have the oversight of the Reubenites, the
Gadites, and the half-tribe of the Manassites for everything pertaining
to God and for the affairs of the king.
[1 Chronicles 27]
Military leaders
1 This is the list of the people of Israel, the heads of families, the
commanders of the thousands and the hundreds, and their officers
who served the king in all matters concerning the divisions that came
and went, month after month throughout the year, each division
numbering twenty-four thousand:
2 Jashobeam son of Zabdiel was in charge of the first division in the
first month; in his division were twenty-four thousand. 3 He was a
descendant of Perez, and was chief of all the commanders of the army
for the first month. 4 Dodai the Ahohite was in charge of the division
of the second month; Mikloth was the chief officer of his division. In his
division were twenty-four thousand. 5 The third commander, for the
third month, was Benaiah son of the priest Jehoiada, as chief; in his
division were twenty-four thousand. 6 This is the Benaiah who was a
mighty man of the Thirty and in command of the Thirty; his son
Ammizabad was in charge of his division. 7 Asahel brother of Joab was
fourth, for the fourth month, and his son Zebadiah after him; in his
division were twenty-four thousand. 8 The fifth commander, for the
fifth month, was Shamhuth, the Izrahite; in his division were twentyfour thousand. 9 Sixth, for the sixth month, was Ira son of Ikkesh the
Tekoite; in his division were twenty-four thousand. 10 Seventh, for the
seventh month, was Helez the Pelonite, of the Ephraimites; in his

821

1 CHRONICLES 822

division were twenty-four thousand. 11 Eighth, for the eighth month,
was Sibbecai the Hushathite, of the Zerahites; in his division were
twenty-four thousand. 12 Ninth, for the ninth month, was Abiezer of
Anathoth, a Benjaminite; in his division were twenty-four thousand. 13
Tenth, for the tenth month, was Maharai of Netophah, of the
Zerahites; in his division were twenty-four thousand. 14 Eleventh, for
the eleventh month, was Benaiah of Pirathon, of the Ephraimites; in his
division were twenty-four thousand. 15 Twelfth, for the twelfth month,
was Heldai the Netophathite, of Othniel; in his division were twentyfour thousand.
16 Over the tribes of Israel, for the Reubenites, Eliezer son of Zichri was
chief officer; for the Simeonites, Shephatiah son of Maacah; 17 for Levi,
Hashabiah son of Kemuel; for Aaron, Zadok; 18 for Judah, Elihu, one of
David's brothers; for Issachar, Omri son of Michael; 19 for Zebulun,
Ishmaiah son of Obadiah; for Naphtali, Jerimoth son of Azriel; 20 for
the Ephraimites, Hoshea son of Azaziah; for the half-tribe of Manasseh,
Joel son of Pedaiah; 21 for the half-tribe of Manasseh in Gilead, Iddo
son of Zechariah; for Benjamin, Jaasiel son of Abner; 22 for Dan, Azarel
son of Jeroham. These were the leaders of the tribes of Israel. 23 David
did not count those below twenty years of age, for the LORD had
promised to make Israel as numerous as the stars of heaven. 24 Joab
son of Zeruiah began to count them, but did not finish; yet wrath came
upon Israel for this, and the number was not entered into the account
of the Annals of King David.
Other administrators
25 Over the king's treasuries was Azmaveth son of Adiel. Over the
treasuries in the country, in the cities, in the villages and in the towers,
was Jonathan son of Uzziah. 26 Over those who did the work of the
field, tilling the soil, was Ezri son of Chelub. 27 Over the vineyards was
Shimei the Ramathite. Over the produce of the vineyards for the wine
cellars was Zabdi the Shiphmite. 28 Over the olive and sycamore trees
in the Shephelah was Baal-hanan the Gederite. Over the stores of oil
was Joash. 29 Over the herds that pastured in Sharon was Shitrai the
Sharonite. Over the herds in the valleys was Shaphat son of Adlai. 30
Over the camels was Obil the Ishmaelite. Over the donkeys was

822

1 CHRONICLES 823

Jehdeiah the Meronothite. Over the flocks was Jaziz the Hagrite. 31 All
these were stewards of King David's property.
32 Jonathan, David's uncle, was a counselor, being a man of
understanding and a scribe; Jehiel son of Hachmoni attended the
king's sons. 33 Ahithophel was the king's counselor, and Hushai the
Archite was the king's friend. 34 After Ahithophel came Jehoiada son
of Benaiah, and Abiathar. Joab was commander of the king's army.
[1 Chronicles 28]
All Israel ratifies accession
1 David assembled at Jerusalem all the officials of Israel, the officials of
the tribes, the officers of the divisions that served the king, the
commanders of the thousands, the commanders of the hundreds, the
stewards of all the property and cattle of the king and his sons,
together with the palace officials, the mighty warriors, and all the
warriors. 2 Then King David rose to his feet and said: "Hear me, my
brothers and my people. I had planned to build a house of rest for the
ark of the covenant of the LORD, for the footstool of our God; and I
made preparations for building. 3 But God said to me, 'You shall not
build a house for my name, for you are a warrior and have shed blood.'
4 Yet the LORD God of Israel chose me from all my ancestral house to be
king over Israel forever; for he chose Judah as leader, and in the house
of Judah my father's house, and among my father's sons he took
delight in making me king over all Israel. 5 And of all my sons, for the
LORD has given me many, he has chosen my son Solomon to sit upon
the throne of the kingdom of the LORD over Israel. 6 He said to me, 'It is
your son Solomon who shall build my house and my courts, for I have
chosen him to be a son to me, and I will be a father to him. 7 I will
establish his kingdom forever if he continues resolute in keeping my
commandments and my ordinances, as he is today.' 8 Now therefore in
the sight of all Israel, the assembly of the LORD, and in the hearing of
our God, observe and search out all the commandments of the LORD
your God; that you may possess this good land, and leave it for an
inheritance to your children after you forever.

823

1 CHRONICLES 824

9 "And you, my son Solomon, know the God of your father, and serve
him with single mind and willing heart; for the LORD searches every
mind, and understands every plan and thought. If you seek him, he will
be found by you; but if you forsake him, he will abandon you forever.
10 Take heed now, for the LORD has chosen you to build a house as the
sanctuary; be strong, and act."
A plan for the Temple
11 Then David gave his son Solomon the plan of the vestibule of the
temple, and of its houses, its treasuries, its upper rooms, and its inner
chambers, and of the room for the mercy seat; 12 and the plan of all
that he had in mind: for the courts of the house of the LORD, all the
surrounding chambers, the treasuries of the house of God, and the
treasuries for dedicated gifts; 13 for the divisions of the priests and of
the Levites, and all the work of the service in the house of the LORD; for
all the vessels for the service in the house of the LORD, 14 the weight of
gold for all golden vessels for each service, the weight of silver vessels
for each service, 15 the weight of the golden lampstands and their
lamps, the weight of gold for each lampstand and its lamps, the weight
of silver for a lampstand and its lamps, according to the use of each in
the service, 16 the weight of gold for each table for the rows of bread,
the silver for the silver tables, 17 and pure gold for the forks, the basins,
and the cups; for the golden bowls and the weight of each; for the
silver bowls and the weight of each; 18 for the altar of incense made of
refined gold, and its weight; also his plan for the golden chariot of the
cherubim that spread their wings and covered the ark of the covenant
of the LORD.
19 "All this, in writing at the LORD's direction, he made clear to me —
the plan of all the works."
20 David said further to his son Solomon, "Be strong and of good
courage, and act. Do not be afraid or dismayed; for the LORD God, my
God, is with you. He will not fail you or forsake you, until all the work
for the service of the house of the LORD is finished. 21 Here are the
divisions of the priests and the Levites for all the service of the house of
God; and with you in all the work will be every volunteer who has skill

824

1 CHRONICLES 825

for any kind of service; also the officers and all the people will be
wholly at your command."
[1 Chronicles 29]
Endowments for the Temple
1 King David said to the whole assembly, "My son Solomon, whom
alone God has chosen, is young and inexperienced, and the work is
great; for the temple will not be for mortals but for the LORD God. 2 So
I have provided for the house of my God, so far as I was able, the gold
for the things of gold, the silver for the things of silver, and the bronze
for the things of bronze, the iron for the things of iron, and wood for
the things of wood, besides great quantities of onyx and stones for
setting, antimony, colored stones, all sorts of precious stones, and
marble in abundance. 3 Moreover, in addition to all that I have
provided for the holy house, I have a treasure of my own of gold and
silver, and because of my devotion to the house of my God I give it to
the house of my God: 4 three thousand talents of gold, of the gold of
Ophir, and seven thousand talents of refined silver, for overlaying the
walls of the house, 5 and for all the work to be done by artisans, gold
for the things of gold and silver for the things of silver. Who then will
offer willingly, consecrating themselves today to the LORD?"
6 Then the leaders of ancestral houses made their freewill offerings, as
did also the leaders of the tribes, the commanders of the thousands
and of the hundreds, and the officers over the king's work. 7 They gave
for the service of the house of God five thousand talents and ten
thousand darics of gold, ten thousand talents of silver, eighteen
thousand talents of bronze, and one hundred thousand talents of iron.
8 Whoever had precious stones gave them to the treasury of the house
of the LORD, into the care of Jehiel the Gershonite. 9 Then the people
rejoiced because these had given willingly, for with single mind they
had offered freely to the LORD; King David also rejoiced greatly.
David's farewell prayer
10 Then David blessed the LORD in the presence of all the assembly;
David said: "Blessed are you, O LORD, the God of our ancestor Israel,

825

1 CHRONICLES 826

forever and ever. 11 Yours, O LORD, are the greatness, the power, the
glory, the victory, and the majesty; for all that is in the heavens and on
the earth is yours; yours is the kingdom, O LORD, and you are exalted as
head above all. 12 Riches and honor come from you, and you rule over
all. In your hand are power and might; and it is in your hand to make
great and to give strength to all. 13 And now, our God, we give thanks
to you and praise your glorious name.
14 "But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to
make this freewill offering? For all things come from you, and of your
own have we given you. 15 For we are aliens and transients before you,
as were all our ancestors; our days on the earth are like a shadow, and
there is no hope. 16 O LORD our God, all this abundance that we have
provided for building you a house for your holy name comes from your
hand and is all your own. 17 I know, my God, that you search the heart,
and take pleasure in uprightness; in the uprightness of my heart I have
freely offered all these things, and now I have seen your people, who
are present here, offering freely and joyously to you. 18 O LORD, the
God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, our ancestors, keep forever such
purposes and thoughts in the hearts of your people, and direct their
hearts toward you. 19 Grant to my son Solomon that with single mind
he may keep your commandments, your decrees, and your statutes,
performing all of them, and that he may build the temple for which I
have made provision."
David's death and the transition to Solomon
20 Then David said to the whole assembly, "Bless the LORD your God."
And all the assembly blessed the LORD, the God of their ancestors, and
bowed their heads and prostrated themselves before the LORD and the
king. 21 On the next day they offered sacrifices and burnt offerings to
the LORD, a thousand bulls, a thousand rams, and a thousand lambs,
with their libations, and sacrifices in abundance for all Israel; 22 and
they ate and drank before the LORD on that day with great joy.
They made David's son Solomon king a second time; they anointed him
as the LORD's prince, and Zadok as priest. 23 Then Solomon sat on the
throne of the LORD, succeeding his father David as king; he prospered,

826

1 CHRONICLES 827

and all Israel obeyed him. 24 All the leaders and the mighty warriors,
and also all the sons of King David, pledged their allegiance to King
Solomon. 25 The LORD highly exalted Solomon in the sight of all Israel,
and bestowed upon him such royal majesty as had not been on any
king before him in Israel.
26 Thus David son of Jesse reigned over all Israel. 27 The period that he
reigned over Israel was forty years; he reigned seven years in Hebron,
and thirty-three years in Jerusalem. 28 He died in a good old age, full
of days, riches, and honor; and his son Solomon succeeded him. 29 Now
the acts of King David, from first to last, are written in the records of
the seer Samuel, and in the records of the prophet Nathan, and in the
records of the seer Gad, 30 with accounts of all his rule and his might
and of the events that befell him and Israel and all the kingdoms of the
earth.

827

2 CHRONICLES 828

2 CHRONICLES
Introduction
The organization of 2 Chronicles falls into two major parts: the reign of
Solomon (chs 1-9) and the kingdom of Judah (chs 10-36). In Chronicles
the tenure of Solomon represents the apex of Israelite history, a time
of unprecedented glory, prosperity, and peace. If David's reign was
highly successful because David consolidated Israel's international
position and prepared for the long-awaited Temple, Solomon's reign
was highly successfully because he brought these plans to fruition.
Accordingly, much space is devoted in chs 2-7 to the construction,
furnishings, and dedication of this national edifice. As the home of the
ark and the tabernacle, the Temple represents the continuation and
fulfillment of earlier Israelite religious institutions. For the Chronicler,
the Temple is the divinely sanctioned place for both sacrifice and
prayer (6.1-7.22).
The Chronicler's account of the divided monarch differs in many
respects from that found in 1 and 2 Kings, even though he draws
heavily from Kings to write his own work. The writer excludes the
independent history of the Northern Kingdom because he regards both
the kingship and the sanctuaries of this new state as an affront to God
(13.4-12). The choice not to recount the record of northern Israel also
means that the stories of the northern prophets (e.g., Elijah and Elisha)
are not found in Chronicles. The author does add, however, much
coverage to the Judahite kingdom, some of which reflects well on the
reigns of major Judahite monarchs, such as Asa (chs 14-16), Jehoshaphat
(chs 17-20), and Hezekiah (chs 29-32). Throughout his presentation, the
Chronicler exhibits a concern for all Israelite tribes. The Chronicler
criticizes the Northern Kingdom and its monarchs, but he still considers
the northern tribes as Israelite and shows a sustained interest in the
contacts with Judah. In the latter part of its history, Judah lost ground
to its enemies and was exiled from its land to Babylon (586 BCE). A
828

2 CHRONICLES 829

major concern of Chronicles is not only to trace this decline, but also to
commend the reforms aimed at reversing it. On the whole, he presents
a more balanced and optimistic presentation of this period than do the
authors of Kings (for a fuller treatment, see the Introduction to 1
Chronicles).
HT

TH

[2 Chronicles 1]
Solomon takes charge, journeys to Gibeon, and prospers
1 Solomon son of David established himself in his kingdom; the LORD his
God was with him and made him exceedingly great.
2 Solomon summoned all Israel, the commanders of the thousands and
of the hundreds, the judges, and all the leaders of all Israel, the heads
of families. 3 Then Solomon, and the whole assembly with him, went to
the high place that was at Gibeon; for God's tent of meeting, which
Moses the servant of the LORD had made in the wilderness, was there. 4
(But David had brought the ark of God up from Kiriath-jearim to the
place that David had prepared for it; for he had pitched a tent for it in
Jerusalem.) 5 Moreover the bronze altar that Bezalel son of Uri, son of
Hur, had made, was there in front of the tabernacle of the LORD. And
Solomon and the assembly inquired at it. 6 Solomon went up there to
the bronze altar before the LORD, which was at the tent of meeting,
and offered a thousand burnt offerings on it.
7 That night God appeared to Solomon, and said to him, "Ask what I
should give you." 8 Solomon said to God, "You have shown great and
steadfast love to my father David, and have made me succeed him as
king. 9 O LORD God, let your promise to my father David now be
fulfilled, for you have made me king over a people as numerous as the
dust of the earth. 10 Give me now wisdom and knowledge to go out
and come in before this people, for who can rule this great people of
yours?" 11 God answered Solomon, "Because this was in your heart,
and you have not asked for possessions, wealth, honor, or the life of
those who hate you, and have not even asked for long life, but have

829

2 CHRONICLES 830

asked for wisdom and knowledge for yourself that you may rule my
people over whom I have made you king, 12 wisdom and knowledge
are granted to you. I will also give you riches, possessions, and honor,
such as none of the kings had who were before you, and none after
you shall have the like." 13 So Solomon came from the high place at
Gibeon, from the tent of meeting, to Jerusalem. And he reigned over
Israel.
14 Solomon gathered together chariots and horses; he had fourteen
hundred chariots and twelve thousand horses, which he stationed in
the chariot cities and with the king in Jerusalem. 15 The king made
silver and gold as common in Jerusalem as stone, and he made cedar as
plentiful as the sycamore of the Shephelah. 16 Solomon's horses were
imported from Egypt and Kue; the king's traders received them from
Kue at the prevailing price. 17 They imported from Egypt, and then
exported, a chariot for six hundred shekels of silver, and a horse for
one hundred fifty; so through them these were exported to all the
kings of the Hittites and the kings of Aram.
[2 Chronicles 2]
Solomon prepares to build the Temple
1 Solomon decided to build a temple for the name of the LORD, and a
royal palace for himself. 2 Solomon conscripted seventy thousand
laborers and eighty thousand stonecutters in the hill country, with
three thousand six hundred to oversee them.
3 Solomon sent word to King Huram of Tyre: "Once you dealt with my
father David and sent him cedar to build himself a house to live in. 4 I
am now about to build a house for the name of the LORD my God and
dedicate it to him for offering fragrant incense before him, and for the
regular offering of the rows of bread, and for burnt offerings morning
and evening, on the sabbaths and the new moons and the appointed
festivals of the LORD our God, as ordained forever for Israel. 5 The
house that I am about to build will be great, for our God is greater
than other gods. 6 But who is able to build him a house, since heaven,
even highest heaven, cannot contain him? Who am I to build a house
for him, except as a place to make offerings before him? 7 So now send

830

2 CHRONICLES 831

me an artisan skilled to work in gold, silver, bronze, and iron, and in
purple, crimson, and blue fabrics, trained also in engraving, to join the
skilled workers who are with me in Judah and Jerusalem, whom my
father David provided. 8 Send me also cedar, cypress, and algum
timber from Lebanon, for I know that your servants are skilled in
cutting Lebanon timber. My servants will work with your servants 9 to
prepare timber for me in abundance, for the house I am about to build
will be great and wonderful. 10 I will provide for your servants, those
who cut the timber, twenty thousand cors of crushed wheat, twenty
thousand cors of barley, twenty thousand baths of wine, and twenty
thousand baths of oil."
11 Then King Huram of Tyre answered in a letter that he sent to
Solomon, "Because the LORD loves his people he has made you king
over them." 12 Huram also said, "Blessed be the LORD God of Israel,
who made heaven and earth, who has given King David a wise son,
endowed with discretion and understanding, who will build a temple
for the LORD, and a royal palace for himself.
13 "I have dispatched Huram-abi, a skilled artisan, endowed with
understanding, 14 the son of one of the Danite women, his father a
Tyrian. He is trained to work in gold, silver, bronze, iron, stone, and
wood, and in purple, blue, and crimson fabrics and fine linen, and to
do all sorts of engraving and execute any design that may be assigned
him, with your artisans, the artisans of my lord, your father David. 15
Now, as for the wheat, barley, oil, and wine, of which my lord has
spoken, let him send them to his servants. 16 We will cut whatever
timber you need from Lebanon, and bring it to you as rafts by sea to
Joppa; you will take it up to Jerusalem."
17 Then Solomon took a census of all the aliens who were residing in
the land of Israel, after the census that his father David had taken; and
there were found to be one hundred fifty-three thousand six hundred.
18 Seventy thousand of them he assigned as laborers, eighty thousand
as stonecutters in the hill country, and three thousand six hundred as
overseers to make the people work.

831

2 CHRONICLES 832

[2 Chronicles 3]
Temple construction
1 Solomon began to build the house of the LORD in Jerusalem on Mount
Moriah, where the LORD had appeared to his father David, at the place
that David had designated, on the threshing floor of Ornan the
Jebusite. 2 He began to build on the second day of the second month
of the fourth year of his reign. 3 These are Solomon's measurements
for building the house of God: the length, in cubits of the old standard,
was sixty cubits, and the width twenty cubits. 4 The vestibule in front
of the nave of the house was twenty cubits long, across the width of
the house; and its height was one hundred twenty cubits. He overlaid it
on the inside with pure gold. 5 The nave he lined with cypress, covered
it with fine gold, and made palms and chains on it. 6 He adorned the
house with settings of precious stones. The gold was gold from
Parvaim. 7 So he lined the house with gold — its beams, its thresholds,
its walls, and its doors; and he carved cherubim on the walls.
8 He made the most holy place; its length, corresponding to the width
of the house, was twenty cubits, and its width was twenty cubits; he
overlaid it with six hundred talents of fine gold. 9 The weight of the
nails was fifty shekels of gold. He overlaid the upper chambers with
gold.
10 In the most holy place he made two carved cherubim and overlaid
them with gold. 11 The wings of the cherubim together extended
twenty cubits: one wing of the one, five cubits long, touched the wall
of the house, and its other wing, five cubits long, touched the wing of
the other cherub; 12 and of this cherub, one wing, five cubits long,
touched the wall of the house, and the other wing, also five cubits
long, was joined to the wing of the first cherub. 13 The wings of these
cherubim extended twenty cubits; the cherubim stood on their feet,
facing the nave. 14 And Solomon made the curtain of blue and purple
and crimson fabrics and fine linen, and worked cherubim into it.

832

2 CHRONICLES 833

15 In front of the house he made two pillars thirty-five cubits high, with
a capital of five cubits on the top of each. 16 He made encircling chains
and put them on the tops of the pillars; and he made one hundred
pomegranates, and put them on the chains. 17 He set up the pillars in
front of the temple, one on the right, the other on the left; the one on
the right he called Jachin, and the one on the left, Boaz.
[2 Chronicles 4]
The Temple furnishings
1 He made an altar of bronze, twenty cubits long, twenty cubits wide,
and ten cubits high. 2 Then he made the molten sea; it was round, ten
cubits from rim to rim, and five cubits high. A line of thirty cubits
would encircle it completely. 3 Under it were panels all around, each of
ten cubits, surrounding the sea; there were two rows of panels, cast
when it was cast. 4 It stood on twelve oxen, three facing north, three
facing west, three facing south, and three facing east; the sea was set
on them. The hindquarters of each were toward the inside. 5 Its
thickness was a handbreadth; its rim was made like the rim of a cup,
like the flower of a lily; it held three thousand baths. 6 He also made
ten basins in which to wash, and set five on the right side, and five on
the left. In these they were to rinse what was used for the burnt
offering. The sea was for the priests to wash in.
7 He made ten golden lampstands as prescribed, and set them in the
temple, five on the south side and five on the north. 8 He also made
ten tables and placed them in the temple, five on the right side and
five on the left. And he made one hundred basins of gold. 9 He made
the court of the priests, and the great court, and doors for the court;
he overlaid their doors with bronze. 10 He set the sea at the southeast
corner of the house.
11 And Huram made the pots, the shovels, and the basins. Thus Huram
finished the work that he did for King Solomon on the house of God:
12 the two pillars, the bowls, and the two capitals on the top of the
pillars; and the two latticeworks to cover the two bowls of the capitals
that were on the top of the pillars; 13 the four hundred pomegranates
for the two latticeworks, two rows of pomegranates for each

833

2 CHRONICLES 834

latticework, to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on the
pillars. 14 He made the stands, the basins on the stands, 15 the one sea,
and the twelve oxen underneath it. 16 The pots, the shovels, the forks,
and all the equipment for these Huram-abi made of burnished bronze
for King Solomon for the house of the LORD. 17 In the plain of the
Jordan the king cast them, in the clay ground between Succoth and
Zeredah. 18 Solomon made all these things in great quantities, so that
the weight of the bronze was not determined.
19 So Solomon made all the things that were in the house of God: the
golden altar, the tables for the bread of the Presence, 20 the
lampstands and their lamps of pure gold to burn before the inner
sanctuary, as prescribed; 21 the flowers, the lamps, and the tongs, of
purest gold; 22 the snuffers, basins, ladles, and firepans, of pure gold.
As for the entrance to the temple: the inner doors to the most holy
place and the doors of the nave of the temple were of gold.
[2 Chronicles 5]
The ark and the tent of meeting ascend into the Temple
1 Thus all the work that Solomon did for the house of the LORD was
finished. Solomon brought in the things that his father David had
dedicated, and stored the silver, the gold, and all the vessels in the
treasuries of the house of God.
2 Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel and all the heads of the
tribes, the leaders of the ancestral houses of the people of Israel, in
Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of the
city of David, which is Zion. 3 And all the Israelites assembled before
the king at the festival that is in the seventh month. 4 And all the
elders of Israel came, and the Levites carried the ark. 5 So they brought
up the ark, the tent of meeting, and all the holy vessels that were in
the tent; the priests and the Levites brought them up. 6 King Solomon
and all the congregation of Israel, who had assembled before him,
were before the ark, sacrificing so many sheep and oxen that they
could not be numbered or counted. 7 Then the priests brought the ark
of the covenant of the LORD to its place, in the inner sanctuary of the
house, in the most holy place, underneath the wings of the cherubim.

834

2 CHRONICLES 835

8 For the cherubim spread out their wings over the place of the ark, so
that the cherubim made a covering above the ark and its poles. 9 The
poles were so long that the ends of the poles were seen from the holy
place in front of the inner sanctuary; but they could not be seen from
outside; they are there to this day. 10 There was nothing in the ark
except the two tablets that Moses put there at Horeb, where the LORD
made a covenant with the people of Israel after they came out of
Egypt.
11 Now when the priests came out of the holy place (for all the priests
who were present had sanctified themselves, without regard to their
divisions), 12 all the levitical singers, Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun, their
sons and kindred, arrayed in fine linen, with cymbals, harps, and lyres,
stood east of the altar with one hundred twenty priests who were
trumpeters. 13 It was the duty of the trumpeters and singers to make
themselves heard in unison in praise and thanksgiving to the LORD, and
when the song was raised, with trumpets and cymbals and other
musical instruments, in praise to the LORD,
"For he is good,
for his steadfast love endures forever,"
the house, the house of the LORD, was filled with a cloud, 14 so that the
priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud; for the glory
of the LORD filled the house of God.
[2 Chronicles 6]
Solomon's blessing and Temple dedication prayer
1 Then Solomon said, "The LORD has said that he would reside in thick
darkness. 2 I have built you an exalted house, a place for you to reside
in forever."
3 Then the king turned around and blessed all the assembly of Israel,
while all the assembly of Israel stood. 4 And he said, "Blessed be the
LORD, the God of Israel, who with his hand has fulfilled what he
promised with his mouth to my father David, saying, 5 'Since the day
that I brought my people out of the land of Egypt, I have not chosen a
city from any of the tribes of Israel in which to build a house, so that
my name might be there, and I chose no one as ruler over my people

835

2 CHRONICLES 836

Israel; 6 but I have chosen Jerusalem in order that my name may be
there, and I have chosen David to be over my people Israel.' 7 My
father David had it in mind to build a house for the name of the LORD,
the God of Israel. 8 But the LORD said to my father David, 'You did well
to consider building a house for my name; 9 nevertheless you shall not
build the house, but your son who shall be born to you shall build the
house for my name.' 10 Now the LORD has fulfilled his promise that he
made; for I have succeeded my father David, and sit on the throne of
Israel, as the LORD promised, and have built the house for the name of
the LORD, the God of Israel. 11 There I have set the ark, in which is the
covenant of the LORD that he made with the people of Israel."
12 Then Solomon stood before the altar of the LORD in the presence of
the whole assembly of Israel, and spread out his hands. 13 Solomon had
made a bronze platform five cubits long, five cubits wide, and three
cubits high, and had set it in the court; and he stood on it. Then he
knelt on his knees in the presence of the whole assembly of Israel, and
spread out his hands toward heaven. 14 He said, "O LORD, God of Israel,
there is no God like you, in heaven or on earth, keeping covenant in
steadfast love with your servants who walk before you with all their
heart — 15 you who have kept for your servant, my father David, what
you promised to him. Indeed, you promised with your mouth and this
day have fulfilled with your hand. 16 Therefore, O LORD, God of Israel,
keep for your servant, my father David, that which you promised him,
saying, 'There shall never fail you a successor before me to sit on the
throne of Israel, if only your children keep to their way, to walk in my
law as you have walked before me.' 17 Therefore, O LORD, God of Israel,
let your word be confirmed, which you promised to your servant David.
18 "But will God indeed reside with mortals on earth? Even heaven and
the highest heaven cannot contain you, how much less this house that I
have built! 19 Regard your servant's prayer and his plea, O LORD my
God, heeding the cry and the prayer that your servant prays to you. 20
May your eyes be open day and night toward this house, the place
where you promised to set your name, and may you heed the prayer
that your servant prays toward this place. 21 And hear the plea of your
servant and of your people Israel, when they pray toward this place;
may you hear from heaven your dwelling place; hear and forgive.

836

2 CHRONICLES 837

22 "If someone sins against another and is required to take an oath
and comes and swears before your altar in this house, 23 may you hear
from heaven, and act, and judge your servants, repaying the guilty by
bringing their conduct on their own head, and vindicating those who
are in the right by rewarding them in accordance with their
righteousness.
24 "When your people Israel, having sinned against you, are defeated
before an enemy but turn again to you, confess your name, pray and
plead with you in this house, 25 may you hear from heaven, and
forgive the sin of your people Israel, and bring them again to the land
that you gave to them and to their ancestors.
26 "When heaven is shut up and there is no rain because they have
sinned against you, and then they pray toward this place, confess your
name, and turn from their sin, because you punish them, 27 may you
hear in heaven, forgive the sin of your servants, your people Israel,
when you teach them the good way in which they should walk; and
send down rain upon your land, which you have given to your people
as an inheritance.
28 "If there is famine in the land, if there is plague, blight, mildew,
locust, or caterpillar; if their enemies besiege them in any of the
settlements of the lands; whatever suffering, whatever sickness there
is; 29 whatever prayer, whatever plea from any individual or from all
your people Israel, all knowing their own suffering and their own
sorrows so that they stretch out their hands toward this house; 30 may
you hear from heaven, your dwelling place, forgive, and render to all
whose heart you know, according to all their ways, for only you know
the human heart. 31 Thus may they fear you and walk in your ways all
the days that they live in the land that you gave to our ancestors.
32 "Likewise when foreigners, who are not of your people Israel, come
from a distant land because of your great name, and your mighty
hand, and your outstretched arm, when they come and pray toward
this house, 33 may you hear from heaven your dwelling place, and do
whatever the foreigners ask of you, in order that all the peoples of the

837

2 CHRONICLES 838

earth may know your name and fear you, as do your people Israel, and
that they may know that your name has been invoked on this house
that I have built.
34 "If your people go out to battle against their enemies, by whatever
way you shall send them, and they pray to you toward this city that
you have chosen and the house that I have built for your name, 35 then
hear from heaven their prayer and their plea, and maintain their cause.
36 "If they sin against you — for there is no one who does not sin —
and you are angry with them and give them to an enemy, so that they
are carried away captive to a land far or near; 37 then if they come to
their senses in the land to which they have been taken captive, and
repent, and plead with you in the land of their captivity, saying, 'We
have sinned, and have done wrong; we have acted wickedly'; 38 if they
repent with all their heart and soul in the land of their captivity, to
which they were taken captive, and pray toward their land, which you
gave to their ancestors, the city that you have chosen, and the house
that I have built for your name, 39 then hear from heaven your
dwelling place their prayer and their pleas, maintain their cause and
forgive your people who have sinned against you. 40 Now, O my God,
let your eyes be open and your ears attentive to prayer from this place.
41 "Now rise up, O LORD God, and go to your resting place,
you and the ark of your might.
Let your priests, O LORD God, be clothed with salvation,
and let your faithful rejoice in your goodness.
42 O LORD God, do not reject your anointed one.
Remember your steadfast love for your servant David."
[2 Chronicles 7]
Divine consecration, national thanksgiving, and a warning
1 When Solomon had ended his prayer, fire came down from heaven
and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices; and the glory of
the LORD filled the temple. 2 The priests could not enter the house of
the LORD, because the glory of the LORD filled the LORD's house. 3 When
all the people of Israel saw the fire come down and the glory of the

838

2 CHRONICLES 839

LORD on the temple, they bowed down on the pavement with their
faces to the ground, and worshiped and gave thanks to the LORD,
saying,
"For he is good,
for his steadfast love endures forever."
4 Then the king and all the people offered sacrifice before the LORD. 5
King Solomon offered as a sacrifice twenty-two thousand oxen and
one hundred twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the people
dedicated the house of God. 6 The priests stood at their posts; the
Levites also, with the instruments for music to the LORD that King David
had made for giving thanks to the LORD — for his steadfast love
endures forever — whenever David offered praises by their ministry.
Opposite them the priests sounded trumpets; and all Israel stood.
7 Solomon consecrated the middle of the court that was in front of the
house of the LORD; for there he offered the burnt offerings and the fat
of the offerings of well-being because the bronze altar Solomon had
made could not hold the burnt offering and the grain offering and the
fat parts.
8 At that time Solomon held the festival for seven days, and all Israel
with him, a very great congregation, from Lebo-hamath to the Wadi of
Egypt. 9 On the eighth day they held a solemn assembly; for they had
observed the dedication of the altar seven days and the festival seven
days. 10 On the twenty-third day of the seventh month he sent the
people away to their homes, joyful and in good spirits because of the
goodness that the LORD had shown to David and to Solomon and to his
people Israel.
11 Thus Solomon finished the house of the LORD and the king's house;
all that Solomon had planned to do in the house of the LORD and in his
own house he successfully accomplished.

839

2 CHRONICLES 840

12 Then the LORD appeared to Solomon in the night and said to him: "I
have heard your prayer, and have chosen this place for myself as a
house of sacrifice. 13 When I shut up the heavens so that there is no
rain, or command the locust to devour the land, or send pestilence
among my people, 14 if my people who are called by my name humble
themselves, pray, seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways, then I
will hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin and heal their land. 15
Now my eyes will be open and my ears attentive to the prayer that is
made in this place. 16 For now I have chosen and consecrated this
house so that my name may be there forever; my eyes and my heart
will be there for all time. 17 As for you, if you walk before me, as your
father David walked, doing according to all that I have commanded
you and keeping my statutes and my ordinances, 18 then I will establish
your royal throne, as I made covenant with your father David saying,
'You shall never lack a successor to rule over Israel.'
19 "But if you turn aside and forsake my statutes and my
commandments that I have set before you, and go and serve other
gods and worship them, 20 then I will pluck you up from the land that I
have given you; and this house, which I have consecrated for my name,
I will cast out of my sight, and will make it a proverb and a byword
among all peoples. 21 And regarding this house, now exalted, everyone
passing by will be astonished, and say, 'Why has the LORD done such a
thing to this land and to this house?' 22 Then they will say, 'Because
they abandoned the LORD the God of their ancestors who brought
them out of the land of Egypt, and they adopted other gods, and
worshiped them and served them; therefore he has brought all this
calamity upon them.'"
[2 Chronicles 8]
Solomon the successful king
1 At the end of twenty years, during which Solomon had built the
house of the LORD and his own house, 2 Solomon rebuilt the cities that
Huram had given to him, and settled the people of Israel in them.

840

2 CHRONICLES 841

3 Solomon went to Hamath-zobah, and captured it. 4 He built Tadmor
in the wilderness and all the storage towns that he built in Hamath. 5
He also built Upper Beth-horon and Lower Beth-horon, fortified cities,
with walls, gates, and bars, 6 and Baalath, as well as all Solomon's
storage towns, and all the towns for his chariots, the towns for his
cavalry, and whatever Solomon desired to build, in Jerusalem, in
Lebanon, and in all the land of his dominion. 7 All the people who
were left of the Hittites, the Amorites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and
the Jebusites, who were not of Israel, 8 from their descendants who
were still left in the land, whom the people of Israel had not destroyed
— these Solomon conscripted for forced labor, as is still the case today.
9 But of the people of Israel Solomon made no slaves for his work; they
were soldiers, and his officers, the commanders of his chariotry and
cavalry. 10 These were the chief officers of King Solomon, two hundred
fifty of them, who exercised authority over the people.
11 Solomon brought Pharaoh's daughter from the city of David to the
house that he had built for her, for he said, "My wife shall not live in
the house of King David of Israel, for the places to which the ark of the
LORD has come are holy."
12 Then Solomon offered up burnt offerings to the LORD on the altar of
the LORD that he had built in front of the vestibule, 13 as the duty of
each day required, offering according to the commandment of Moses
for the sabbaths, the new moons, and the three annual festivals — the
festival of unleavened bread, the festival of weeks, and the festival of
booths. 14 According to the ordinance of his father David, he
appointed the divisions of the priests for their service, and the Levites
for their offices of praise and ministry alongside the priests as the duty
of each day required, and the gatekeepers in their divisions for the
several gates; for so David the man of God had commanded. 15 They
did not turn away from what the king had commanded the priests and
Levites regarding anything at all, or regarding the treasuries.
16 Thus all the work of Solomon was accomplished from the day the
foundation of the house of the LORD was laid until the house of the
LORD was finished completely.

841

2 CHRONICLES 842

17 Then Solomon went to Ezion-geber and Eloth on the shore of the
sea, in the land of Edom. 18 Huram sent him, in the care of his servants,
ships and servants familiar with the sea. They went to Ophir, together
with the servants of Solomon, and imported from there four hundred
fifty talents of gold and brought it to King Solomon.
[2 Chronicles 9]
Solomon in all of his glory
1 When the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came
to Jerusalem to test him with hard questions, having a very great
retinue and camels bearing spices and very much gold and precious
stones. When she came to Solomon, she discussed with him all that was
on her mind. 2 Solomon answered all her questions; there was nothing
hidden from Solomon that he could not explain to her. 3 When the
queen of Sheba had observed the wisdom of Solomon, the house that
he had built, 4 the food of his table, the seating of his officials, and the
attendance of his servants, and their clothing, his valets, and their
clothing, and his burnt offerings that he offered at the house of the
LORD, there was no more spirit left in her.
5 So she said to the king, "The report was true that I heard in my own
land of your accomplishments and of your wisdom, 6 but I did not
believe the reports until I came and my own eyes saw it. Not even half
of the greatness of your wisdom had been told to me; you far surpass
the report that I had heard. 7 Happy are your people! Happy are these
your servants, who continually attend you and hear your wisdom! 8
Blessed be the LORD your God, who has delighted in you and set you on
his throne as king for the LORD your God. Because your God loved Israel
and would establish them forever, he has made you king over them,
that you may execute justice and righteousness." 9 Then she gave the
king one hundred twenty talents of gold, a very great quantity of
spices, and precious stones: there were no spices such as those that the
queen of Sheba gave to King Solomon.
10 Moreover the servants of Huram and the servants of Solomon who
brought gold from Ophir brought algum wood and precious stones. 11
From the algum wood, the king made steps for the house of the LORD

842

2 CHRONICLES 843

and for the king's house, lyres also and harps for the singers; there
never was seen the like of them before in the land of Judah.
12 Meanwhile King Solomon granted the queen of Sheba every desire
that she expressed, well beyond what she had brought to the king.
Then she returned to her own land, with her servants.
13 The weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six
hundred sixty-six talents of gold, 14 besides that which the traders and
merchants brought; and all the kings of Arabia and the governors of
the land brought gold and silver to Solomon. 15 King Solomon made
two hundred large shields of beaten gold; six hundred shekels of
beaten gold went into each large shield. 16 He made three hundred
shields of beaten gold; three hundred shekels of gold went into each
shield; and the king put them in the House of the Forest of Lebanon. 17
The king also made a great ivory throne, and overlaid it with pure
gold. 18 The throne had six steps and a footstool of gold, which were
attached to the throne, and on each side of the seat were arm rests
and two lions standing beside the arm rests, 19 while twelve lions were
standing, one on each end of a step on the six steps. The like of it was
never made in any kingdom. 20 All King Solomon's drinking vessels
were of gold, and all the vessels of the House of the Forest of Lebanon
were of pure gold; silver was not considered as anything in the days of
Solomon. 21 For the king's ships went to Tarshish with the servants of
Huram; once every three years the ships of Tarshish used to come
bringing gold, silver, ivory, apes, and peacocks.
22 Thus King Solomon excelled all the kings of the earth in riches and
in wisdom. 23 All the kings of the earth sought the presence of
Solomon to hear his wisdom, which God had put into his mind. 24
Every one of them brought a present, objects of silver and gold,
garments, weaponry, spices, horses, and mules, so much year by year.
25 Solomon had four thousand stalls for horses and chariots, and
twelve thousand horses, which he stationed in the chariot cities and
with the king in Jerusalem. 26 He ruled over all the kings from the
Euphrates to the land of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt. 27
The king made silver as common in Jerusalem as stone, and cedar as

843

2 CHRONICLES 844

plentiful as the sycamore of the Shephelah. 28 Horses were imported
for Solomon from Egypt and from all lands.
29 Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, from first to last, are they not
written in the history of the prophet Nathan, and in the prophecy of
Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the visions of the seer Iddo concerning
Jeroboam son of Nebat? 30 Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all
Israel forty years. 31 Solomon slept with his ancestors and was buried in
the city of his father David; and his son Rehoboam succeeded him.
[2 Chronicles 10]
The difficult beginning to Rehoboam's reign (928-911 BCE)
1 Rehoboam went to Shechem, for all Israel had come to Shechem to
make him king. 2 When Jeroboam son of Nebat heard of it (for he was
in Egypt, where he had fled from King Solomon), then Jeroboam
returned from Egypt. 3 They sent and called him; and Jeroboam and all
Israel came and said to Rehoboam, 4 "Your father made our yoke
heavy. Now therefore lighten the hard service of your father and his
heavy yoke that he placed on us, and we will serve you." 5 He said to
them, "Come to me again in three days." So the people went away.
6 Then King Rehoboam took counsel with the older men who had
attended his father Solomon while he was still alive, saying, "How do
you advise me to answer this people?" 7 They answered him, "If you
will be kind to this people and please them, and speak good words to
them, then they will be your servants forever." 8 But he rejected the
advice that the older men gave him, and consulted the young men
who had grown up with him and now attended him. 9 He said to
them, "What do you advise that we answer this people who have said
to me, 'Lighten the yoke that your father put on us'?" 10 The young
men who had grown up with him said to him, "Thus should you speak
to the people who said to you, 'Your father made our yoke heavy, but
you must lighten it for us'; tell them, 'My little finger is thicker than my
father's loins. 11 Now, whereas my father laid on you a heavy yoke, I
will add to your yoke. My father disciplined you with whips, but I will
discipline you with scorpions.'"

844

2 CHRONICLES 845

12 So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day, as
the king had said, "Come to me again the third day." 13 The king
answered them harshly. King Rehoboam rejected the advice of the
older men; 14 he spoke to them in accordance with the advice of the
young men, "My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add to it; my
father disciplined you with whips, but I will discipline you with
scorpions." 15 So the king did not listen to the people, because it was a
turn of affairs brought about by God so that the LORD might fulfill his
word, which he had spoken by Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam son of
Nebat.
16 When all Israel saw that the king would not listen to them, the
people answered the king,
"What share do we have in David?
We have no inheritance in the son of Jesse.
Each of you to your tents, O Israel!
Look now to your own house, O David."
So all Israel departed to their tents. 17 But Rehoboam reigned over the
people of Israel who were living in the cities of Judah. 18 When King
Rehoboam sent Hadoram, who was taskmaster over the forced labor,
the people of Israel stoned him to death. King Rehoboam hurriedly
mounted his chariot to flee to Jerusalem. 19 So Israel has been in
rebellion against the house of David to this day.
[2 Chronicles 11]
Rehoboam's recovery
1 When Rehoboam came to Jerusalem, he assembled one hundred
eighty thousand chosen troops of the house of Judah and Benjamin to
fight against Israel, to restore the kingdom to Rehoboam. 2 But the
word of the LORD came to Shemaiah the man of God: 3 Say to King
Rehoboam of Judah, son of Solomon, and to all Israel in Judah and
Benjamin, 4 "Thus says the LORD: You shall not go up or fight against
your kindred. Let everyone return home, for this thing is from me." So
they heeded the word of the LORD and turned back from the
expedition against Jeroboam.

845

2 CHRONICLES 846

5 Rehoboam resided in Jerusalem, and he built cities for defense in
Judah. 6 He built up Bethlehem, Etam, Tekoa, 7 Beth-zur, Soco,
Adullam, 8 Gath, Mareshah, Ziph, 9 Adoraim, Lachish, Azekah, 10
Zorah, Aijalon, and Hebron, fortified cities that are in Judah and in
Benjamin. 11 He made the fortresses strong, and put commanders in
them, and stores of food, oil, and wine. 12 He also put large shields and
spears in all the cities, and made them very strong. So he held Judah
and Benjamin.
13 The priests and the Levites who were in all Israel presented
themselves to him from all their territories. 14 The Levites had left their
common lands and their holdings and had come to Judah and
Jerusalem, because Jeroboam and his sons had prevented them from
serving as priests of the LORD, 15 and had appointed his own priests for
the high places, and for the goat-demons, and for the calves that he
had made. 16 Those who had set their hearts to seek the LORD God of
Israel came after them from all the tribes of Israel to Jerusalem to
sacrifice to the LORD, the God of their ancestors. 17 They strengthened
the kingdom of Judah, and for three years they made Rehoboam son
of Solomon secure, for they walked for three years in the way of David
and Solomon.
18 Rehoboam took as his wife Mahalath daughter of Jerimoth son of
David, and of Abihail daughter of Eliab son of Jesse. 19 She bore him
sons: Jeush, Shemariah, and Zaham. 20 After her he took Maacah
daughter of Absalom, who bore him Abijah, Attai, Ziza, and Shelomith.
21 Rehoboam loved Maacah daughter of Absalom more than all his
other wives and concubines (he took eighteen wives and sixty
concubines, and became the father of twenty-eight sons and sixty
daughters). 22 Rehoboam appointed Abijah son of Maacah as chief
prince among his brothers, for he intended to make him king. 23 He
dealt wisely, and distributed some of his sons through all the districts
of Judah and Benjamin, in all the fortified cities; he gave them
abundant provisions, and found many wives for them.

846

2 CHRONICLES 847

[2 Chronicles 12]
National decline and a reprieve
1 When the rule of Rehoboam was established and he grew strong, he
abandoned the law of the LORD, he and all Israel with him. 2 In the fifth
year of King Rehoboam, because they had been unfaithful to the LORD,
King Shishak of Egypt came up against Jerusalem 3 with twelve
hundred chariots and sixty thousand cavalry. A countless army came
with him from Egypt — Libyans, Sukkiim, and Ethiopians. 4 He took the
fortified cities of Judah and came as far as Jerusalem. 5 Then the
prophet Shemaiah came to Rehoboam and to the officers of Judah,
who had gathered at Jerusalem because of Shishak, and said to them,
"Thus says the LORD: You abandoned me, so I have abandoned you to
the hand of Shishak." 6 Then the officers of Israel and the king
humbled themselves and said, "The LORD is in the right." 7 When the
LORD saw that they humbled themselves, the word of the LORD came to
Shemaiah, saying: "They have humbled themselves; I will not destroy
them, but I will grant them some deliverance, and my wrath shall not
be poured out on Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak. 8 Nevertheless
they shall be his servants, so that they may know the difference
between serving me and serving the kingdoms of other lands."
9 So King Shishak of Egypt came up against Jerusalem; he took away
the treasures of the house of the LORD and the treasures of the king's
house; he took everything. He also took away the shields of gold that
Solomon had made; 10 but King Rehoboam made in place of them
shields of bronze, and committed them to the hands of the officers of
the guard, who kept the door of the king's house. 11 Whenever the
king went into the house of the LORD, the guard would come along
bearing them, and would then bring them back to the guardroom. 12
Because he humbled himself the wrath of the LORD turned from him, so
as not to destroy them completely; moreover, conditions were good in
Judah.
13 So King Rehoboam established himself in Jerusalem and reigned.
Rehoboam was forty-one years old when he began to reign; he reigned
seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city that the LORD had chosen out of
all the tribes of Israel to put his name there. His mother's name was

847

2 CHRONICLES 848

Naamah the Ammonite. 14 He did evil, for he did not set his heart to
seek the LORD.
15 Now the acts of Rehoboam, from first to last, are they not written in
the records of the prophet Shemaiah and of the seer Iddo, recorded by
genealogy? There were continual wars between Rehoboam and
Jeroboam. 16 Rehoboam slept with his ancestors and was buried in the
city of David; and his son Abijah succeeded him.
[2 Chronicles 13]
The successful reign of Abijah (911-908 BCE)
1 In the eighteenth year of King Jeroboam, Abijah began to reign over
Judah. 2 He reigned for three years in Jerusalem. His mother's name
was Micaiah daughter of Uriel of Gibeah.
Now there was war between Abijah and Jeroboam. 3 Abijah engaged
in battle, having an army of valiant warriors, four hundred thousand
picked men; and Jeroboam drew up his line of battle against him with
eight hundred thousand picked mighty warriors. 4 Then Abijah stood
on the slope of Mount Zemaraim that is in the hill country of Ephraim,
and said, "Listen to me, Jeroboam and all Israel! 5 Do you not know
that the LORD God of Israel gave the kingship over Israel forever to
David and his sons by a covenant of salt? 6 Yet Jeroboam son of Nebat,
a servant of Solomon son of David, rose up and rebelled against his
lord; 7 and certain worthless scoundrels gathered around him and
defied Rehoboam son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was young and
irresolute and could not withstand them.
8 "And now you think that you can withstand the kingdom of the LORD
in the hand of the sons of David, because you are a great multitude
and have with you the golden calves that Jeroboam made as gods for
you. 9 Have you not driven out the priests of the LORD, the descendants
of Aaron, and the Levites, and made priests for yourselves like the
peoples of other lands? Whoever comes to be consecrated with a
young bull or seven rams becomes a priest of what are no gods. 10 But
as for us, the LORD is our God, and we have not abandoned him. We
have priests ministering to the LORD who are descendants of Aaron,

848

2 CHRONICLES 849

and Levites for their service. 11 They offer to the LORD every morning
and every evening burnt offerings and fragrant incense, set out the
rows of bread on the table of pure gold, and care for the golden
lampstand so that its lamps may burn every evening; for we keep the
charge of the LORD our God, but you have abandoned him. 12 See, God
is with us at our head, and his priests have their battle trumpets to
sound the call to battle against you. O Israelites, do not fight against
the LORD, the God of your ancestors; for you cannot succeed."
13 Jeroboam had sent an ambush around to come on them from
behind; thus his troops were in front of Judah, and the ambush was
behind them. 14 When Judah turned, the battle was in front of them
and behind them. They cried out to the LORD, and the priests blew the
trumpets. 15 Then the people of Judah raised the battle shout. And
when the people of Judah shouted, God defeated Jeroboam and all
Israel before Abijah and Judah. 16 The Israelites fled before Judah, and
God gave them into their hands. 17 Abijah and his army defeated them
with great slaughter; five hundred thousand picked men of Israel fell
slain. 18 Thus the Israelites were subdued at that time, and the people
of Judah prevailed, because they relied on the LORD, the God of their
ancestors. 19 Abijah pursued Jeroboam, and took cities from him:
Bethel with its villages and Jeshanah with its villages and Ephron with
its villages. 20 Jeroboam did not recover his power in the days of
Abijah; the LORD struck him down, and he died. 21 But Abijah grew
strong. He took fourteen wives, and became the father of twenty-two
sons and sixteen daughters. 22 The rest of the acts of Abijah, his
behavior and his deeds, are written in the story of the prophet Iddo.
[2 Chronicles 14]
Reforms, victory, and expansion: the first period of Asa's reign (908867 BCE)
1 So Abijah slept with his ancestors, and they buried him in the city of
David. His son Asa succeeded him. In his days the land had rest for ten
years. 2 Asa did what was good and right in the sight of the LORD his
God. 3 He took away the foreign altars and the high places, broke
down the pillars, hewed down the sacred poles, 4 and commanded
Judah to seek the LORD, the God of their ancestors, and to keep the law

849

2 CHRONICLES 850

and the commandment. 5 He also removed from all the cities of Judah
the high places and the incense altars. And the kingdom had rest under
him. 6 He built fortified cities in Judah while the land had rest. He had
no war in those years, for the LORD gave him peace. 7 He said to Judah,
"Let us build these cities, and surround them with walls and towers,
gates and bars; the land is still ours because we have sought the LORD
our God; we have sought him, and he has given us peace on every
side." So they built and prospered. 8 Asa had an army of three
hundred thousand from Judah, armed with large shields and spears,
and two hundred eighty thousand troops from Benjamin who carried
shields and drew bows; all these were mighty warriors.
9 Zerah the Ethiopian came out against them with an army of a million
men and three hundred chariots, and came as far as Mareshah. 10 Asa
went out to meet him, and they drew up their lines of battle in the
valley of Zephathah at Mareshah. 11 Asa cried to the LORD his God, "O
LORD, there is no difference for you between helping the mighty and
the weak. Help us, O LORD our God, for we rely on you, and in your
name we have come against this multitude. O LORD, you are our God;
let no mortal prevail against you." 12 So the LORD defeated the
Ethiopians before Asa and before Judah, and the Ethiopians fled. 13
Asa and the army with him pursued them as far as Gerar, and the
Ethiopians fell until no one remained alive; for they were broken
before the LORD and his army. The people of Judah carried away a
great quantity of booty. 14 They defeated all the cities around Gerar,
for the fear of the LORD was on them. They plundered all the cities; for
there was much plunder in them. 15 They also attacked the tents of
those who had livestock, and carried away sheep and goats in
abundance, and camels. Then they returned to Jerusalem.
[2 Chronicles 15]
1 The spirit of God came upon Azariah son of Oded. 2 He went out to
meet Asa and said to him, "Hear me, Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin:
The LORD is with you, while you are with him. If you seek him, he will
be found by you, but if you abandon him, he will abandon you. 3 For a
long time Israel was without the true God, and without a teaching
priest, and without law; 4 but when in their distress they turned to the

850

2 CHRONICLES 851

LORD, the God of Israel, and sought him, he was found by them. 5 In
those times it was not safe for anyone to go or come, for great
disturbances afflicted all the inhabitants of the lands. 6 They were
broken in pieces, nation against nation and city against city, for God
troubled them with every sort of distress. 7 But you, take courage! Do
not let your hands be weak, for your work shall be rewarded."
8 When Asa heard these words, the prophecy of Azariah son of Oded,
he took courage, and put away the abominable idols from all the land
of Judah and Benjamin and from the towns that he had taken in the
hill country of Ephraim. He repaired the altar of the LORD that was in
front of the vestibule of the house of the LORD. 9 He gathered all Judah
and Benjamin, and those from Ephraim, Manasseh, and Simeon who
were residing as aliens with them, for great numbers had deserted to
him from Israel when they saw that the LORD his God was with him. 10
They were gathered at Jerusalem in the third month of the fifteenth
year of the reign of Asa. 11 They sacrificed to the LORD on that day,
from the booty that they had brought, seven hundred oxen and seven
thousand sheep. 12 They entered into a covenant to seek the LORD, the
God of their ancestors, with all their heart and with all their soul. 13
Whoever would not seek the LORD, the God of Israel, should be put to
death, whether young or old, man or woman. 14 They took an oath to
the LORD with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with trumpets, and
with horns. 15 All Judah rejoiced over the oath; for they had sworn
with all their heart, and had sought him with their whole desire, and
he was found by them, and the LORD gave them rest all around.
16 King Asa even removed his mother Maacah from being queen
mother because she had made an abominable image for Asherah. Asa
cut down her image, crushed it, and burned it at the Wadi Kidron. 17
But the high places were not taken out of Israel. Nevertheless the heart
of Asa was true all his days. 18 He brought into the house of God the
votive gifts of his father and his own votive gifts — silver, gold, and
utensils. 19 And there was no more war until the thirty-fifth year of the
reign of Asa.

851

2 CHRONICLES 852

[2 Chronicles 16]
Asa's decline
1 In the thirty-sixth year of the reign of Asa, King Baasha of Israel went
up against Judah, and built Ramah, to prevent anyone from going out
or coming into the territory of King Asa of Judah. 2 Then Asa took
silver and gold from the treasures of the house of the LORD and the
king's house, and sent them to King Ben-hadad of Aram, who resided
in Damascus, saying, 3 "Let there be an alliance between me and you,
like that between my father and your father; I am sending to you silver
and gold; go, break your alliance with King Baasha of Israel, so that he
may withdraw from me." 4 Ben-hadad listened to King Asa, and sent
the commanders of his armies against the cities of Israel. They
conquered Ijon, Dan, Abel-maim, and all the store-cities of Naphtali. 5
When Baasha heard of it, he stopped building Ramah, and let his work
cease. 6 Then King Asa brought all Judah, and they carried away the
stones of Ramah and its timber, with which Baasha had been building,
and with them he built up Geba and Mizpah.
7 At that time the seer Hanani came to King Asa of Judah, and said to
him, "Because you relied on the king of Aram, and did not rely on the
LORD your God, the army of the king of Aram has escaped you. 8 Were
not the Ethiopians and the Libyans a huge army with exceedingly many
chariots and cavalry? Yet because you relied on the LORD, he gave them
into your hand. 9 For the eyes of the LORD range throughout the entire
earth, to strengthen those whose heart is true to him. You have done
foolishly in this; for from now on you will have wars." 10 Then Asa was
angry with the seer, and put him in the stocks, in prison, for he was in
a rage with him because of this. And Asa inflicted cruelties on some of
the people at the same time.
11 The acts of Asa, from first to last, are written in the Book of the
Kings of Judah and Israel. 12 In the thirty-ninth year of his reign Asa
was diseased in his feet, and his disease became severe; yet even in his
disease he did not seek the LORD, but sought help from physicians. 13
Then Asa slept with his ancestors, dying in the forty-first year of his
reign. 14 They buried him in the tomb that he had hewn out for
himself in the city of David. They laid him on a bier that had been filled

852

2 CHRONICLES 853

with various kinds of spices prepared by the perfumer's art; and they
made a very great fire in his honor.
[2 Chronicles 17]
The promising beginning to the reign of Jehoshaphat (870-846 BCE)
1 His son Jehoshaphat succeeded him, and strengthened himself
against Israel. 2 He placed forces in all the fortified cities of Judah, and
set garrisons in the land of Judah, and in the cities of Ephraim that his
father Asa had taken. 3 The LORD was with Jehoshaphat, because he
walked in the earlier ways of his father; he did not seek the Baals, 4
but sought the God of his father and walked in his commandments,
and not according to the ways of Israel. 5 Therefore the LORD
established the kingdom in his hand. All Judah brought tribute to
Jehoshaphat, and he had great riches and honor. 6 His heart was
courageous in the ways of the LORD; and furthermore he removed the
high places and the sacred poles from Judah.
7 In the third year of his reign he sent his officials, Ben-hail, Obadiah,
Zechariah, Nethanel, and Micaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah. 8
With them were the Levites, Shemaiah, Nethaniah, Zebadiah, Asahel,
Shemiramoth, Jehonathan, Adonijah, Tobijah, and Tob-adonijah; and
with these Levites, the priests Elishama and Jehoram. 9 They taught in
Judah, having the book of the law of the LORD with them; they went
around through all the cities of Judah and taught among the people.
10 The fear of the LORD fell on all the kingdoms of the lands around
Judah, and they did not make war against Jehoshaphat. 11 Some of the
Philistines brought Jehoshaphat presents, and silver for tribute; and the
Arabs also brought him seven thousand seven hundred rams and seven
thousand seven hundred male goats. 12 Jehoshaphat grew steadily
greater. He built fortresses and storage cities in Judah. 13 He carried
out great works in the cities of Judah. He had soldiers, mighty warriors,
in Jerusalem. 14 This was the muster of them by ancestral houses: Of
Judah, the commanders of the thousands: Adnah the commander, with
three hundred thousand mighty warriors, 15 and next to him
Jehohanan the commander, with two hundred eighty thousand, 16 and
next to him Amasiah son of Zichri, a volunteer for the service of the

853

2 CHRONICLES 854

LORD, with two hundred thousand mighty warriors. 17 Of Benjamin:
Eliada, a mighty warrior, with two hundred thousand armed with bow
and shield, 18 and next to him Jehozabad with one hundred eighty
thousand armed for war. 19 These were in the service of the king,
besides those whom the king had placed in the fortified cities
throughout all Judah.
[2 Chronicles 18]
Jehoshaphat's first misstep
1 Now Jehoshaphat had great riches and honor; and he made a
marriage alliance with Ahab. 2 After some years he went down to
Ahab in Samaria. Ahab slaughtered an abundance of sheep and oxen
for him and for the people who were with him, and induced him to go
up against Ramoth-gilead. 3 King Ahab of Israel said to King
Jehoshaphat of Judah, "Will you go with me to Ramoth-gilead?" He
answered him, "I am with you, my people are your people. We will be
with you in the war."
4 But Jehoshaphat also said to the king of Israel, "Inquire first for the
word of the LORD." 5 Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets
together, four hundred of them, and said to them, "Shall we go to
battle against Ramoth-gilead, or shall I refrain?" They said, "Go up; for
God will give it into the hand of the king." 6 But Jehoshaphat said, "Is
there no other prophet of the LORD here of whom we may inquire?" 7
The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, "There is still one other by
whom we may inquire of the LORD, Micaiah son of Imlah; but I hate
him, for he never prophesies anything favorable about me, but only
disaster." Jehoshaphat said, "Let the king not say such a thing." 8 Then
the king of Israel summoned an officer and said, "Bring quickly Micaiah
son of Imlah." 9 Now the king of Israel and King Jehoshaphat of Judah
were sitting on their thrones, arrayed in their robes; and they were
sitting at the threshing floor at the entrance of the gate of Samaria;
and all the prophets were prophesying before them. 10 Zedekiah son
of Chenaanah made for himself horns of iron, and he said, "Thus says
the LORD: With these you shall gore the Arameans until they are
destroyed." 11 All the prophets were prophesying the same and saying,

854

2 CHRONICLES 855

"Go up to Ramoth-gilead and triumph; the LORD will give it into the
hand of the king."
12 The messenger who had gone to summon Micaiah said to him,
"Look, the words of the prophets with one accord are favorable to the
king; let your word be like the word of one of them, and speak
favorably." 13 But Micaiah said, "As the LORD lives, whatever my God
says, that I will speak."
14 When he had come to the king, the king said to him, "Micaiah, shall
we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I refrain?" He answered,
"Go up and triumph; they will be given into your hand." 15 But the
king said to him, "How many times must I make you swear to tell me
nothing but the truth in the name of the LORD?" 16 Then Micaiah said,
"I saw all Israel scattered on the mountains, like sheep without a
shepherd; and the LORD said, 'These have no master; let each one go
home in peace.'" 17 The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, "Did I not
tell you that he would not prophesy anything favorable about me, but
only disaster?"
18 Then Micaiah said, "Therefore hear the word of the LORD: I saw the
LORD sitting on his throne, with all the host of heaven standing to the
right and to the left of him. 19 And the LORD said, 'Who will entice King
Ahab of Israel, so that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead?' Then
one said one thing, and another said another, 20 until a spirit came
forward and stood before the LORD, saying, 'I will entice him.' The LORD
asked him, 'How?' 21 He replied, 'I will go out and be a lying spirit in
the mouth of all his prophets.' Then the LORD said, 'You are to entice
him, and you shall succeed; go out and do it.' 22 So you see, the LORD
has put a lying spirit in the mouth of these your prophets; the LORD has
decreed disaster for you."
23 Then Zedekiah son of Chenaanah came up to Micaiah, slapped him
on the cheek, and said, "Which way did the spirit of the LORD pass from
me to speak to you?" 24 Micaiah replied, "You will find out on that
day when you go in to hide in an inner chamber." 25 The king of Israel
then ordered, "Take Micaiah, and return him to Amon the governor of
the city and to Joash the king's son; 26 and say, 'Thus says the king: Put

855

2 CHRONICLES 856

this fellow in prison, and feed him on reduced rations of bread and
water until I return in peace.'" 27 Micaiah said, "If you return in peace,
the LORD has not spoken by me." And he said, "Hear, you peoples, all
of you!"
28 So the king of Israel and King Jehoshaphat of Judah went up to
Ramoth-gilead. 29 The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, "I will
disguise myself and go into battle, but you wear your robes." So the
king of Israel disguised himself, and they went into battle. 30 Now the
king of Aram had commanded the captains of his chariots, "Fight with
no one small or great, but only with the king of Israel." 31 When the
captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, they said, "It is the king of
Israel." So they turned to fight against him; and Jehoshaphat cried out,
and the LORD helped him. God drew them away from him, 32 for when
the captains of the chariots saw that it was not the king of Israel, they
turned back from pursuing him. 33 But a certain man drew his bow and
unknowingly struck the king of Israel between the scale armor and the
breastplate; so he said to the driver of his chariot, "Turn around, and
carry me out of the battle, for I am wounded." 34 The battle grew hot
that day, and the king of Israel propped himself up in his chariot facing
the Arameans until evening; then at sunset he died.
[2 Chronicles 19]
1 King Jehoshaphat of Judah returned in safety to his house in
Jerusalem. 2 Jehu son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him and
said to King Jehoshaphat, "Should you help the wicked and love those
who hate the LORD? Because of this, wrath has gone out against you
from the LORD. 3 Nevertheless, some good is found in you, for you
destroyed the sacred poles out of the land, and have set your heart to
seek God."
Recovery and further reforms
4 Jehoshaphat resided at Jerusalem; then he went out again among
the people, from Beer-sheba to the hill country of Ephraim, and
brought them back to the LORD, the God of their ancestors. 5 He
appointed judges in the land in all the fortified cities of Judah, city by

856

2 CHRONICLES 857

city, 6 and said to the judges, "Consider what you are doing, for you
judge not on behalf of human beings but on the LORD's behalf; he is
with you in giving judgment. 7 Now, let the fear of the LORD be upon
you; take care what you do, for there is no perversion of justice with
the LORD our God, or partiality, or taking of bribes."
8 Moreover in Jerusalem Jehoshaphat appointed certain Levites and
priests and heads of families of Israel, to give judgment for the LORD
and to decide disputed cases. They had their seat at Jerusalem. 9 He
charged them: "This is how you shall act: in the fear of the LORD, in
faithfulness, and with your whole heart; 10 whenever a case comes to
you from your kindred who live in their cities, concerning bloodshed,
law or commandment, statutes or ordinances, then you shall instruct
them, so that they may not incur guilt before the LORD and wrath may
not come on you and your kindred. Do so, and you will not incur guilt.
11 See, Amariah the chief priest is over you in all matters of the LORD;
and Zebadiah son of Ishmael, the governor of the house of Judah, in all
the king's matters; and the Levites will serve you as officers. Deal
courageously, and may the LORD be with the good!"
[2 Chronicles 20]
Dramatic triumph in sacral war
1 After this the Moabites and Ammonites, and with them some of the
Meunites, came against Jehoshaphat for battle. 2 Messengers came and
told Jehoshaphat, "A great multitude is coming against you from
Edom, from beyond the sea; already they are at Hazazon-tamar" (that
is, En-gedi). 3 Jehoshaphat was afraid; he set himself to seek the LORD,
and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah. 4 Judah assembled to seek
help from the LORD; from all the towns of Judah they came to seek the
LORD.
5 Jehoshaphat stood in the assembly of Judah and Jerusalem, in the
house of the LORD, before the new court, 6 and said, "O LORD, God of
our ancestors, are you not God in heaven? Do you not rule over all the
kingdoms of the nations? In your hand are power and might, so that
no one is able to withstand you. 7 Did you not, O our God, drive out
the inhabitants of this land before your people Israel, and give it

857

2 CHRONICLES 858

forever to the descendants of your friend Abraham? 8 They have lived
in it, and in it have built you a sanctuary for your name, saying, 9 'If
disaster comes upon us, the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine,
we will stand before this house, and before you, for your name is in
this house, and cry to you in our distress, and you will hear and save.'
10 See now, the people of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, whom you
would not let Israel invade when they came from the land of Egypt,
and whom they avoided and did not destroy — 11 they reward us by
coming to drive us out of your possession that you have given us to
inherit. 12 O our God, will you not execute judgment upon them? For
we are powerless against this great multitude that is coming against
us. We do not know what to do, but our eyes are on you."
13 Meanwhile all Judah stood before the LORD, with their little ones,
their wives, and their children. 14 Then the spirit of the LORD came
upon Jahaziel son of Zechariah, son of Benaiah, son of Jeiel, son of
Mattaniah, a Levite of the sons of Asaph, in the middle of the
assembly. 15 He said, "Listen, all Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and King Jehoshaphat: Thus says the LORD to you: 'Do not fear or be
dismayed at this great multitude; for the battle is not yours but God's.
16 Tomorrow go down against them; they will come up by the ascent
of Ziz; you will find them at the end of the valley, before the
wilderness of Jeruel. 17 This battle is not for you to fight; take your
position, stand still, and see the victory of the LORD on your behalf, O
Judah and Jerusalem.' Do not fear or be dismayed; tomorrow go out
against them, and the LORD will be with you."
18 Then Jehoshaphat bowed down with his face to the ground, and all
Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell down before the LORD,
worshiping the LORD. 19 And the Levites, of the Kohathites and the
Korahites, stood up to praise the LORD, the God of Israel, with a very
loud voice.
20 They rose early in the morning and went out into the wilderness of
Tekoa; and as they went out, Jehoshaphat stood and said, "Listen to
me, O Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem! Believe in the LORD your
God and you will be established; believe his prophets." 21 When he had
taken counsel with the people, he appointed those who were to sing

858

2 CHRONICLES 859

to the LORD and praise him in holy splendor, as they went before the
army, saying,
"Give thanks to the LORD,
for his steadfast love endures forever."
22 As they began to sing and praise, the LORD set an ambush against
the Ammonites, Moab, and Mount Seir, who had come against Judah,
so that they were routed. 23 For the Ammonites and Moab attacked
the inhabitants of Mount Seir, destroying them utterly; and when they
had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, they all helped to destroy
one another.
24 When Judah came to the watchtower of the wilderness, they looked
toward the multitude; they were corpses lying on the ground; no one
had escaped. 25 When Jehoshaphat and his people came to take the
booty from them, they found livestock in great numbers, goods,
clothing, and precious things, which they took for themselves until
they could carry no more. They spent three days taking the booty,
because of its abundance. 26 On the fourth day they assembled in the
Valley of Beracah, for there they blessed the LORD; therefore that place
has been called the Valley of Beracah to this day. 27 Then all the
people of Judah and Jerusalem, with Jehoshaphat at their head,
returned to Jerusalem with joy, for the LORD had enabled them to
rejoice over their enemies. 28 They came to Jerusalem, with harps and
lyres and trumpets, to the house of the LORD. 29 The fear of God came
on all the kingdoms of the countries when they heard that the LORD
had fought against the enemies of Israel. 30 And the realm of
Jehoshaphat was quiet, for his God gave him rest all around.
Jehoshaphat's second misstep
31 So Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah. He was thirty-five years old
when he began to reign; he reigned twenty-five years in Jerusalem. His
mother's name was Azubah daughter of Shilhi. 32 He walked in the
way of his father Asa and did not turn aside from it, doing what was
right in the sight of the LORD. 33 Yet the high places were not removed;
the people had not yet set their hearts upon the God of their
ancestors.

859

2 CHRONICLES 860

34 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, from first to last, are
written in the Annals of Jehu son of Hanani, which are recorded in the
Book of the Kings of Israel.
35 After this King Jehoshaphat of Judah joined with King Ahaziah of
Israel, who did wickedly. 36 He joined him in building ships to go to
Tarshish; they built the ships in Ezion-geber. 37 Then Eliezer son of
Dodavahu of Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying,
"Because you have joined with Ahaziah, the LORD will destroy what you
have made." And the ships were wrecked and were not able to go to
Tarshish.
[2 Chronicles 21]
Decline under Jehoram (851-843 BCE)
1 Jehoshaphat slept with his ancestors and was buried with his
ancestors in the city of David; his son Jehoram succeeded him. 2 He had
brothers, the sons of Jehoshaphat: Azariah, Jehiel, Zechariah, Azariah,
Michael, and Shephatiah; all these were the sons of King Jehoshaphat
of Judah. 3 Their father gave them many gifts, of silver, gold, and
valuable possessions, together with fortified cities in Judah; but he
gave the kingdom to Jehoram, because he was the firstborn. 4 When
Jehoram had ascended the throne of his father and was established, he
put all his brothers to the sword, and also some of the officials of
Israel. 5 Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he began to reign; he
reigned eight years in Jerusalem. 6 He walked in the way of the kings
of Israel, as the house of Ahab had done; for the daughter of Ahab was
his wife. He did what was evil in the sight of the LORD. 7 Yet the LORD
would not destroy the house of David because of the covenant that he
had made with David, and since he had promised to give a lamp to him
and to his descendants forever.
8 In his days Edom revolted against the rule of Judah and set up a king
of their own. 9 Then Jehoram crossed over with his commanders and
all his chariots. He set out by night and attacked the Edomites, who
had surrounded him and his chariot commanders. 10 So Edom has been
in revolt against the rule of Judah to this day. At that time Libnah also

860

2 CHRONICLES 861

revolted against his rule, because he had forsaken the LORD, the God of
his ancestors.
11 Moreover he made high places in the hill country of Judah, and led
the inhabitants of Jerusalem into unfaithfulness, and made Judah go
astray. 12 A letter came to him from the prophet Elijah, saying: "Thus
says the LORD, the God of your father David: Because you have not
walked in the ways of your father Jehoshaphat or in the ways of King
Asa of Judah, 13 but have walked in the way of the kings of Israel, and
have led Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem into unfaithfulness, as
the house of Ahab led Israel into unfaithfulness, and because you also
have killed your brothers, members of your father's house, who were
better than yourself, 14 see, the LORD will bring a great plague on your
people, your children, your wives, and all your possessions, 15 and you
yourself will have a severe sickness with a disease of your bowels, until
your bowels come out, day after day, because of the disease."
16 The LORD aroused against Jehoram the anger of the Philistines and
of the Arabs who are near the Ethiopians. 17 They came up against
Judah, invaded it, and carried away all the possessions they found that
belonged to the king's house, along with his sons and his wives, so that
no son was left to him except Jehoahaz, his youngest son.
18 After all this the LORD struck him in his bowels with an incurable
disease. 19 In course of time, at the end of two years, his bowels came
out because of the disease, and he died in great agony. His people
made no fire in his honor, like the fires made for his ancestors. 20 He
was thirty-two years old when he began to reign; he reigned eight
years in Jerusalem. He departed with no one's regret. They buried him
in the city of David, but not in the tombs of the kings.
[2 Chronicles 22]
The brief and ill-fated reign of Ahaziah (Jehoahaz; 843-842 BCE)
1 The inhabitants of Jerusalem made his youngest son Ahaziah king as
his successor; for the troops who came with the Arabs to the camp had
killed all the older sons. So Ahaziah son of Jehoram reigned as king of
Judah. 2 Ahaziah was forty-two years old when he began to reign; he

861

2 CHRONICLES 862

reigned one year in Jerusalem. His mother's name was Athaliah, a
granddaughter of Omri. 3 He also walked in the ways of the house of
Ahab, for his mother was his counselor in doing wickedly. 4 He did
what was evil in the sight of the LORD, as the house of Ahab had done;
for after the death of his father they were his counselors, to his ruin. 5
He even followed their advice, and went with Jehoram son of King
Ahab of Israel to make war against King Hazael of Aram at Ramothgilead. The Arameans wounded Joram, 6 and he returned to be healed
in Jezreel of the wounds that he had received at Ramah, when he
fought King Hazael of Aram. And Ahaziah son of King Jehoram of
Judah went down to see Joram son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he was
sick.
7 But it was ordained by God that the downfall of Ahaziah should
come about through his going to visit Joram. For when he came there
he went out with Jehoram to meet Jehu son of Nimshi, whom the LORD
had anointed to destroy the house of Ahab. 8 When Jehu was
executing judgment on the house of Ahab, he met the officials of
Judah and the sons of Ahaziah's brothers, who attended Ahaziah, and
he killed them. 9 He searched for Ahaziah, who was captured while
hiding in Samaria and was brought to Jehu, and put to death. They
buried him, for they said, "He is the grandson of Jehoshaphat, who
sought the LORD with all his heart." And the house of Ahaziah had no
one able to rule the kingdom.
The tenure and fall of Athaliah (842-836 BCE)
10 Now when Athaliah, Ahaziah's mother, saw that her son was dead,
she set about to destroy all the royal family of the house of Judah. 11
But Jehoshabeath, the king's daughter, took Joash son of Ahaziah, and
stole him away from among the king's children who were about to be
killed; she put him and his nurse in a bedroom. Thus Jehoshabeath,
daughter of King Jehoram and wife of the priest Jehoiada — because
she was a sister of Ahaziah — hid him from Athaliah, so that she did
not kill him; 12 he remained with them six years, hidden in the house of
God, while Athaliah reigned over the land.

862

2 CHRONICLES 863

[2 Chronicles 23]
1 But in the seventh year Jehoiada took courage, and entered into a
compact with the commanders of the hundreds, Azariah son of
Jeroham, Ishmael son of Jehohanan, Azariah son of Obed, Maaseiah
son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat son of Zichri. 2 They went around
through Judah and gathered the Levites from all the towns of Judah,
and the heads of families of Israel, and they came to Jerusalem. 3 Then
the whole assembly made a covenant with the king in the house of
God. Jehoiada said to them, "Here is the king's son! Let him reign, as
the LORD promised concerning the sons of David. 4 This is what you are
to do: one-third of you, priests and Levites, who come on duty on the
sabbath, shall be gatekeepers, 5 one-third shall be at the king's house,
and one-third at the Gate of the Foundation; and all the people shall
be in the courts of the house of the LORD. 6 Do not let anyone enter
the house of the LORD except the priests and ministering Levites; they
may enter, for they are holy, but all the other people shall observe the
instructions of the LORD. 7 The Levites shall surround the king, each
with his weapons in his hand; and whoever enters the house shall be
killed. Stay with the king in his comings and goings."
8 The Levites and all Judah did according to all that the priest Jehoiada
commanded; each brought his men, who were to come on duty on the
sabbath, with those who were to go off duty on the sabbath; for the
priest Jehoiada did not dismiss the divisions. 9 The priest Jehoiada
delivered to the captains the spears and the large and small shields
that had been King David's, which were in the house of God; 10 and he
set all the people as a guard for the king, everyone with weapon in
hand, from the south side of the house to the north side of the house,
around the altar and the house. 11 Then he brought out the king's son,
put the crown on him, and gave him the covenant; they proclaimed
him king, and Jehoiada and his sons anointed him; and they shouted,
"Long live the king!"
12 When Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and praising
the king, she went into the house of the LORD to the people; 13 and
when she looked, there was the king standing by his pillar at the
entrance, and the captains and the trumpeters beside the king, and all

863

2 CHRONICLES 864

the people of the land rejoicing and blowing trumpets, and the singers
with their musical instruments leading in the celebration. Athaliah tore
her clothes, and cried, "Treason! Treason!" 14 Then the priest Jehoiada
brought out the captains who were set over the army, saying to them,
"Bring her out between the ranks; anyone who follows her is to be put
to the sword." For the priest said, "Do not put her to death in the
house of the LORD." 15 So they laid hands on her; she went into the
entrance of the Horse Gate of the king's house, and there they put her
to death.
The reformation of Jehoiada
16 Jehoiada made a covenant between himself and all the people and
the king that they should be the LORD's people. 17 Then all the people
went to the house of Baal, and tore it down; his altars and his images
they broke in pieces, and they killed Mattan, the priest of Baal, in front
of the altars. 18 Jehoiada assigned the care of the house of the LORD to
the levitical priests whom David had organized to be in charge of the
house of the LORD, to offer burnt offerings to the LORD, as it is written
in the law of Moses, with rejoicing and with singing, according to the
order of David. 19 He stationed the gatekeepers at the gates of the
house of the LORD so that no one should enter who was in any way
unclean. 20 And he took the captains, the nobles, the governors of the
people, and all the people of the land, and they brought the king
down from the house of the LORD, marching through the upper gate to
the king's house. They set the king on the royal throne. 21 So all the
people of the land rejoiced, and the city was quiet after Athaliah had
been killed with the sword.
[2 Chronicles 24]
The Temple restoration of Joash (836-798 BCE) and his later regression
1 Joash was seven years old when he began to reign; he reigned forty
years in Jerusalem; his mother's name was Zibiah of Beer-sheba. 2 Joash
did what was right in the sight of the LORD all the days of the priest
Jehoiada. 3 Jehoiada got two wives for him, and he became the father
of sons and daughters.

864

2 CHRONICLES 865

4 Some time afterward Joash decided to restore the house of the LORD.
5 He assembled the priests and the Levites and said to them, "Go out
to the cities of Judah and gather money from all Israel to repair the
house of your God, year by year; and see that you act quickly." But the
Levites did not act quickly. 6 So the king summoned Jehoiada the chief,
and said to him, "Why have you not required the Levites to bring in
from Judah and Jerusalem the tax levied by Moses, the servant of the
LORD, on the congregation of Israel for the tent of the covenant?" 7 For
the children of Athaliah, that wicked woman, had broken into the
house of God, and had even used all the dedicated things of the house
of the LORD for the Baals.
8 So the king gave command, and they made a chest, and set it outside
the gate of the house of the LORD. 9 A proclamation was made
throughout Judah and Jerusalem to bring in for the LORD the tax that
Moses the servant of God laid on Israel in the wilderness. 10 All the
leaders and all the people rejoiced and brought their tax and dropped
it into the chest until it was full. 11 Whenever the chest was brought to
the king's officers by the Levites, when they saw that there was a large
amount of money in it, the king's secretary and the officer of the chief
priest would come and empty the chest and take it and return it to its
place. So they did day after day, and collected money in abundance. 12
The king and Jehoiada gave it to those who had charge of the work of
the house of the LORD, and they hired masons and carpenters to restore
the house of the LORD, and also workers in iron and bronze to repair
the house of the LORD. 13 So those who were engaged in the work
labored, and the repairing went forward at their hands, and they
restored the house of God to its proper condition and strengthened it.
14 When they had finished, they brought the rest of the money to the
king and Jehoiada, and with it were made utensils for the house of the
LORD, utensils for the service and for the burnt offerings, and ladles,
and vessels of gold and silver. They offered burnt offerings in the
house of the LORD regularly all the days of Jehoiada.
15 But Jehoiada grew old and full of days, and died; he was one
hundred thirty years old at his death. 16 And they buried him in the city
of David among the kings, because he had done good in Israel, and for
God and his house.

865

2 CHRONICLES 866

17 Now after the death of Jehoiada the officials of Judah came and did
obeisance to the king; then the king listened to them. 18 They
abandoned the house of the LORD, the God of their ancestors, and
served the sacred poles and the idols. And wrath came upon Judah and
Jerusalem for this guilt of theirs. 19 Yet he sent prophets among them
to bring them back to the LORD; they testified against them, but they
would not listen.
20 Then the spirit of God took possession of Zechariah son of the priest
Jehoiada; he stood above the people and said to them, "Thus says God:
Why do you transgress the commandments of the LORD, so that you
cannot prosper? Because you have forsaken the LORD, he has also
forsaken you." 21 But they conspired against him, and by command of
the king they stoned him to death in the court of the house of the
LORD. 22 King Joash did not remember the kindness that Jehoiada,
Zechariah's father, had shown him, but killed his son. As he was dying,
he said, "May the LORD see and avenge!"
23 At the end of the year the army of Aram came up against Joash.
They came to Judah and Jerusalem, and destroyed all the officials of
the people from among them, and sent all the booty they took to the
king of Damascus. 24 Although the army of Aram had come with few
men, the LORD delivered into their hand a very great army, because
they had abandoned the LORD, the God of their ancestors. Thus they
executed judgment on Joash.
25 When they had withdrawn, leaving him severely wounded, his
servants conspired against him because of the blood of the son of the
priest Jehoiada, and they killed him on his bed. So he died; and they
buried him in the city of David, but they did not bury him in the tombs
of the kings. 26 Those who conspired against him were Zabad son of
Shimeath the Ammonite, and Jehozabad son of Shimrith the Moabite.
27 Accounts of his sons, and of the many oracles against him, and of
the rebuilding of the house of God are written in the Commentary on
the Book of the Kings. And his son Amaziah succeeded him.

866

2 CHRONICLES 867

[2 Chronicles 25]
The mixed record of Amaziah (789-769 BCE)
1 Amaziah was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother's name was
Jehoaddan of Jerusalem. 2 He did what was right in the sight of the
LORD, yet not with a true heart. 3 As soon as the royal power was firmly
in his hand he killed his servants who had murdered his father the
king. 4 But he did not put their children to death, according to what is
written in the law, in the book of Moses, where the LORD commanded,
"The parents shall not be put to death for the children, or the children
be put to death for the parents; but all shall be put to death for their
own sins."
5 Amaziah assembled the people of Judah, and set them by ancestral
houses under commanders of the thousands and of the hundreds for
all Judah and Benjamin. He mustered those twenty years old and
upward, and found that they were three hundred thousand picked
troops fit for war, able to handle spear and shield. 6 He also hired one
hundred thousand mighty warriors from Israel for one hundred talents
of silver. 7 But a man of God came to him and said, "O king, do not let
the army of Israel go with you, for the LORD is not with Israel — all
these Ephraimites. 8 Rather, go by yourself and act; be strong in battle,
or God will fling you down before the enemy; for God has power to
help or to overthrow." 9 Amaziah said to the man of God, "But what
shall we do about the hundred talents that I have given to the army of
Israel?" The man of God answered, "The LORD is able to give you much
more than this." 10 Then Amaziah discharged the army that had come
to him from Ephraim, letting them go home again. But they became
very angry with Judah, and returned home in fierce anger.
11 Amaziah took courage, and led out his people; he went to the Valley
of Salt, and struck down ten thousand men of Seir. 12 The people of
Judah captured another ten thousand alive, took them to the top of
Sela, and threw them down from the top of Sela, so that all of them
were dashed to pieces. 13 But the men of the army whom Amaziah sent
back, not letting them go with him to battle, fell on the cities of Judah

867

2 CHRONICLES 868

from Samaria to Beth-horon; they killed three thousand people in
them, and took much booty.
14 Now after Amaziah came from the slaughter of the Edomites, he
brought the gods of the people of Seir, set them up as his gods, and
worshiped them, making offerings to them. 15 The LORD was angry
with Amaziah and sent to him a prophet, who said to him, "Why have
you resorted to a people's gods who could not deliver their own
people from your hand?" 16 But as he was speaking the king said to
him, "Have we made you a royal counselor? Stop! Why should you be
put to death?" So the prophet stopped, but said, "I know that God has
determined to destroy you, because you have done this and have not
listened to my advice."
17 Then King Amaziah of Judah took counsel and sent to King Joash
son of Jehoahaz son of Jehu of Israel, saying, "Come, let us look one
another in the face." 18 King Joash of Israel sent word to King Amaziah
of Judah, "A thornbush on Lebanon sent to a cedar on Lebanon,
saying, 'Give your daughter to my son for a wife'; but a wild animal of
Lebanon passed by and trampled down the thornbush. 19 You say,
'See, I have defeated Edom,' and your heart has lifted you up in
boastfulness. Now stay at home; why should you provoke trouble so
that you fall, you and Judah with you?"
20 But Amaziah would not listen — it was God's doing, in order to
hand them over, because they had sought the gods of Edom. 21 So
King Joash of Israel went up; he and King Amaziah of Judah faced one
another in battle at Beth-shemesh, which belongs to Judah. 22 Judah
was defeated by Israel; everyone fled home. 23 King Joash of Israel
captured King Amaziah of Judah, son of Joash, son of Ahaziah, at
Beth-shemesh; he brought him to Jerusalem, and broke down the wall
of Jerusalem from the Ephraim Gate to the Corner Gate, a distance of
four hundred cubits. 24 He seized all the gold and silver, and all the
vessels that were found in the house of God, and Obed-edom with
them; he seized also the treasuries of the king's house, also hostages;
then he returned to Samaria.

868

2 CHRONICLES 869

25 King Amaziah son of Joash of Judah, lived fifteen years after the
death of King Joash son of Jehoahaz of Israel. 26 Now the rest of the
deeds of Amaziah, from first to last, are they not written in the Book
of the Kings of Judah and Israel? 27 From the time that Amaziah
turned away from the LORD they made a conspiracy against him in
Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish. But they sent after him to Lachish,
and killed him there. 28 They brought him back on horses; he was
buried with his ancestors in the city of David.
[2 Chronicles 26]
The builder and reformer, Uzziah (785-733 BCE)
1 Then all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years old,
and made him king to succeed his father Amaziah. 2 He rebuilt Eloth
and restored it to Judah, after the king slept with his ancestors. 3
Uzziah was sixteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
fifty-two years in Jerusalem. His mother's name was Jecoliah of
Jerusalem. 4 He did what was right in the sight of the LORD, just as his
father Amaziah had done. 5 He set himself to seek God in the days of
Zechariah, who instructed him in the fear of God; and as long as he
sought the LORD, God made him prosper.
6 He went out and made war against the Philistines, and broke down
the wall of Gath and the wall of Jabneh and the wall of Ashdod; he
built cities in the territory of Ashdod and elsewhere among the
Philistines. 7 God helped him against the Philistines, against the Arabs
who lived in Gur-baal, and against the Meunites. 8 The Ammonites
paid tribute to Uzziah, and his fame spread even to the border of
Egypt, for he became very strong. 9 Moreover Uzziah built towers in
Jerusalem at the Corner Gate, at the Valley Gate, and at the Angle, and
fortified them. 10 He built towers in the wilderness and hewed out
many cisterns, for he had large herds, both in the Shephelah and in the
plain, and he had farmers and vinedressers in the hills and in the fertile
lands, for he loved the soil. 11 Moreover Uzziah had an army of soldiers,
fit for war, in divisions according to the numbers in the muster made
by the secretary Jeiel and the officer Maaseiah, under the direction of
Hananiah, one of the king's commanders. 12 The whole number of the
heads of ancestral houses of mighty warriors was two thousand six

869

2 CHRONICLES 870

hundred. 13 Under their command was an army of three hundred seven
thousand five hundred, who could make war with mighty power, to
help the king against the enemy. 14 Uzziah provided for all the army
the shields, spears, helmets, coats of mail, bows, and stones for
slinging. 15 In Jerusalem he set up machines, invented by skilled
workers, on the towers and the corners for shooting arrows and large
stones. And his fame spread far, for he was marvelously helped until he
became strong.
Uzziah's hubris
16 But when he had become strong he grew proud, to his destruction.
For he was false to the LORD his God, and entered the temple of the
LORD to make offering on the altar of incense. 17 But the priest Azariah
went in after him, with eighty priests of the LORD who were men of
valor; 18 they withstood King Uzziah, and said to him, "It is not for
you, Uzziah, to make offering to the LORD, but for the priests the
descendants of Aaron, who are consecrated to make offering. Go out
of the sanctuary; for you have done wrong, and it will bring you no
honor from the LORD God." 19 Then Uzziah was angry. Now he had a
censer in his hand to make offering, and when he became angry with
the priests a leprous disease broke out on his forehead, in the presence
of the priests in the house of the LORD, by the altar of incense. 20 When
the chief priest Azariah, and all the priests, looked at him, he was
leprous in his forehead. They hurried him out, and he himself hurried
to get out, because the LORD had struck him. 21 King Uzziah was
leprous to the day of his death, and being leprous lived in a separate
house, for he was excluded from the house of the LORD. His son Jotham
was in charge of the palace of the king, governing the people of the
land.
22 Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, from first to last, the prophet
Isaiah son of Amoz wrote. 23 Uzziah slept with his ancestors; they
buried him near his ancestors in the burial field that belonged to the
kings, for they said, "He is leprous." His son Jotham succeeded him.

870

2 CHRONICLES 871

[2 Chronicles 27]
The accomplishments of Jotham (759-743 BCE)
1 Jotham was twenty-five years old when he began to reign; he reigned
sixteen years in Jerusalem. His mother's name was Jerushah daughter
of Zadok. 2 He did what was right in the sight of the LORD just as his
father Uzziah had done — only he did not invade the temple of the
LORD. But the people still followed corrupt practices. 3 He built the
upper gate of the house of the LORD, and did extensive building on the
wall of Ophel. 4 Moreover he built cities in the hill country of Judah,
and forts and towers on the wooded hills. 5 He fought with the king of
the Ammonites and prevailed against them. The Ammonites gave him
that year one hundred talents of silver, ten thousand cors of wheat and
ten thousand of barley. The Ammonites paid him the same amount in
the second and the third years. 6 So Jotham became strong because he
ordered his ways before the LORD his God. 7 Now the rest of the acts of
Jotham, and all his wars and his ways, are written in the Book of the
Kings of Israel and Judah. 8 He was twenty-five years old when he
began to reign; he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. 9 Jotham slept
with his ancestors, and they buried him in the city of David; and his son
Ahaz succeeded him.
[2 Chronicles 28]
Unending failure under Ahaz (743/753-727/715 BCE; the data are
inconsistent)
1 Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign; he reigned
sixteen years in Jerusalem. He did not do what was right in the sight of
the LORD, as his ancestor David had done, 2 but he walked in the ways
of the kings of Israel. He even made cast images for the Baals; 3 and he
made offerings in the valley of the son of Hinnom, and made his sons
pass through fire, according to the abominable practices of the nations
whom the LORD drove out before the people of Israel. 4 He sacrificed
and made offerings on the high places, on the hills, and under every
green tree.

871

2 CHRONICLES 872

5 Therefore the LORD his God gave him into the hand of the king of
Aram, who defeated him and took captive a great number of his
people and brought them to Damascus. He was also given into the
hand of the king of Israel, who defeated him with great slaughter. 6
Pekah son of Remaliah killed one hundred twenty thousand in Judah in
one day, all of them valiant warriors, because they had abandoned the
LORD, the God of their ancestors. 7 And Zichri, a mighty warrior of
Ephraim, killed the king's son Maaseiah, Azrikam the commander of
the palace, and Elkanah the next in authority to the king.
8 The people of Israel took captive two hundred thousand of their kin,
women, sons, and daughters; they also took much booty from them
and brought the booty to Samaria. 9 But a prophet of the LORD was
there, whose name was Oded; he went out to meet the army that
came to Samaria, and said to them, "Because the LORD, the God of your
ancestors, was angry with Judah, he gave them into your hand, but you
have killed them in a rage that has reached up to heaven. 10 Now you
intend to subjugate the people of Judah and Jerusalem, male and
female, as your slaves. But what have you except sins against the LORD
your God? 11 Now hear me, and send back the captives whom you have
taken from your kindred, for the fierce wrath of the LORD is upon you."
12 Moreover, certain chiefs of the Ephraimites, Azariah son of Johanan,
Berechiah son of Meshillemoth, Jehizkiah son of Shallum, and Amasa
son of Hadlai, stood up against those who were coming from the war,
13 and said to them, "You shall not bring the captives in here, for you
propose to bring on us guilt against the LORD in addition to our present
sins and guilt. For our guilt is already great, and there is fierce wrath
against Israel." 14 So the warriors left the captives and the booty
before the officials and all the assembly. 15 Then those who were
mentioned by name got up and took the captives, and with the booty
they clothed all that were naked among them; they clothed them, gave
them sandals, provided them with food and drink, and anointed them;
and carrying all the feeble among them on donkeys, they brought
them to their kindred at Jericho, the city of palm trees. Then they
returned to Samaria.

872

2 CHRONICLES 873

16 At that time King Ahaz sent to the king of Assyria for help. 17 For
the Edomites had again invaded and defeated Judah, and carried away
captives. 18 And the Philistines had made raids on the cities in the
Shephelah and the Negeb of Judah, and had taken Beth-shemesh,
Aijalon, Gederoth, Soco with its villages, Timnah with its villages, and
Gimzo with its villages; and they settled there. 19 For the LORD brought
Judah low because of King Ahaz of Israel, for he had behaved without
restraint in Judah and had been faithless to the LORD. 20 So King
Tilgath-pilneser of Assyria came against him, and oppressed him
instead of strengthening him. 21 For Ahaz plundered the house of the
LORD and the houses of the king and of the officials, and gave tribute
to the king of Assyria; but it did not help him.
22 In the time of his distress he became yet more faithless to the LORD
— this same King Ahaz. 23 For he sacrificed to the gods of Damascus,
which had defeated him, and said, "Because the gods of the kings of
Aram helped them, I will sacrifice to them so that they may help me."
But they were the ruin of him, and of all Israel. 24 Ahaz gathered
together the utensils of the house of God, and cut in pieces the utensils
of the house of God. He shut up the doors of the house of the LORD
and made himself altars in every corner of Jerusalem. 25 In every city of
Judah he made high places to make offerings to other gods, provoking
to anger the LORD, the God of his ancestors. 26 Now the rest of his acts
and all his ways, from first to last, are written in the Book of the Kings
of Judah and Israel. 27 Ahaz slept with his ancestors, and they buried
him in the city, in Jerusalem; but they did not bring him into the tombs
of the kings of Israel. His son Hezekiah succeeded him.
[2 Chronicles 29]
Restoring the Temple: the beginning of Hezekiah's rule
1 Hezekiah began to reign when he was twenty-five years old; he
reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother's name was Abijah
daughter of Zechariah. 2 He did what was right in the sight of the
LORD, just as his ancestor David had done.
3 In the first year of his reign, in the first month, he opened the doors
of the house of the LORD and repaired them. 4 He brought in the

873

2 CHRONICLES 874

priests and the Levites and assembled them in the square on the east. 5
He said to them, "Listen to me, Levites! Sanctify yourselves, and
sanctify the house of the LORD, the God of your ancestors, and carry out
the filth from the holy place. 6 For our ancestors have been unfaithful
and have done what was evil in the sight of the LORD our God; they
have forsaken him, and have turned away their faces from the
dwelling of the LORD, and turned their backs. 7 They also shut the doors
of the vestibule and put out the lamps, and have not offered incense
or made burnt offerings in the holy place to the God of Israel. 8
Therefore the wrath of the LORD came upon Judah and Jerusalem, and
he has made them an object of horror, of astonishment, and of hissing,
as you see with your own eyes. 9 Our fathers have fallen by the sword
and our sons and our daughters and our wives are in captivity for this.
10 Now it is in my heart to make a covenant with the LORD, the God of
Israel, so that his fierce anger may turn away from us. 11 My sons, do
not now be negligent, for the LORD has chosen you to stand in his
presence to minister to him, and to be his ministers and make offerings
to him."
12 Then the Levites arose, Mahath son of Amasai, and Joel son of
Azariah, of the sons of the Kohathites; and of the sons of Merari, Kish
son of Abdi, and Azariah son of Jehallelel; and of the Gershonites, Joah
son of Zimmah, and Eden son of Joah; 13 and of the sons of Elizaphan,
Shimri and Jeuel; and of the sons of Asaph, Zechariah and Mattaniah;
14 and of the sons of Heman, Jehuel and Shimei; and of the sons of
Jeduthun, Shemaiah and Uzziel. 15 They gathered their brothers,
sanctified themselves, and went in as the king had commanded, by the
words of the LORD, to cleanse the house of the LORD. 16 The priests
went into the inner part of the house of the LORD to cleanse it, and
they brought out all the unclean things that they found in the temple
of the LORD into the court of the house of the LORD; and the Levites
took them and carried them out to the Wadi Kidron. 17 They began to
sanctify on the first day of the first month, and on the eighth day of
the month they came to the vestibule of the LORD; then for eight days
they sanctified the house of the LORD, and on the sixteenth day of the
first month they finished. 18 Then they went inside to King Hezekiah
and said, "We have cleansed all the house of the LORD, the altar of
burnt offering and all its utensils, and the table for the rows of bread

874

2 CHRONICLES 875

and all its utensils. 19 All the utensils that King Ahaz repudiated during
his reign when he was faithless, we have made ready and sanctified;
see, they are in front of the altar of the LORD."
20 Then King Hezekiah rose early, assembled the officials of the city,
and went up to the house of the LORD. 21 They brought seven bulls,
seven rams, seven lambs, and seven male goats for a sin offering for
the kingdom and for the sanctuary and for Judah. He commanded the
priests the descendants of Aaron to offer them on the altar of the
LORD. 22 So they slaughtered the bulls, and the priests received the
blood and dashed it against the altar; they slaughtered the rams and
their blood was dashed against the altar; they also slaughtered the
lambs and their blood was dashed against the altar. 23 Then the male
goats for the sin offering were brought to the king and the assembly;
they laid their hands on them, 24 and the priests slaughtered them and
made a sin offering with their blood at the altar, to make atonement
for all Israel. For the king commanded that the burnt offering and the
sin offering should be made for all Israel.
25 He stationed the Levites in the house of the LORD with cymbals,
harps, and lyres, according to the commandment of David and of Gad
the king's seer and of the prophet Nathan, for the commandment was
from the LORD through his prophets. 26 The Levites stood with the
instruments of David, and the priests with the trumpets. 27 Then
Hezekiah commanded that the burnt offering be offered on the altar.
When the burnt offering began, the song to the LORD began also, and
the trumpets, accompanied by the instruments of King David of Israel.
28 The whole assembly worshiped, the singers sang, and the
trumpeters sounded; all this continued until the burnt offering was
finished. 29 When the offering was finished, the king and all who were
present with him bowed down and worshiped. 30 King Hezekiah and
the officials commanded the Levites to sing praises to the LORD with
the words of David and of the seer Asaph. They sang praises with
gladness, and they bowed down and worshiped.
31 Then Hezekiah said, "You have now consecrated yourselves to the
LORD; come near, bring sacrifices and thank offerings to the house of
the LORD." The assembly brought sacrifices and thank offerings; and all

875

2 CHRONICLES 876

who were of a willing heart brought burnt offerings. 32 The number of
the burnt offerings that the assembly brought was seventy bulls, one
hundred rams, and two hundred lambs; all these were for a burnt
offering to the LORD. 33 The consecrated offerings were six hundred
bulls and three thousand sheep. 34 But the priests were too few and
could not skin all the burnt offerings, so, until other priests had
sanctified themselves, their kindred, the Levites, helped them until the
work was finished — for the Levites were more conscientious than the
priests in sanctifying themselves. 35 Besides the great number of burnt
offerings there was the fat of the offerings of well-being, and there
were the drink offerings for the burnt offerings. Thus the service of the
house of the LORD was restored. 36 And Hezekiah and all the people
rejoiced because of what God had done for the people; for the thing
had come about suddenly.
[2 Chronicles 30]
National Passover and further religious reforms
1 Hezekiah sent word to all Israel and Judah, and wrote letters also to
Ephraim and Manasseh, that they should come to the house of the
LORD at Jerusalem, to keep the passover to the LORD the God of Israel. 2
For the king and his officials and all the assembly in Jerusalem had
taken counsel to keep the passover in the second month 3 (for they
could not keep it at its proper time because the priests had not
sanctified themselves in sufficient number, nor had the people
assembled in Jerusalem). 4 The plan seemed right to the king and all
the assembly. 5 So they decreed to make a proclamation throughout all
Israel, from Beer-sheba to Dan, that the people should come and keep
the passover to the LORD the God of Israel, at Jerusalem; for they had
not kept it in great numbers as prescribed. 6 So couriers went
throughout all Israel and Judah with letters from the king and his
officials, as the king had commanded, saying, "O people of Israel,
return to the LORD, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, so that he
may turn again to the remnant of you who have escaped from the
hand of the kings of Assyria. 7 Do not be like your ancestors and your
kindred, who were faithless to the LORD God of their ancestors, so that
he made them a desolation, as you see. 8 Do not now be stiff-necked
as your ancestors were, but yield yourselves to the LORD and come to

876

2 CHRONICLES 877

his sanctuary, which he has sanctified forever, and serve the LORD your
God, so that his fierce anger may turn away from you. 9 For as you
return to the LORD, your kindred and your children will find compassion
with their captors, and return to this land. For the LORD your God is
gracious and merciful, and will not turn away his face from you, if you
return to him."
10 So the couriers went from city to city through the country of
Ephraim and Manasseh, and as far as Zebulun; but they laughed them
to scorn, and mocked them. 11 Only a few from Asher, Manasseh, and
Zebulun humbled themselves and came to Jerusalem. 12 The hand of
God was also on Judah to give them one heart to do what the king and
the officials commanded by the word of the LORD.
13 Many people came together in Jerusalem to keep the festival of
unleavened bread in the second month, a very large assembly. 14 They
set to work and removed the altars that were in Jerusalem, and all the
altars for offering incense they took away and threw into the Wadi
Kidron. 15 They slaughtered the passover lamb on the fourteenth day
of the second month. The priests and the Levites were ashamed, and
they sanctified themselves and brought burnt offerings into the house
of the LORD. 16 They took their accustomed posts according to the law
of Moses the man of God; the priests dashed the blood that they
received from the hands of the Levites. 17 For there were many in the
assembly who had not sanctified themselves; therefore the Levites had
to slaughter the passover lamb for everyone who was not clean, to
make it holy to the LORD. 18 For a multitude of the people, many of
them from Ephraim, Manasseh, Issachar, and Zebulun, had not
cleansed themselves, yet they ate the passover otherwise than as
prescribed. But Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, "The good LORD
pardon all 19 who set their hearts to seek God, the LORD the God of
their ancestors, even though not in accordance with the sanctuary's
rules of cleanness." 20 The LORD heard Hezekiah, and healed the
people. 21 The people of Israel who were present at Jerusalem kept the
festival of unleavened bread seven days with great gladness; and the
Levites and the priests praised the LORD day by day, accompanied by
loud instruments for the LORD. 22 Hezekiah spoke encouragingly to all
the Levites who showed good skill in the service of the LORD. So the

877

2 CHRONICLES 878

people ate the food of the festival for seven days, sacrificing offerings
of well-being and giving thanks to the LORD the God of their ancestors.
23 Then the whole assembly agreed together to keep the festival for
another seven days; so they kept it for another seven days with
gladness. 24 For King Hezekiah of Judah gave the assembly a thousand
bulls and seven thousand sheep for offerings, and the officials gave the
assembly a thousand bulls and ten thousand sheep. The priests
sanctified themselves in great numbers. 25 The whole assembly of
Judah, the priests and the Levites, and the whole assembly that came
out of Israel, and the resident aliens who came out of the land of
Israel, and the resident aliens who lived in Judah, rejoiced. 26 There
was great joy in Jerusalem, for since the time of Solomon son of King
David of Israel there had been nothing like this in Jerusalem. 27 Then
the priests and the Levites stood up and blessed the people, and their
voice was heard; their prayer came to his holy dwelling in heaven.
[2 Chronicles 31]
The priestly and Levitical courses reestablished
1 Now when all this was finished, all Israel who were present went out
to the cities of Judah and broke down the pillars, hewed down the
sacred poles, and pulled down the high places and the altars
throughout all Judah and Benjamin, and in Ephraim and Manasseh,
until they had destroyed them all. Then all the people of Israel
returned to their cities, all to their individual properties.
2 Hezekiah appointed the divisions of the priests and of the Levites,
division by division, everyone according to his service, the priests and
the Levites, for burnt offerings and offerings of well-being, to minister
in the gates of the camp of the LORD and to give thanks and praise. 3
The contribution of the king from his own possessions was for the
burnt offerings: the burnt offerings of morning and evening, and the
burnt offerings for the sabbaths, the new moons, and the appointed
festivals, as it is written in the law of the LORD. 4 He commanded the
people who lived in Jerusalem to give the portion due to the priests
and the Levites, so that they might devote themselves to the law of the
LORD. 5 As soon as the word spread, the people of Israel gave in

878

2 CHRONICLES 879

abundance the first fruits of grain, wine, oil, honey, and of all the
produce of the field; and they brought in abundantly the tithe of
everything. 6 The people of Israel and Judah who lived in the cities of
Judah also brought in the tithe of cattle and sheep, and the tithe of
the dedicated things that had been consecrated to the LORD their God,
and laid them in heaps. 7 In the third month they began to pile up the
heaps, and finished them in the seventh month. 8 When Hezekiah and
the officials came and saw the heaps, they blessed the LORD and his
people Israel. 9 Hezekiah questioned the priests and the Levites about
the heaps. 10 The chief priest Azariah, who was of the house of Zadok,
answered him, "Since they began to bring the contributions into the
house of the LORD, we have had enough to eat and have plenty to
spare; for the LORD has blessed his people, so that we have this great
supply left over."
11 Then Hezekiah commanded them to prepare store-chambers in the
house of the LORD; and they prepared them. 12 Faithfully they brought
in the contributions, the tithes and the dedicated things. The chief
officer in charge of them was Conaniah the Levite, with his brother
Shimei as second; 13 while Jehiel, Azaziah, Nahath, Asahel, Jerimoth,
Jozabad, Eliel, Ismachiah, Mahath, and Benaiah were overseers
assisting Conaniah and his brother Shimei, by the appointment of King
Hezekiah and of Azariah the chief officer of the house of God. 14 Kore
son of Imnah the Levite, keeper of the east gate, was in charge of the
freewill offerings to God, to apportion the contribution reserved for
the LORD and the most holy offerings. 15 Eden, Miniamin, Jeshua,
Shemaiah, Amariah, and Shecaniah were faithfully assisting him in the
cities of the priests, to distribute the portions to their kindred, old and
young alike, by divisions, 16 except those enrolled by genealogy, males
from three years old and upwards, all who entered the house of the
LORD as the duty of each day required, for their service according to
their offices, by their divisions. 17 The enrollment of the priests was
according to their ancestral houses; that of the Levites from twenty
years old and upwards was according to their offices, by their divisions.
18 The priests were enrolled with all their little children, their wives,
their sons, and their daughters, the whole multitude; for they were
faithful in keeping themselves holy. 19 And for the descendants of
Aaron, the priests, who were in the fields of common land belonging

879

2 CHRONICLES 880

to their towns, town by town, the people designated by name were to
distribute portions to every male among the priests and to everyone
among the Levites who was enrolled.
20 Hezekiah did this throughout all Judah; he did what was good and
right and faithful before the LORD his God. 21 And every work that he
undertook in the service of the house of God, and in accordance with
the law and the commandments, to seek his God, he did with all his
heart; and he prospered.
[2 Chronicles 32]
Sennacherib's invasion of Judah and threat to Jerusalem
1 After these things and these acts of faithfulness, King Sennacherib of
Assyria came and invaded Judah and encamped against the fortified
cities, thinking to win them for himself. 2 When Hezekiah saw that
Sennacherib had come and intended to fight against Jerusalem, 3 he
planned with his officers and his warriors to stop the flow of the
springs that were outside the city; and they helped him. 4 A great
many people were gathered, and they stopped all the springs and the
wadi that flowed through the land, saying, "Why should the Assyrian
kings come and find water in abundance?" 5 Hezekiah set to work
resolutely and built up the entire wall that was broken down, and
raised towers on it, and outside it he built another wall; he also
strengthened the Millo in the city of David, and made weapons and
shields in abundance. 6 He appointed combat commanders over the
people, and gathered them together to him in the square at the gate
of the city and spoke encouragingly to them, saying, 7 "Be strong and
of good courage. Do not be afraid or dismayed before the king of
Assyria and all the horde that is with him; for there is one greater with
us than with him. 8 With him is an arm of flesh; but with us is the LORD
our God, to help us and to fight our battles." The people were
encouraged by the words of King Hezekiah of Judah.
9 After this, while King Sennacherib of Assyria was at Lachish with all
his forces, he sent his servants to Jerusalem to King Hezekiah of Judah
and to all the people of Judah that were in Jerusalem, saying, 10 "Thus
says King Sennacherib of Assyria: On what are you relying, that you

880

2 CHRONICLES 881

undergo the siege of Jerusalem? 11 Is not Hezekiah misleading you,
handing you over to die by famine and by thirst, when he tells you,
'The LORD our God will save us from the hand of the king of Assyria'? 12
Was it not this same Hezekiah who took away his high places and his
altars and commanded Judah and Jerusalem, saying, 'Before one altar
you shall worship, and upon it you shall make your offerings'? 13 Do
you not know what I and my ancestors have done to all the peoples of
other lands? Were the gods of the nations of those lands at all able to
save their lands out of my hand? 14 Who among all the gods of those
nations that my ancestors utterly destroyed was able to save his people
from my hand, that your God should be able to save you from my
hand? 15 Now therefore do not let Hezekiah deceive you or mislead
you in this fashion, and do not believe him, for no god of any nation or
kingdom has been able to save his people from my hand or from the
hand of my ancestors. How much less will your God save you out of my
hand!"
16 His servants said still more against the Lord GOD and against his
servant Hezekiah. 17 He also wrote letters to throw contempt on the
LORD the God of Israel and to speak against him, saying, "Just as the
gods of the nations in other lands did not rescue their people from my
hands, so the God of Hezekiah will not rescue his people from my
hand." 18 They shouted it with a loud voice in the language of Judah
to the people of Jerusalem who were on the wall, to frighten and
terrify them, in order that they might take the city. 19 They spoke of
the God of Jerusalem as if he were like the gods of the peoples of the
earth, which are the work of human hands.
20 Then King Hezekiah and the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz prayed
because of this and cried to heaven. 21 And the LORD sent an angel who
cut off all the mighty warriors and commanders and officers in the
camp of the king of Assyria. So he returned in disgrace to his own land.
When he came into the house of his god, some of his own sons struck
him down there with the sword. 22 So the LORD saved Hezekiah and
the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hand of King Sennacherib of
Assyria and from the hand of all his enemies; he gave them rest on
every side. 23 Many brought gifts to the LORD in Jerusalem and precious

881

2 CHRONICLES 882

things to King Hezekiah of Judah, so that he was exalted in the sight of
all nations from that time onward.
Hezekiah's sickness, recovery, and wealth
24 In those days Hezekiah became sick and was at the point of death.
He prayed to the LORD, and he answered him and gave him a sign. 25
But Hezekiah did not respond according to the benefit done to him,
for his heart was proud. Therefore wrath came upon him and upon
Judah and Jerusalem. 26 Then Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride
of his heart, both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the
wrath of the LORD did not come upon them in the days of Hezekiah.
27 Hezekiah had very great riches and honor; and he made for himself
treasuries for silver, for gold, for precious stones, for spices, for shields,
and for all kinds of costly objects; 28 storehouses also for the yield of
grain, wine, and oil; and stalls for all kinds of cattle, and sheepfolds. 29
He likewise provided cities for himself, and flocks and herds in
abundance; for God had given him very great possessions. 30 This same
Hezekiah closed the upper outlet of the waters of Gihon and directed
them down to the west side of the city of David. Hezekiah prospered in
all his works. 31 So also in the matter of the envoys of the officials of
Babylon, who had been sent to him to inquire about the sign that had
been done in the land, God left him to himself, in order to test him and
to know all that was in his heart.
32 Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and his good deeds, are
written in the vision of the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz in the Book of
the Kings of Judah and Israel. 33 Hezekiah slept with his ancestors, and
they buried him on the ascent to the tombs of the descendants of
David; and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honor at
his death. His son Manasseh succeeded him.
[2 Chronicles 33]
Manasseh: regression and repentance
1 Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign; he reigned
fifty-five years in Jerusalem. 2 He did what was evil in the sight of the

882

2 CHRONICLES 883

LORD, according to the abominable practices of the nations whom the
LORD drove out before the people of Israel. 3 For he rebuilt the high
places that his father Hezekiah had pulled down, and erected altars to
the Baals, made sacred poles, worshiped all the host of heaven, and
served them. 4 He built altars in the house of the LORD, of which the
LORD had said, "In Jerusalem shall my name be forever." 5 He built
altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of the
LORD. 6 He made his son pass through fire in the valley of the son of
Hinnom, practiced soothsaying and augury and sorcery, and dealt with
mediums and with wizards. He did much evil in the sight of the LORD,
provoking him to anger. 7 The carved image of the idol that he had
made he set in the house of God, of which God said to David and to his
son Solomon, "In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out
of all the tribes of Israel, I will put my name forever; 8 I will never
again remove the feet of Israel from the land that I appointed for your
ancestors, if only they will be careful to do all that I have commanded
them, all the law, the statutes, and the ordinances given through
Moses." 9 Manasseh misled Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so
that they did more evil than the nations whom the LORD had destroyed
before the people of Israel.
10 The LORD spoke to Manasseh and to his people, but they gave no
heed. 11 Therefore the LORD brought against them the commanders of
the army of the king of Assyria, who took Manasseh captive in
manacles, bound him with fetters, and brought him to Babylon. 12
While he was in distress he entreated the favor of the LORD his God and
humbled himself greatly before the God of his ancestors. 13 He prayed
to him, and God received his entreaty, heard his plea, and restored him
again to Jerusalem and to his kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that the
LORD indeed was God.
14 Afterward he built an outer wall for the city of David west of Gihon,
in the valley, reaching the entrance at the Fish Gate; he carried it
around Ophel, and raised it to a very great height. He also put
commanders of the army in all the fortified cities in Judah. 15 He took
away the foreign gods and the idol from the house of the LORD, and all
the altars that he had built on the mountain of the house of the LORD
and in Jerusalem, and he threw them out of the city. 16 He also

883

2 CHRONICLES 884

restored the altar of the LORD and offered on it sacrifices of well-being
and of thanksgiving; and he commanded Judah to serve the LORD the
God of Israel. 17 The people, however, still sacrificed at the high places,
but only to the LORD their God.
18 Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, his prayer to his God, and the
words of the seers who spoke to him in the name of the LORD God of
Israel, these are in the Annals of the Kings of Israel. 19 His prayer, and
how God received his entreaty, all his sin and his faithlessness, the sites
on which he built high places and set up the sacred poles and the
images, before he humbled himself, these are written in the records of
the seers. 20 So Manasseh slept with his ancestors, and they buried him
in his house. His son Amon succeeded him.
Degeneracy under Amon (641-640 BCE)
21 Amon was twenty-two years old when he began to reign; he reigned
two years in Jerusalem. 22 He did what was evil in the sight of the
LORD, as his father Manasseh had done. Amon sacrificed to all the
images that his father Manasseh had made, and served them. 23 He did
not humble himself before the LORD, as his father Manasseh had
humbled himself, but this Amon incurred more and more guilt. 24 His
servants conspired against him and killed him in his house. 25 But the
people of the land killed all those who had conspired against King
Amon; and the people of the land made his son Josiah king to succeed
him.
[2 Chronicles 34]
Josiah (640-609 BCE): the champion of centralization
1 Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign; he reigned thirtyone years in Jerusalem. 2 He did what was right in the sight of the
LORD, and walked in the ways of his ancestor David; he did not turn
aside to the right or to the left. 3 For in the eighth year of his reign,
while he was still a boy, he began to seek the God of his ancestor
David, and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem
of the high places, the sacred poles, and the carved and the cast
images. 4 In his presence they pulled down the altars of the Baals; he

884

2 CHRONICLES 885

demolished the incense altars that stood above them. He broke down
the sacred poles and the carved and the cast images; he made dust of
them and scattered it over the graves of those who had sacrificed to
them. 5 He also burned the bones of the priests on their altars, and
purged Judah and Jerusalem. 6 In the towns of Manasseh, Ephraim,
and Simeon, and as far as Naphtali, in their ruins all around, 7 he broke
down the altars, beat the sacred poles and the images into powder,
and demolished all the incense altars throughout all the land of Israel.
Then he returned to Jerusalem.
8 In the eighteenth year of his reign, when he had purged the land
and the house, he sent Shaphan son of Azaliah, Maaseiah the governor
of the city, and Joah son of Joahaz, the recorder, to repair the house of
the LORD his God. 9 They came to the high priest Hilkiah and delivered
the money that had been brought into the house of God, which the
Levites, the keepers of the threshold, had collected from Manasseh and
Ephraim and from all the remnant of Israel and from all Judah and
Benjamin and from the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 10 They delivered it
to the workers who had the oversight of the house of the LORD, and
the workers who were working in the house of the LORD gave it for
repairing and restoring the house. 11 They gave it to the carpenters and
the builders to buy quarried stone, and timber for binders, and beams
for the buildings that the kings of Judah had let go to ruin. 12 The
people did the work faithfully. Over them were appointed the Levites
Jahath and Obadiah, of the sons of Merari, along with Zechariah and
Meshullam, of the sons of the Kohathites, to have oversight. Other
Levites, all skillful with instruments of music, 13 were over the burden
bearers and directed all who did work in every kind of service; and
some of the Levites were scribes, and officials, and gatekeepers.
14 While they were bringing out the money that had been brought
into the house of the LORD, the priest Hilkiah found the book of the
law of the LORD given through Moses. 15 Hilkiah said to the secretary
Shaphan, "I have found the book of the law in the house of the LORD";
and Hilkiah gave the book to Shaphan. 16 Shaphan brought the book
to the king, and further reported to the king, "All that was committed
to your servants they are doing. 17 They have emptied out the money
that was found in the house of the LORD and have delivered it into the

885

2 CHRONICLES 886

hand of the overseers and the workers." 18 The secretary Shaphan
informed the king, "The priest Hilkiah has given me a book." Shaphan
then read it aloud to the king.
19 When the king heard the words of the law he tore his clothes. 20
Then the king commanded Hilkiah, Ahikam son of Shaphan, Abdon son
of Micah, the secretary Shaphan, and the king's servant Asaiah: 21 "Go,
inquire of the LORD for me and for those who are left in Israel and in
Judah, concerning the words of the book that has been found; for the
wrath of the LORD that is poured out on us is great, because our
ancestors did not keep the word of the LORD, to act in accordance with
all that is written in this book."
22 So Hilkiah and those whom the king had sent went to the prophet
Huldah, the wife of Shallum son of Tokhath son of Hasrah, keeper of
the wardrobe (who lived in Jerusalem in the Second Quarter) and
spoke to her to that effect. 23 She declared to them, "Thus says the
LORD, the God of Israel: Tell the man who sent you to me, 24 Thus says
the LORD: I will indeed bring disaster upon this place and upon its
inhabitants, all the curses that are written in the book that was read
before the king of Judah. 25 Because they have forsaken me and have
made offerings to other gods, so that they have provoked me to anger
with all the works of their hands, my wrath will be poured out on this
place and will not be quenched. 26 But as to the king of Judah, who
sent you to inquire of the LORD, thus shall you say to him: Thus says the
LORD, the God of Israel: Regarding the words that you have heard, 27
because your heart was penitent and you humbled yourself before God
when you heard his words against this place and its inhabitants, and
you have humbled yourself before me, and have torn your clothes and
wept before me, I also have heard you, says the LORD. 28 I will gather
you to your ancestors and you shall be gathered to your grave in
peace; your eyes shall not see all the disaster that I will bring on this
place and its inhabitants." They took the message back to the king.
29 Then the king sent word and gathered together all the elders of
Judah and Jerusalem. 30 The king went up to the house of the LORD,
with all the people of Judah, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the priests
and the Levites, all the people both great and small; he read in their

886

2 CHRONICLES 887

hearing all the words of the book of the covenant that had been found
in the house of the LORD. 31 The king stood in his place and made a
covenant before the LORD, to follow the LORD, keeping his
commandments, his decrees, and his statutes, with all his heart and all
his soul, to perform the words of the covenant that were written in this
book. 32 Then he made all who were present in Jerusalem and in
Benjamin pledge themselves to it. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem
acted according to the covenant of God, the God of their ancestors. 33
Josiah took away all the abominations from all the territory that
belonged to the people of Israel, and made all who were in Israel
worship the LORD their God. All his days they did not turn away from
following the LORD the God of their ancestors.
[2 Chronicles 35]
Passover celebration
1 Josiah kept a passover to the LORD in Jerusalem; they slaughtered the
passover lamb on the fourteenth day of the first month. 2 He
appointed the priests to their offices and encouraged them in the
service of the house of the LORD. 3 He said to the Levites who taught all
Israel and who were holy to the LORD, "Put the holy ark in the house
that Solomon son of David, king of Israel, built; you need no longer
carry it on your shoulders. Now serve the LORD your God and his people
Israel. 4 Make preparations by your ancestral houses by your divisions,
following the written directions of King David of Israel and the written
directions of his son Solomon. 5 Take position in the holy place
according to the groupings of the ancestral houses of your kindred the
people, and let there be Levites for each division of an ancestral house.
6 Slaughter the passover lamb, sanctify yourselves, and on behalf of
your kindred make preparations, acting according to the word of the
LORD by Moses."
7 Then Josiah contributed to the people, as passover offerings for all
that were present, lambs and kids from the flock to the number of
thirty thousand, and three thousand bulls; these were from the king's
possessions. 8 His officials contributed willingly to the people, to the
priests, and to the Levites. Hilkiah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, the chief
officers of the house of God, gave to the priests for the passover

887

2 CHRONICLES 888

offerings two thousand six hundred lambs and kids and three hundred
bulls. 9 Conaniah also, and his brothers Shemaiah and Nethanel, and
Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad, the chiefs of the Levites, gave to the
Levites for the passover offerings five thousand lambs and kids and five
hundred bulls.
10 When the service had been prepared for, the priests stood in their
place, and the Levites in their divisions according to the king's
command. 11 They slaughtered the passover lamb, and the priests
dashed the blood that they received from them, while the Levites did
the skinning. 12 They set aside the burnt offerings so that they might
distribute them according to the groupings of the ancestral houses of
the people, to offer to the LORD, as it is written in the book of Moses.
And they did the same with the bulls. 13 They roasted the passover
lamb with fire according to the ordinance; and they boiled the holy
offerings in pots, in caldrons, and in pans, and carried them quickly to
all the people. 14 Afterward they made preparations for themselves
and for the priests, because the priests the descendants of Aaron were
occupied in offering the burnt offerings and the fat parts until night;
so the Levites made preparations for themselves and for the priests, the
descendants of Aaron. 15 The singers, the descendants of Asaph, were
in their place according to the command of David, and Asaph, and
Heman, and the king's seer Jeduthun. The gatekeepers were at each
gate; they did not need to interrupt their service, for their kindred the
Levites made preparations for them.
16 So all the service of the LORD was prepared that day, to keep the
passover and to offer burnt offerings on the altar of the LORD,
according to the command of King Josiah. 17 The people of Israel who
were present kept the passover at that time, and the festival of
unleavened bread seven days. 18 No passover like it had been kept in
Israel since the days of the prophet Samuel; none of the kings of Israel
had kept such a passover as was kept by Josiah, by the priests and the
Levites, by all Judah and Israel who were present, and by the
inhabitants of Jerusalem. 19 In the eighteenth year of the reign of
Josiah this passover was kept.

888

2 CHRONICLES 889

Josiah's defeat and death by Pharaoh Neco
20 After all this, when Josiah had set the temple in order, King Neco of
Egypt went up to fight at Carchemish on the Euphrates, and Josiah
went out against him. 21 But Neco sent envoys to him, saying, "What
have I to do with you, king of Judah? I am not coming against you
today, but against the house with which I am at war; and God has
commanded me to hurry. Cease opposing God, who is with me, so that
he will not destroy you." 22 But Josiah would not turn away from him,
but disguised himself in order to fight with him. He did not listen to
the words of Neco from the mouth of God, but joined battle in the
plain of Megiddo. 23 The archers shot King Josiah; and the king said to
his servants, "Take me away, for I am badly wounded." 24 So his
servants took him out of the chariot and carried him in his second
chariot and brought him to Jerusalem. There he died, and was buried
in the tombs of his ancestors. All Judah and Jerusalem mourned for
Josiah. 25 Jeremiah also uttered a lament for Josiah, and all the singing
men and singing women have spoken of Josiah in their laments to this
day. They made these a custom in Israel; they are recorded in the
Laments. 26 Now the rest of the acts of Josiah and his faithful deeds in
accordance with what is written in the law of the LORD, 27 and his acts,
first and last, are written in the Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah.
[2 Chronicles 36]
Judah's last four kings
1 The people of the land took Jehoahaz son of Josiah and made him
king to succeed his father in Jerusalem. 2 Jehoahaz was twenty-three
years old when he began to reign; he reigned three months in
Jerusalem. 3 Then the king of Egypt deposed him in Jerusalem and laid
on the land a tribute of one hundred talents of silver and one talent of
gold. 4 The king of Egypt made his brother Eliakim king over Judah
and Jerusalem, and changed his name to Jehoiakim; but Neco took his
brother Jehoahaz and carried him to Egypt.
5 Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he began to reign; he
reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. He did what was evil in the sight of
the LORD his God. 6 Against him King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came

889

2 CHRONICLES 890

up, and bound him with fetters to take him to Babylon. 7
Nebuchadnezzar also carried some of the vessels of the house of the
LORD to Babylon and put them in his palace in Babylon. 8 Now the rest
of the acts of Jehoiakim, and the abominations that he did, and what
was found against him, are written in the Book of the Kings of Israel
and Judah; and his son Jehoiachin succeeded him.
9 Jehoiachin was eight years old when he began to reign; he reigned
three months and ten days in Jerusalem. He did what was evil in the
sight of the LORD. 10 In the spring of the year King Nebuchadnezzar
sent and brought him to Babylon, along with the precious vessels of
the house of the LORD, and made his brother Zedekiah king over Judah
and Jerusalem.
11 Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he began to reign; he
reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. 12 He did what was evil in the sight
of the LORD his God. He did not humble himself before the prophet
Jeremiah who spoke from the mouth of the LORD. 13 He also rebelled
against King Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God; he
stiffened his neck and hardened his heart against turning to the LORD,
the God of Israel. 14 All the leading priests and the people also were
exceedingly unfaithful, following all the abominations of the nations;
and they polluted the house of the LORD that he had consecrated in
Jerusalem.
Exile and call to return
15 The LORD, the God of their ancestors, sent persistently to them by his
messengers, because he had compassion on his people and on his
dwelling place; 16 but they kept mocking the messengers of God,
despising his words, and scoffing at his prophets, until the wrath of the
LORD against his people became so great that there was no remedy.
17 Therefore he brought up against them the king of the Chaldeans,
who killed their youths with the sword in the house of their sanctuary,
and had no compassion on young man or young woman, the aged or
the feeble; he gave them all into his hand. 18 All the vessels of the
house of God, large and small, and the treasures of the house of the

890

2 CHRONICLES 891

LORD, and the treasures of the king and of his officials, all these he
brought to Babylon. 19 They burned the house of God, broke down the
wall of Jerusalem, burned all its palaces with fire, and destroyed all its
precious vessels. 20 He took into exile in Babylon those who had
escaped from the sword, and they became servants to him and to his
sons until the establishment of the kingdom of Persia, 21 to fulfill the
word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had made
up for its sabbaths. All the days that it lay desolate it kept sabbath, to
fulfill seventy years.
22 In the first year of King Cyrus of Persia, in fulfillment of the word of
the LORD spoken by Jeremiah, the LORD stirred up the spirit of King
Cyrus of Persia so that he sent a herald throughout all his kingdom and
also declared in a written edict: 23 "Thus says King Cyrus of Persia: The
LORD, the God of heaven, has given me all the kingdoms of the earth,
and he has charged me to build him a house at Jerusalem, which is in
Judah. Whoever is among you of all his people, may the LORD his God
be with him! Let him go up."

891

EZRA 892

EZRA
Introduction
Ezra-Nehemiah forms a single book in the Hebrew Bible, though its
two parts are separated in Christian tradition. It begins where
Chronicles ends (2 Chr 36.22-23||Ezra 1.1-3), with an account of the
return from exile (528 BCE). The return, authorized by the edict of the
Persian king Cyrus, marks the beginning of a lengthy process of
rebuilding the Temple and Jerusalem. During this period, under Persian
control, Israel reconstitutes itself as the "people of the Book," with
scripture, specifically the first five books of the Bible (the Torah, also
known as the Law of Moses, or the Pentateuch), become authoritative
for communal and personal life. These developments take place in the
period of Ezra and Nehemiah. While the Temple and its clergy gain
unprecedented powers, so does the community itself, as new criteria
for identity and membership develop.
Cyrus's edict permitting the return sets the agenda for the entire book.
For Ezra-Nehemiah, it launches a national and religious rebirth and
reconstruction that includes a rebuilding of the Temple, of the
community, and of Jerusalem. The edict also establishes Persian
legitimation of Jewish life in the Persian province of Yehud (or Judah),
claiming harmony between Persian imperial policies and the will of
Israel's God, a position that pervades Ezra-Nehemiah.
It is difficult to reconstruct the actual history of this period. Most likely,
the return and rebuilding took place in three or four stages. First, the
initial returnees, led by Sheshbazzar in 538, began to rebuild the
Temple but were forced to abandon the project. Second, a further
group of exiles, under the leadership of Zerubbabel and Jeshua,
returned during the reign of the Persian king Darius I (522-486 BCE)
and completed the Temple reconstruction in 515 BCE. Third, a group
led by Ezra in 458 BCE during the reign of Artaxerxes I (454-424 BCE)
892

EZRA 893

reestablished the Torah, i.e., the Law of Moses, as the authority for
Jews in Judah. Finally, a group led by Nehemiah beginning in 445 BCE,
also during the time of Artaxerxes I, restored Jerusalem's walls and
repopulated Jerusalem. Some scholars have suggested that Ezra's
return took place after Nehemiah's. The majority of scholars, however,
favor the reconstruction noted above, which will be used in the
annotations.
The returned exiles were concerned not only with restoring preexilic
institutions, such as the altar, Temple, and city, but with establishing
religious practice that conformed to their understanding of the book
of the Torah, which likely reached its final form in the late exilic or
early postexilic period. To the author, the returned exiles were a godly
remnant with a renewed commitment to perpetuate the covenantal
teachings that kept them distinct. The author was especially worried
that the community might repeat the mistakes that caused the exile,
and a new destruction would follow.
The returned exiles wee a minority within the vast, polytheistic and
multicultural Persian Empire. Consequently, they sought to protect
their ethnic and religious identity by establishing rigorous religious
boundaries between themselves and their neighbors through the
observance of the Torah. For Ezra-Nehemiah, mixed marriages posed a
serious threat to maintaining distinctiveness, hence its objection to
exogamous marriages.
Ezra-Nehemiah utilizes contemporary sources in composing its account:
memoirs of Ezra, memoirs of Nehemiah (two first-person reports),
Aramaic letters, and assorted lists. These are organized theologically
rather than merely historically into a three-stage fulfillment of God's
promise and Cyrus's exhortation to build the house of God in Judah.
Each stage begins in exile and ends in Jerusalem; each expands the
scope of the house of God — from Temple (Ezra 3-6), to community
(Ezra 7-9), to Jerusalem as a whole (Neh 1-7), reconstituted finally as a
holy city (Neh 11.1). Two lists of returnees (Ezra 2 and Neh 7) frame the
activities of the returned exiles, melding the stages into a continuous
development. Completion is celebrated with extensive ceremonies of
rededication (Neh 8-13).

893

EZRA 894

Ezra-Nehemiah was probably composed in Judah shortly after 400 BCE.
It shares some themes and vocabulary with Chronicles, another Persianperiod book, but is not by that author (see the Introduction to 1
Chronicles). It also shares elements with several later books under the
name of Ezra that circulated in antiquity and are preserved in the
Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha, especially 1 Esdras.
HT

TH

The structure of the book is as follows: Ezra-Nehemiah opens with
God's promise and Cyrus's decree (Ezra 1.1-4), and continues with exiled
Israel's response (Ezra 1.5-Neh 7.73), culminating in celebration of
reconstruction (Neh 8-13). After an anticipatory summary of
enthusiastic response (Ezra 1.5-11) and a framing section of the list of
returnees (Ezra 2.1-70), the response takes place in three stages: the
first stage of reconstruction, building the Temple in 538-516 BCE (Ezra
3.1-6.22); the second stage, the mission of Ezra and the formation of
the community according to Torah in 458 BCE (Ezra 7.1-10.44); and the
third stage, rebuilding Jerusalem under Nehemiah's leadership in 445444 BCE (Neh 1.1-7.5). These stages close with another framing section,
the repeated list of returnees (Neh 7.6-73). Then follows a celebration
of renewal and reconstruction (Neh 8-13), consisting of the reading and
implementation of the Torah (Neh 8); the confession and commitment
of the people (Neh 9-10); the repopulation of the city and review of the
people (Neh 11.1-12.26); and a service of dedication, including
celebration, purification, procession, and separation (Neh 12.27-13.3).
The work as a whole closes with a coda (Neh 13.4-31) in which
Nehemiah recounts some of his reforms and invokes God's
remembrance.

[Ezra 1]
God's promise and Cyrus's decree
1 In the first year of King Cyrus of Persia, in order that the word of the
LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, the LORD
stirred up the spirit of King Cyrus of Persia so that he sent a herald
throughout all his kingdom, and also in a written edict declared:

894

EZRA 895

2 "Thus says King Cyrus of Persia: The LORD, the God of heaven, has
given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and he has charged me to
build him a house at Jerusalem in Judah. 3 Any of those among you
who are of his people — may their God be with them! — are now
permitted to go up to Jerusalem in Judah, and rebuild the house of the
LORD, the God of Israel — he is the God who is in Jerusalem; 4 and let
all survivors, in whatever place they reside, be assisted by the people of
their place with silver and gold, with goods and with animals, besides
freewill offerings for the house of God in Jerusalem."
Exiled Israel responds: three stages of return and reconstruction;
anticipatory summary
5 The heads of the families of Judah and Benjamin, and the priests and
the Levites — everyone whose spirit God had stirred — got ready to go
up and rebuild the house of the LORD in Jerusalem. 6 All their
neighbors aided them with silver vessels, with gold, with goods, with
animals, and with valuable gifts, besides all that was freely offered. 7
King Cyrus himself brought out the vessels of the house of the LORD
that Nebuchadnezzar had carried away from Jerusalem and placed in
the house of his gods. 8 King Cyrus of Persia had them released into
the charge of Mithredath the treasurer, who counted them out to
Sheshbazzar the prince of Judah. 9 And this was the inventory: gold
basins, thirty; silver basins, one thousand; knives, twenty-nine; 10 gold
bowls, thirty; other silver bowls, four hundred ten; other vessels, one
thousand; 11 the total of the gold and silver vessels was five thousand
four hundred. All these Sheshbazzar brought up, when the exiles were
brought up from Babylonia to Jerusalem.
[Ezra 2]
Frame: initial list of returnees
1 Now these were the people of the province who came from those
captive exiles whom King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon had carried
captive to Babylonia; they returned to Jerusalem and Judah, all to their
own towns. 2 They came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah,
Reelaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispar, Bigvai, Rehum, and Baanah.

895

EZRA 896

The number of the Israelite people: 3 the descendants of Parosh, two
thousand one hundred seventy-two. 4 Of Shephatiah, three hundred
seventy-two. 5 Of Arah, seven hundred seventy-five. 6 Of Pahathmoab, namely the descendants of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand eight
hundred twelve. 7 Of Elam, one thousand two hundred fifty-four. 8 Of
Zattu, nine hundred forty-five. 9 Of Zaccai, seven hundred sixty. 10 Of
Bani, six hundred forty-two. 11 Of Bebai, six hundred twenty-three. 12
Of Azgad, one thousand two hundred twenty-two. 13 Of Adonikam, six
hundred sixty-six. 14 Of Bigvai, two thousand fifty-six. 15 Of Adin, four
hundred fifty-four. 16 Of Ater, namely of Hezekiah, ninety-eight. 17 Of
Bezai, three hundred twenty-three. 18 Of Jorah, one hundred twelve.
19 Of Hashum, two hundred twenty-three. 20 Of Gibbar, ninety-five. 21
Of Bethlehem, one hundred twenty-three. 22 The people of Netophah,
fifty-six. 23 Of Anathoth, one hundred twenty-eight. 24 The
descendants of Azmaveth, forty-two. 25 Of Kiriatharim, Chephirah, and
Beeroth, seven hundred forty-three. 26 Of Ramah and Geba, six
hundred twenty-one. 27 The people of Michmas, one hundred twentytwo. 28 Of Bethel and Ai, two hundred twenty-three. 29 The
descendants of Nebo, fifty-two. 30 Of Magbish, one hundred fifty-six.
31 Of the other Elam, one thousand two hundred fifty-four. 32 Of
Harim, three hundred twenty. 33 Of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven
hundred twenty-five. 34 Of Jericho, three hundred forty-five. 35 Of
Senaah, three thousand six hundred thirty.
36 The priests: the descendants of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine
hundred seventy-three. 37 Of Immer, one thousand fifty-two. 38 Of
Pashhur, one thousand two hundred forty-seven. 39 Of Harim, one
thousand seventeen.
40 The Levites: the descendants of Jeshua and Kadmiel, of the
descendants of Hodaviah, seventy-four. 41 The singers: the descendants
of Asaph, one hundred twenty-eight. 42 The descendants of the
gatekeepers: of Shallum, of Ater, of Talmon, of Akkub, of Hatita, and
of Shobai, in all one hundred thirty-nine.
43 The temple servants: the descendants of Ziha, Hasupha, Tabbaoth,
44 Keros, Siaha, Padon, 45 Lebanah, Hagabah, Akkub, 46 Hagab,
Shamlai, Hanan, 47 Giddel, Gahar, Reaiah, 48 Rezin, Nekoda, Gazzam,

896

EZRA 897

49 Uzza, Paseah, Besai, 50 Asnah, Meunim, Nephisim, 51 Bakbuk,
Hakupha, Harhur, 52 Bazluth, Mehida, Harsha, 53 Barkos, Sisera,
Temah, 4 Neziah, and Hatipha.
55 The descendants of Solomon's servants: Sotai, Hassophereth, Peruda,
56 Jaalah, Darkon, Giddel, 57 Shephatiah, Hattil, Pochereth-hazzebaim,
and Ami.
58 All the temple servants and the descendants of Solomon's servants
were three hundred ninety-two.
59 The following were those who came up from Tel-melah, Tel-harsha,
Cherub, Addan, and Immer, though they could not prove their families
or their descent, whether they belonged to Israel: 60 the descendants
of Delaiah, Tobiah, and Nekoda, six hundred fifty-two. 61 Also, of the
descendants of the priests: the descendants of Habaiah, Hakkoz, and
Barzillai (who had married one of the daughters of Barzillai the
Gileadite, and was called by their name). 62 These looked for their
entries in the genealogical records, but they were not found there, and
so they were excluded from the priesthood as unclean; 6 3 the
governor told them that they were not to partake of the most holy
food, until there should be a priest to consult Urim and Thummim.
64 The whole assembly together was forty-two thousand three
hundred sixty, 6 5 besides their male and female servants, of whom
there were seven thousand three hundred thirty-seven; and they had
two hundred male and female singers. 6 6 They had seven hundred
thirty-six horses, two hundred forty-five mules, 67 four hundred thirtyfive camels, and six thousand seven hundred twenty donkeys.
68 As soon as they came to the house of the LORD in Jerusalem, some of
the heads of families made freewill offerings for the house of God, to
erect it on its site. 69 According to their resources they gave to the
building fund sixty-one thousand darics of gold, five thousand minas of
silver, and one hundred priestly robes.

897

EZRA 898

70 The priests, the Levites, and some of the people lived in Jerusalem
and its vicinity; and the singers, the gatekeepers, and the temple
servants lived in their towns, and all Israel in their towns.
[Ezra 3]
First stage of reconstruction: building the Temple; first step: rebuilding
the altar
1 When the seventh month came, and the Israelites were in the towns,
the people gathered together in Jerusalem. 2 Then Jeshua son of
Jozadak, with his fellow priests, and Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel with
his kin set out to build the altar of the God of Israel, to offer burnt
offerings on it, as prescribed in the law of Moses the man of God. 3
They set up the altar on its foundation, because they were in dread of
the neighboring peoples, and they offered burnt offerings upon it to
the LORD, morning and evening. 4 And they kept the festival of booths,
as prescribed, and offered the daily burnt offerings by number
according to the ordinance, as required for each day, 5 and after that
the regular burnt offerings, the offerings at the new moon and at all
the sacred festivals of the LORD, and the offerings of everyone who
made a freewill offering to the LORD. 6 From the first day of the
seventh month they began to offer burnt offerings to the LORD. But the
foundation of the temple of the LORD was not yet laid. 7 So they gave
money to the masons and the carpenters, and food, drink, and oil to
the Sidonians and the Tyrians to bring cedar trees from Lebanon to the
sea, to Joppa, according to the grant that they had from King Cyrus of
Persia.
Second step: found the Second Temple
8 In the second year after their arrival at the house of God at
Jerusalem, in the second month, Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and
Jeshua son of Jozadak made a beginning, together with the rest of
their people, the priests and the Levites and all who had come to
Jerusalem from the captivity. They appointed the Levites, from twenty
years old and upward, to have the oversight of the work on the house
of the LORD. 9 And Jeshua with his sons and his kin, and Kadmiel and
his sons, Binnui and Hodaviah along with the sons of Henadad, the

898

EZRA 899

Levites, their sons and kin, together took charge of the workers in the
house of God.
10 When the builders laid the foundation of the temple of the LORD,
the priests in their vestments were stationed to praise the LORD with
trumpets, and the Levites, the sons of Asaph, with cymbals, according
to the directions of King David of Israel; 11 and they sang responsively,
praising and giving thanks to the LORD,
"For he is good,
for his steadfast love endures forever toward Israel."
And all the people responded with a great shout when they praised
the LORD, because the foundation of the house of the LORD was laid. 12
But many of the priests and Levites and heads of families, old people
who had seen the first house on its foundations, wept with a loud
voice when they saw this house, though many shouted aloud for joy, 13
so that the people could not distinguish the sound of the joyful shout
from the sound of the people's weeping, for the people shouted so
loudly that the sound was heard far away.
[Ezra 4]
Opposition and support: opposition from neighbors halts rebuilding
1 When the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard that the returned
exiles were building a temple to the LORD, the God of Israel, 2 they
approached Zerubbabel and the heads of families and said to them,
"Let us build with you, for we worship your God as you do, and we
have been sacrificing to him ever since the days of King Esar-haddon of
Assyria who brought us here." 3 But Zerubbabel, Jeshua, and the rest
of the heads of families in Israel said to them, "You shall have no part
with us in building a house to our God; but we alone will build to the
LORD, the God of Israel, as King Cyrus of Persia has commanded us."
4 Then the people of the land discouraged the people of Judah, and
made them afraid to build, 5 and they bribed officials to frustrate their
plan throughout the reign of King Cyrus of Persia and until the reign
of King Darius of Persia.

899

EZRA 900

6 In the reign of Ahasuerus, in his accession year, they wrote an
accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem.
Further opposition during the reign of Artaxerxes
7 And in the days of Artaxerxes, Bishlam and Mithredath and Tabeel
and the rest of their associates wrote to King Artaxerxes of Persia; the
letter was written in Aramaic and translated. 8 Rehum the royal deputy
and Shimshai the scribe wrote a letter against Jerusalem to King
Artaxerxes as follows 9 (then Rehum the royal deputy, Shimshai the
scribe, and the rest of their associates, the judges, the envoys, the
officials, the Persians, the people of Erech, the Babylonians, the people
of Susa, that is, the Elamites, 10 and the rest of the nations whom the
great and noble Osnappar deported and settled in the cities of Samaria
and in the rest of the province Beyond the River wrote — and now 11
this is a copy of the letter that they sent):
The opponents' letter
"To King Artaxerxes: Your servants, the people of the province Beyond
the River, send greeting. And now 12 may it be known to the king that
the Jews who came up from you to us have gone to Jerusalem. They
are rebuilding that rebellious and wicked city; they are finishing the
walls and repairing the foundations. 13 Now may it be known to the
king that, if this city is rebuilt and the walls finished, they will not pay
tribute, custom, or toll, and the royal revenue will be reduced. 14 Now
because we share the salt of the palace and it is not fitting for us to
witness the king's dishonor, therefore we send and inform the king, 15
so that a search may be made in the annals of your ancestors. You will
discover in the annals that this is a rebellious city, hurtful to kings and
provinces, and that sedition was stirred up in it from long ago. On that
account this city was laid waste. 16 We make known to the king that, if
this city is rebuilt and its walls finished, you will then have no
possession in the province Beyond the River."

900

EZRA 901

Royal response, prohibiting building
17 The king sent an answer: "To Rehum the royal deputy and Shimshai
the scribe and the rest of their associates who live in Samaria and in
the rest of the province Beyond the River, greeting. And now 18 the
letter that you sent to us has been read in translation before me. 19 So
I made a decree, and someone searched and discovered that this city
has risen against kings from long ago, and that rebellion and sedition
have been made in it. 20 Jerusalem has had mighty kings who ruled
over the whole province Beyond the River, to whom tribute, custom,
and toll were paid. 21 Therefore issue an order that these people be
made to cease, and that this city not be rebuilt, until I make a decree.
22 Moreover, take care not to be slack in this matter; why should
damage grow to the hurt of the king?"
23 Then when the copy of King Artaxerxes' letter was read before
Rehum and the scribe Shimshai and their associates, they hurried to the
Jews in Jerusalem and by force and power made them cease. 24 At that
time the work on the house of God in Jerusalem stopped and was
discontinued until the second year of the reign of King Darius of Persia.
[Ezra 5]
Third step: resumption of rebuilding of the Temple
1 Now the prophets, Haggai and Zechariah son of Iddo, prophesied to
the Jews who were in Judah and Jerusalem, in the name of the God of
Israel who was over them. 2 Then Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and
Jeshua son of Jozadak set out to rebuild the house of God in
Jerusalem; and with them were the prophets of God, helping them.
New inquiry
3 At the same time Tattenai the governor of the province Beyond the
River and Shethar-bozenai and their associates came to them and
spoke to them thus, "Who gave you a decree to build this house and to
finish this structure?" 4 They also asked them this, "What are the
names of the men who are building this building?" 5 But the eye of
their God was upon the elders of the Jews, and they did not stop them

901

EZRA 902

until a report reached Darius and then answer was returned by letter in
reply to it.
Tattenai's letter
6 The copy of the letter that Tattenai the governor of the province
Beyond the River and Shethar-bozenai and his associates the envoys
who were in the province Beyond the River sent to King Darius; 7 they
sent him a report, in which was written as follows: "To Darius the king,
all peace! 8 May it be known to the king that we went to the province
of Judah, to the house of the great God. It is being built of hewn
stone, and timber is laid in the walls; this work is being done diligently
and prospers in their hands. 9 Then we spoke to those elders and asked
them, 'Who gave you a decree to build this house and to finish this
structure?' 10 We also asked them their names, for your information, so
that we might write down the names of the men at their head. 11 This
was their reply to us: 'We are the servants of the God of heaven and
earth, and we are rebuilding the house that was built many years ago,
which a great king of Israel built and finished. 12 But because our
ancestors had angered the God of heaven, he gave them into the hand
of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon, the Chaldean, who destroyed this
house and carried away the people to Babylonia. 13 However, King
Cyrus of Babylon, in the first year of his reign, made a decree that this
house of God should be rebuilt. 14 Moreover, the gold and silver vessels
of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the
temple in Jerusalem and had brought into the temple of Babylon,
these King Cyrus took out of the temple of Babylon, and they were
delivered to a man named Sheshbazzar, whom he had made governor.
15 He said to him, "Take these vessels; go and put them in the temple
in Jerusalem, and let the house of God be rebuilt on its site." 16 Then
this Sheshbazzar came and laid the foundations of the house of God in
Jerusalem; and from that time until now it has been under
construction, and it is not yet finished.' 17 And now, if it seems good to
the king, have a search made in the royal archives there in Babylon, to
see whether a decree was issued by King Cyrus for the rebuilding of
this house of God in Jerusalem. Let the king send us his pleasure in this
matter."

902

EZRA 903

[Ezra 6]
Darius's edict in support of the Temple
1 Then King Darius made a decree, and they searched the archives
where the documents were stored in Babylon. 2 But it was in Ecbatana,
the capital in the province of Media, that a scroll was found on which
this was written: "A record. 3 In the first year of his reign, King Cyrus
issued a decree: Concerning the house of God at Jerusalem, let the
house be rebuilt, the place where sacrifices are offered and burnt
offerings are brought; its height shall be sixty cubits and its width sixty
cubits, 4 with three courses of hewn stones and one course of timber;
let the cost be paid from the royal treasury. 5 Moreover, let the gold
and silver vessels of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took out
of the temple in Jerusalem and brought to Babylon, be restored and
brought back to the temple in Jerusalem, each to its place; you shall
put them in the house of God."
6 "Now you, Tattenai, governor of the province Beyond the River,
Shethar-bozenai, and you, their associates, the envoys in the province
Beyond the River, keep away; 7 let the work on this house of God
alone; let the governor of the Jews and the elders of the Jews rebuild
this house of God on its site. 8 Moreover I make a decree regarding
what you shall do for these elders of the Jews for the rebuilding of this
house of God: the cost is to be paid to these people, in full and without
delay, from the royal revenue, the tribute of the province Beyond the
River. 9 Whatever is needed — young bulls, rams, or sheep for burnt
offerings to the God of heaven, wheat, salt, wine, or oil, as the priests
in Jerusalem require — let that be given to them day by day without
fail, 10 so that they may offer pleasing sacrifices to the God of heaven,
and pray for the life of the king and his children. 11 Furthermore I
decree that if anyone alters this edict, a beam shall be pulled out of the
house of the perpetrator, who then shall be impaled on it. The house
shall be made a dunghill. 12 May the God who has established his name
there overthrow any king or people that shall put forth a hand to alter
this, or to destroy this house of God in Jerusalem. I, Darius, make a
decree; let it be done with all diligence."

903

EZRA 904

Fourth step: completion of the Temple
13 Then, according to the word sent by King Darius, Tattenai, the
governor of the province Beyond the River, Shethar-bozenai, and their
associates did with all diligence what King Darius had ordered. 14 So
the elders of the Jews built and prospered, through the prophesying of
the prophet Haggai and Zechariah son of Iddo. They finished their
building by command of the God of Israel and by decree of Cyrus,
Darius, and King Artaxerxes of Persia; 15 and this house was finished on
the third day of the month of Adar, in the sixth year of the reign of
King Darius.
Concluding celebrations of the first stage
16 The people of Israel, the priests and the Levites, and the rest of the
returned exiles, celebrated the dedication of this house of God with
joy. 17 They offered at the dedication of this house of God one
hundred bulls, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs, and as a sin
offering for all Israel, twelve male goats, according to the number of
the tribes of Israel. 18 Then they set the priests in their divisions and
the Levites in their courses for the service of God at Jerusalem, as it is
written in the book of Moses.
19 On the fourteenth day of the first month the returned exiles kept
the passover. 20 For both the priests and the Levites had purified
themselves; all of them were clean. So they killed the passover lamb for
all the returned exiles, for their fellow priests, and for themselves. 21 It
was eaten by the people of Israel who had returned from exile, and
also by all who had joined them and separated themselves from the
pollutions of the nations of the land to worship the LORD, the God of
Israel. 22 With joy they celebrated the festival of unleavened bread
seven days; for the LORD had made them joyful, and had turned the
heart of the king of Assyria to them, so that he aided them in the work
on the house of God, the God of Israel.

904

EZRA 905

[Ezra 7]
Second stage of reconstruction: the mission of Ezra and the formation
of community according to Torah in 458 BCE; the narrator's
introduction of Ezra
1 After this, in the reign of King Artaxerxes of Persia, Ezra son of
Seraiah, son of Azariah, son of Hilkiah, 2 son of Shallum, son of Zadok,
son of Ahitub, 3 son of Amariah, son of Azariah, son of Meraioth, 4 son
of Zerahiah, son of Uzzi, son of Bukki, 5 son of Abishua, son of
Phinehas, son of Eleazar, son of the chief priest Aaron — 6 this Ezra
went up from Babylonia. He was a scribe skilled in the law of Moses
that the LORD the God of Israel had given; and the king granted him all
that he asked, for the hand of the LORD his God was upon him.
7 Some of the people of Israel, and some of the priests and Levites, the
singers and gatekeepers, and the temple servants also went up to
Jerusalem, in the seventh year of King Artaxerxes. 8 They came to
Jerusalem in the fifth month, which was in the seventh year of the
king. 9 On the first day of the first month the journey up from Babylon
was begun, and on the first day of the fifth month he came to
Jerusalem, for the gracious hand of his God was upon him. 10 For Ezra
had set his heart to study the law of the LORD, and to do it, and to
teach the statutes and ordinances in Israel.
Royal introduction of Ezra and his mission
11 This is a copy of the letter that King Artaxerxes gave to the priest
Ezra, the scribe, a scholar of the text of the commandments of the LORD
and his statutes for Israel: 12 "Artaxerxes, king of kings, to the priest
Ezra, the scribe of the law of the God of heaven: Peace. And now 13 I
decree that any of the people of Israel or their priests or Levites in my
kingdom who freely offers to go to Jerusalem may go with you. 14 For
you are sent by the king and his seven counselors to make inquiries
about Judah and Jerusalem according to the law of your God, which is
in your hand, 15 and also to convey the silver and gold that the king
and his counselors have freely offered to the God of Israel, whose
dwelling is in Jerusalem, 16 with all the silver and gold that you shall
find in the whole province of Babylonia, and with the freewill offerings

905

EZRA 906

of the people and the priests, given willingly for the house of their God
in Jerusalem. 17 With this money, then, you shall with all diligence buy
bulls, rams, and lambs, and their grain offerings and their drink
offerings, and you shall offer them on the altar of the house of your
God in Jerusalem. 18 Whatever seems good to you and your colleagues
to do with the rest of the silver and gold, you may do, according to the
will of your God. 19 The vessels that have been given you for the
service of the house of your God, you shall deliver before the God of
Jerusalem. 20 And whatever else is required for the house of your God,
which you are responsible for providing, you may provide out of the
king's treasury.
21 "I, King Artaxerxes, decree to all the treasurers in the province
Beyond the River: Whatever the priest Ezra, the scribe of the law of the
God of heaven, requires of you, let it be done with all diligence, 22 up
to one hundred talents of silver, one hundred cors of wheat, one
hundred baths of wine, one hundred baths of oil, and unlimited salt. 23
Whatever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be done with zeal
for the house of the God of heaven, or wrath will come upon the realm
of the king and his heirs. 24 We also notify you that it shall not be
lawful to impose tribute, custom, or toll on any of the priests, the
Levites, the singers, the doorkeepers, the temple servants, or other
servants of this house of God.
25 "And you, Ezra, according to the God-given wisdom you possess,
appoint magistrates and judges who may judge all the people in the
province Beyond the River who know the laws of your God; and you
shall teach those who do not know them. 26 All who will not obey the
law of your God and the law of the king, let judgment be strictly
executed on them, whether for death or for banishment or for
confiscation of their goods or for imprisonment."
Ezra's memoirs
27 Blessed be the LORD, the God of our ancestors, who put such a thing
as this into the heart of the king to glorify the house of the LORD in
Jerusalem, 28 and who extended to me steadfast love before the king
and his counselors, and before all the king's mighty officers. I took

906

EZRA 907

courage, for the hand of the LORD my God was upon me, and I
gathered leaders from Israel to go up with me.
[Ezra 8]
Additional members and clans in Ezra's caravan
1 These are their family heads, and this is the genealogy of those who
went up with me from Babylonia, in the reign of King Artaxerxes: 2 Of
the descendants of Phinehas, Gershom. Of Ithamar, Daniel. Of David,
Hattush, 3 of the descendants of Shecaniah. Of Parosh, Zechariah, with
whom were registered one hundred fifty males. 4 Of the descendants
of Pahath-moab, Eliehoenai son of Zerahiah, and with him two
hundred males. 5 Of the descendants of Zattu, Shecaniah son of
Jahaziel, and with him three hundred males. 6 Of the descendants of
Adin, Ebed son of Jonathan, and with him fifty males. 7 Of the
descendants of Elam, Jeshaiah son of Athaliah, and with him seventy
males. 8 Of the descendants of Shephatiah, Zebadiah son of Michael,
and with him eighty males. 9 Of the descendants of Joab, Obadiah son
of Jehiel, and with him two hundred eighteen males. 10 Of the
descendants of Bani, Shelomith son of Josiphiah, and with him one
hundred sixty males. 11 Of the descendants of Bebai, Zechariah son of
Bebai, and with him twenty-eight males. 12 Of the descendants of
Azgad, Johanan son of Hakkatan, and with him one hundred ten
males. 13 Of the descendants of Adonikam, those who came later, their
names being Eliphelet, Jeuel, and Shemaiah, and with them sixty
males. 14 Of the descendants of Bigvai, Uthai and Zaccur, and with
them seventy males.
15 I gathered them by the river that runs to Ahava, and there we
camped three days. As I reviewed the people and the priests, I found
there none of the descendants of Levi. 16 Then I sent for Eliezer, Ariel,
Shemaiah, Elnathan, Jarib, Elnathan, Nathan, Zechariah, and
Meshullam, who were leaders, and for Joiarib and Elnathan, who were
wise, 17 and sent them to Iddo, the leader at the place called Casiphia,
telling them what to say to Iddo and his colleagues the temple servants
at Casiphia, namely, to send us ministers for the house of our God. 18
Since the gracious hand of our God was upon us, they brought us a
man of discretion, of the descendants of Mahli son of Levi son of Israel,

907

EZRA 908

namely Sherebiah, with his sons and kin, eighteen; 19 also Hashabiah
and with him Jeshaiah of the descendants of Merari, with his kin and
their sons, twenty; 20 besides two hundred twenty of the temple
servants, whom David and his officials had set apart to attend the
Levites. These were all mentioned by name.
Preparations
21 Then I proclaimed a fast there, at the river Ahava, that we might
deny ourselves before our God, to seek from him a safe journey for
ourselves, our children, and all our possessions. 22 For I was ashamed to
ask the king for a band of soldiers and cavalry to protect us against the
enemy on our way, since we had told the king that the hand of our
God is gracious to all who seek him, but his power and his wrath are
against all who forsake him. 23 So we fasted and petitioned our God
for this, and he listened to our entreaty.
Further preparations: empowering clergy
24 Then I set apart twelve of the leading priests: Sherebiah, Hashabiah,
and ten of their kin with them. 25 And I weighed out to them the silver
and the gold and the vessels, the offering for the house of our God
that the king, his counselors, his lords, and all Israel there present had
offered; 26 I weighed out into their hand six hundred fifty talents of
silver, and one hundred silver vessels worth talents, and one hundred
talents of gold, 27 twenty gold bowls worth a thousand darics, and two
vessels of fine polished bronze as precious as gold. 28 And I said to
them, "You are holy to the LORD, and the vessels are holy; and the
silver and the gold are a freewill offering to the LORD, the God of your
ancestors. 29 Guard them and keep them until you weigh them before
the chief priests and the Levites and the heads of families in Israel at
Jerusalem, within the chambers of the house of the LORD." 30 So the
priests and the Levites took over the silver, the gold, and the vessels as
they were weighed out, to bring them to Jerusalem, to the house of
our God.

908

EZRA 909

31 Then we left the river Ahava on the twelfth day of the first month,
to go to Jerusalem; the hand of our God was upon us, and he delivered
us from the hand of the enemy and from ambushes along the way. 32
We came to Jerusalem and remained there three days. 33 On the
fourth day, within the house of our God, the silver, the gold, and the
vessels were weighed into the hands of the priest Meremoth son of
Uriah, and with him was Eleazar son of Phinehas, and with them were
the Levites, Jozabad son of Jeshua and Noadiah son of Binnui. 34 The
total was counted and weighed, and the weight of everything was
recorded.
35 At that time those who had come from captivity, the returned
exiles, offered burnt offerings to the God of Israel, twelve bulls for all
Israel, ninety-six rams, seventy-seven lambs, and as a sin offering twelve
male goats; all this was a burnt offering to the LORD. 36 They also
delivered the king's commissions to the king's satraps and to the
governors of the province Beyond the River; and they supported the
people and the house of God.
[Ezra 9]
The crisis of mixed marriages; Ezra reacts with mourning and prayer
1 After these things had been done, the officials approached me and
said, "The people of Israel, the priests, and the Levites have not
separated themselves from the peoples of the lands with their
abominations, from the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the
Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Egyptians, and the
Amorites. 2 For they have taken some of their daughters as wives for
themselves and for their sons. Thus the holy seed has mixed itself with
the peoples of the lands, and in this faithlessness the officials and
leaders have led the way." 3 When I heard this, I tore my garment and
my mantle, and pulled hair from my head and beard, and sat appalled.
4 Then all who trembled at the words of the God of Israel, because of
the faithlessness of the returned exiles, gathered around me while I sat
appalled until the evening sacrifice.

909

EZRA 910

Ezra's prayer
5 At the evening sacrifice I got up from my fasting, with my garments
and my mantle torn, and fell on my knees, spread out my hands to the
LORD my God, 6 and said,
"O my God, I am too ashamed and embarrassed to lift my face to you,
my God, for our iniquities have risen higher than our heads, and our
guilt has mounted up to the heavens. 7 From the days of our ancestors
to this day we have been deep in guilt, and for our iniquities we, our
kings, and our priests have been handed over to the kings of the lands,
to the sword, to captivity, to plundering, and to utter shame, as is now
the case. 8 But now for a brief moment favor has been shown by the
LORD our God, who has left us a remnant, and given us a stake in his
holy place, in order that he may brighten our eyes and grant us a little
sustenance in our slavery. 9 For we are slaves; yet our God has not
forsaken us in our slavery, but has extended to us his steadfast love
before the kings of Persia, to give us new life to set up the house of
our God, to repair its ruins, and to give us a wall in Judea and
Jerusalem.
10 "And now, our God, what shall we say after this? For we have
forsaken your commandments, 11 which you commanded by your
servants the prophets, saying, 'The land that you are entering to
possess is a land unclean with the pollutions of the peoples of the
lands, with their abominations. They have filled it from end to end
with their uncleanness. 12 Therefore do not give your daughters to
their sons, neither take their daughters for your sons, and never seek
their peace or prosperity, so that you may be strong and eat the good
of the land and leave it for an inheritance to your children forever.' 13
After all that has come upon us for our evil deeds and for our great
guilt, seeing that you, our God, have punished us less than our
iniquities deserved and have given us such a remnant as this, 14 shall
we break your commandments again and intermarry with the peoples
who practice these abominations? Would you not be angry with us
until you destroy us without remnant or survivor? 15 O LORD, God of
Israel, you are just, but we have escaped as a remnant, as is now the

910

EZRA 911

case. Here we are before you in our guilt, though no one can face you
because of this."
[Ezra 10]
Resolution of crisis; the impact of Ezra's prayer
1 While Ezra prayed and made confession, weeping and throwing
himself down before the house of God, a very great assembly of men,
women, and children gathered to him out of Israel; the people also
wept bitterly. 2 Shecaniah son of Jehiel, of the descendants of Elam,
addressed Ezra, saying, "We have broken faith with our God and have
married foreign women from the peoples of the land, but even now
there is hope for Israel in spite of this. 3 So now let us make a covenant
with our God to send away all these wives and their children, according
to the counsel of my lord and of those who tremble at the
commandment of our God; and let it be done according to the law. 4
Take action, for it is your duty, and we are with you; be strong, and do
it." 5 Then Ezra stood up and made the leading priests, the Levites, and
all Israel swear that they would do as had been said. So they swore.
Steps toward the resolution
6 Then Ezra withdrew from before the house of God, and went to the
chamber of Jehohanan son of Eliashib, where he spent the night. He
did not eat bread or drink water, for he was mourning over the
faithlessness of the exiles. 7 They made a proclamation throughout
Judah and Jerusalem to all the returned exiles that they should
assemble at Jerusalem, 8 and that if any did not come within three
days, by order of the officials and the elders all their property should
be forfeited, and they themselves banned from the congregation of
the exiles.
A communal process for resolution
9 Then all the people of Judah and Benjamin assembled at Jerusalem
within the three days; it was the ninth month, on the twentieth day of
the month. All the people sat in the open square before the house of
God, trembling because of this matter and because of the heavy rain.

911

EZRA 912

10 Then Ezra the priest stood up and said to them, "You have
trespassed and married foreign women, and so increased the guilt of
Israel. 11 Now make confession to the LORD the God of your ancestors,
and do his will; separate yourselves from the peoples of the land and
from the foreign wives." 12 Then all the assembly answered with a loud
voice, "It is so; we must do as you have said. 13 But the people are
many, and it is a time of heavy rain; we cannot stand in the open. Nor
is this a task for one day or for two, for many of us have transgressed
in this matter. 14 Let our officials represent the whole assembly, and let
all in our towns who have taken foreign wives come at appointed
times, and with them the elders and judges of every town, until the
fierce wrath of our God on this account is averted from us." 15 Only
Jonathan son of Asahel and Jahzeiah son of Tikvah opposed this, and
Meshullam and Shabbethai the Levites supported them.
Results: compliance with communal decision
16 Then the returned exiles did so. Ezra the priest selected men, heads
of families, according to their families, each of them designated by
name. On the first day of the tenth month they sat down to examine
the matter. 17 By the first day of the first month they had come to the
end of all the men who had married foreign women.
18 There were found of the descendants of the priests who had
married foreign women, of the descendants of Jeshua son of Jozadak
and his brothers: Maaseiah, Eliezer, Jarib, and Gedaliah. 19 They
pledged themselves to send away their wives, and their guilt offering
was a ram of the flock for their guilt. 20 Of the descendants of Immer:
Hanani and Zebadiah. 21 Of the descendants of Harim: Maaseiah,
Elijah, Shemaiah, Jehiel, and Uzziah. 22 Of the descendants of Pashhur:
Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethanel, Jozabad, and Elasah.
23 Of the Levites: Jozabad, Shimei, Kelaiah (that is, Kelita), Pethahiah,
Judah, and Eliezer. 24 Of the singers: Eliashib. Of the gatekeepers:
Shallum, Telem, and Uri.

912

EZRA 913

25 And of Israel: of the descendants of Parosh: Ramiah, Izziah,
Malchijah, Mijamin, Eleazar, Hashabiah, and Benaiah. 26 Of the
descendants of Elam: Mattaniah, Zechariah, Jehiel, Abdi, Jeremoth, and
Elijah. 27 Of the descendants of Zattu: Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah,
Jeremoth, Zabad, and Aziza. 28 Of the descendants of Bebai:
Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, and Athlai. 29 Of the descendants of
Bani: Meshullam, Malluch, Adaiah, Jashub, Sheal, and Jeremoth. 30 Of
the descendants of Pahath-moab: Adna, Chelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah,
Mattaniah, Bezalel, Binnui, and Manasseh. 31 Of the descendants of
Harim: Eliezer, Isshijah, Malchijah, Shemaiah, Shimeon, 32 Benjamin,
Malluch, and Shemariah. 33 Of the descendants of Hashum: Mattenai,
Mattattah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manasseh, and Shimei. 34 Of the
descendants of Bani: Maadai, Amram, Uel, 35 Benaiah, Bedeiah,
Cheluhi, 36 Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib, 37 Mattaniah, Mattenai, and
Jaasu. 38 Of the descendants of Binnui: Shimei, 39 Shelemiah, Nathan,
Adaiah, 40 Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai, 41 Azarel, Shelemiah,
Shemariah, 42 Shallum, Amariah, and Joseph. 43 Of the descendants of
Nebo: Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jaddai, Joel, and Benaiah. 44 All
these had married foreign women, and they sent them away with their
children.

913

NEHEMIAH 914

NEHEMIAH
Introduction
The introductory material for Nehemiah is found in the Introduction to
Ezra-Nehemiah. The section known as the book of Nehemiah depicts
the third stage of reconstruction under Nehemiah, focusing on
building Jerusalem's walls (1.1-7.5), followed by the repetition of the list
of returnees (7.6-73) that frames the three stages, and concluding with
the celebration of the achievements of the return and reconstruction
by the rededicated Jewish community (chs 8-13).
HT

TH

[Nehemiah 1]
Third stage of the reconstruction: rebuilding Jerusalem under
Nehemiah's leadership; commission of Nehemiah
1 The words of Nehemiah son of Hacaliah. In the month of Chislev, in
the twentieth year, while I was in Susa the capital, 2 one of my
brothers, Hanani, came with certain men from Judah; and I asked them
about the Jews that survived, those who had escaped the captivity, and
about Jerusalem. 3 They replied, "The survivors there in the province
who escaped captivity are in great trouble and shame; the wall of
Jerusalem is broken down, and its gates have been destroyed by fire."
Nehemiah's prayer
4 When I heard these words I sat down and wept, and mourned for
days, fasting and praying before the God of heaven. 5 I said, "O LORD
God of heaven, the great and awesome God who keeps covenant and
steadfast love with those who love him and keep his commandments; 6
let your ear be attentive and your eyes open to hear the prayer of your
914

NEHEMIAH 915

servant that I now pray before you day and night for your servants, the
people of Israel, confessing the sins of the people of Israel, which we
have sinned against you. Both I and my family have sinned. 7 We have
offended you deeply, failing to keep the commandments, the statutes,
and the ordinances that you commanded your servant Moses. 8
Remember the word that you commanded your servant Moses, 'If you
are unfaithful, I will scatter you among the peoples; 9 but if you return
to me and keep my commandments and do them, though your
outcasts are under the farthest skies, I will gather them from there and
bring them to the place at which I have chosen to establish my name.'
10 They are your servants and your people, whom you redeemed by
your great power and your strong hand. 11 O Lord, let your ear be
attentive to the prayer of your servant, and to the prayer of your
servants who delight in revering your name. Give success to your
servant today, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man!"
At the time, I was cupbearer to the king.
[Nehemiah 2]
Nehemiah's commission
1 In the month of Nisan, in the twentieth year of King Artaxerxes,
when wine was served him, I carried the wine and gave it to the king.
Now, I had never been sad in his presence before. 2 So the king said to
me, "Why is your face sad, since you are not sick? This can only be
sadness of the heart." Then I was very much afraid. 3 I said to the king,
"May the king live forever! Why should my face not be sad, when the
city, the place of my ancestors' graves, lies waste, and its gates have
been destroyed by fire?" 4 Then the king said to me, "What do you
request?" So I prayed to the God of heaven. 5 Then I said to the king,
"If it pleases the king, and if your servant has found favor with you, I
ask that you send me to Judah, to the city of my ancestors' graves, so
that I may rebuild it." 6 The king said to me (the queen also was sitting
beside him), "How long will you be gone, and when will you return?"
So it pleased the king to send me, and I set him a date. 7 Then I said to
the king, "If it pleases the king, let letters be given me to the
governors of the province Beyond the River, that they may grant me
passage until I arrive in Judah; 8 and a letter to Asaph, the keeper of

915

NEHEMIAH 916

the king's forest, directing him to give me timber to make beams for
the gates of the temple fortress, and for the wall of the city, and for
the house that I shall occupy." And the king granted me what I asked,
for the gracious hand of my God was upon me.
Nehemiah's journey
9 Then I came to the governors of the province Beyond the River, and
gave them the king's letters. Now the king had sent officers of the
army and cavalry with me. 10 When Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah
the Ammonite official heard this, it displeased them greatly that
someone had come to seek the welfare of the people of Israel.
Nehemiah's initial work in Jerusalem
11 So I came to Jerusalem and was there for three days. 12 Then I got up
during the night, I and a few men with me; I told no one what my God
had put into my heart to do for Jerusalem. The only animal I took was
the animal I rode. 13 I went out by night by the Valley Gate past the
Dragon's Spring and to the Dung Gate, and I inspected the walls of
Jerusalem that had been broken down and its gates that had been
destroyed by fire. 14 Then I went on to the Fountain Gate and to the
King's Pool; but there was no place for the animal I was riding to
continue. 15 So I went up by way of the valley by night and inspected
the wall. Then I turned back and entered by the Valley Gate, and so
returned. 16 The officials did not know where I had gone or what I was
doing; I had not yet told the Jews, the priests, the nobles, the officials,
and the rest that were to do the work.
Decision to build; opposition
17 Then I said to them, "You see the trouble we are in, how Jerusalem
lies in ruins with its gates burned. Come, let us rebuild the wall of
Jerusalem, so that we may no longer suffer disgrace." 18 I told them
that the hand of my God had been gracious upon me, and also the
words that the king had spoken to me. Then they said, "Let us start
building!" So they committed themselves to the common good. 19 But
when Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the Ammonite official, and

916

NEHEMIAH 917

Geshem the Arab heard of it, they mocked and ridiculed us, saying,
"What is this that you are doing? Are you rebelling against the king?"
20 Then I replied to them, "The God of heaven is the one who will give
us success, and we his servants are going to start building; but you have
no share or claim or historic right in Jerusalem."
[Nehemiah 3]
Building the walls despite opposition; restoring Jerusalem's northern
boundary
1 Then the high priest Eliashib set to work with his fellow priests and
rebuilt the Sheep Gate. They consecrated it and set up its doors; they
consecrated it as far as the Tower of the Hundred and as far as the
Tower of Hananel. 2 And the men of Jericho built next to him. And
next to them Zaccur son of Imri built.
3 The sons of Hassenaah built the Fish Gate; they laid its beams and set
up its doors, its bolts, and its bars. 4 Next to them Meremoth son of
Uriah son of Hakkoz made repairs. Next to them Meshullam son of
Berechiah son of Meshezabel made repairs. Next to them Zadok son of
Baana made repairs. 5 Next to them the Tekoites made repairs; but
their nobles would not put their shoulders to the work of their Lord.
Restoring Jerusalem's western boundary
6 Joiada son of Paseah and Meshullam son of Besodeiah repaired the
Old Gate; they laid its beams and set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars.
7 Next to them repairs were made by Melatiah the Gibeonite and
Jadon the Meronothite — the men of Gibeon and of Mizpah — who
were under the jurisdiction of the governor of the province Beyond the
River. 8 Next to them Uzziel son of Harhaiah, one of the goldsmiths,
made repairs. Next to him Hananiah, one of the perfumers, made
repairs; and they restored Jerusalem as far as the Broad Wall. 9 Next to
them Rephaiah son of Hur, ruler of half the district of Jerusalem, made
repairs. 10 Next to them Jedaiah son of Harumaph made repairs
opposite his house; and next to him Hattush son of Hashabneiah made
repairs. 11 Malchijah son of Harim and Hasshub son of Pahath-moab
repaired another section and the Tower of the Ovens. 12 Next to him

917

NEHEMIAH 918

Shallum son of Hallohesh, ruler of half the district of Jerusalem, made
repairs, he and his daughters.
13 Hanun and the inhabitants of Zanoah repaired the Valley Gate; they
rebuilt it and set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars, and repaired a
thousand cubits of the wall, as far as the Dung Gate.
14 Malchijah son of Rechab, ruler of the district of Beth-haccherem,
repaired the Dung Gate; he rebuilt it and set up its doors, its bolts, and
its bars.
Restoring Jerusalem's southern and eastern boundaries
15 And Shallum son of Col-hozeh, ruler of the district of Mizpah,
repaired the Fountain Gate; he rebuilt it and covered it and set up its
doors, its bolts, and its bars; and he built the wall of the Pool of Shelah
of the king's garden, as far as the stairs that go down from the City of
David. 16 After him Nehemiah son of Azbuk, ruler of half the district of
Beth-zur, repaired from a point opposite the graves of David, as far as
the artificial pool and the house of the warriors. 17 After him the
Levites made repairs: Rehum son of Bani; next to him Hashabiah, ruler
of half the district of Keilah, made repairs for his district. 18 After him
their kin made repairs: Binnui, son of Henadad, ruler of half the district
of Keilah; 19 next to him Ezer son of Jeshua, ruler of Mizpah, repaired
another section opposite the ascent to the armory at the Angle. 20
After him Baruch son of Zabbai repaired another section from the
Angle to the door of the house of the high priest Eliashib. 21 After him
Meremoth son of Uriah son of Hakkoz repaired another section from
the door of the house of Eliashib to the end of the house of Eliashib. 22
After him the priests, the men of the surrounding area, made repairs.
23 After them Benjamin and Hasshub made repairs opposite their
house. After them Azariah son of Maaseiah son of Ananiah made
repairs beside his own house. 24 After him Binnui son of Henadad
repaired another section, from the house of Azariah to the Angle and
to the corner. 25 Palal son of Uzai repaired opposite the Angle and the
tower projecting from the upper house of the king at the court of the
guard. After him Pedaiah son of Parosh 26 and the temple servants
living on Ophel made repairs up to a point opposite the Water Gate on

918

NEHEMIAH 919

the east and the projecting tower. 27 After him the Tekoites repaired
another section opposite the great projecting tower as far as the wall
of Ophel.
28 Above the Horse Gate the priests made repairs, each one opposite
his own house. 29 After them Zadok son of Immer made repairs
opposite his own house. After him Shemaiah son of Shecaniah, the
keeper of the East Gate, made repairs. 30 After him Hananiah son of
Shelemiah and Hanun sixth son of Zalaph repaired another section.
After him Meshullam son of Berechiah made repairs opposite his living
quarters. 31 After him Malchijah, one of the goldsmiths, made repairs
as far as the house of the temple servants and of the merchants,
opposite the Muster Gate, and to the upper room of the corner. 32 And
between the upper room of the corner and the Sheep Gate the
goldsmiths and the merchants made repairs.
[Nehemiah 4]
Obstacles to reconstruction; first obstacle: intimidation
1 Now when Sanballat heard that we were building the wall, he was
angry and greatly enraged, and he mocked the Jews. 2 He said in the
presence of his associates and of the army of Samaria, "What are these
feeble Jews doing? Will they restore things? Will they sacrifice? Will
they finish it in a day? Will they revive the stones out of the heaps of
rubbish — and burned ones at that?" 3 Tobiah the Ammonite was
beside him, and he said, "That stone wall they are building — any fox
going up on it would break it down!" 4 Hear, O our God, for we are
despised; turn their taunt back on their own heads, and give them over
as plunder in a land of captivity. 5 Do not cover their guilt, and do not
let their sin be blotted out from your sight; for they have hurled insults
in the face of the builders.
6 So we rebuilt the wall, and all the wall was joined together to half its
height; for the people had a mind to work.
7 But when Sanballat and Tobiah and the Arabs and the Ammonites
and the Ashdodites heard that the repairing of the walls of Jerusalem
was going forward and the gaps were beginning to be closed, they

919

NEHEMIAH 920

were very angry, 8 and all plotted together to come and fight against
Jerusalem and to cause confusion in it. 9 So we prayed to our God, and
set a guard as a protection against them day and night.
10 But Judah said, "The strength of the burden bearers is failing, and
there is too much rubbish so that we are unable to work on the wall."
11 And our enemies said, "They will not know or see anything before
we come upon them and kill them and stop the work." 12 When the
Jews who lived near them came, they said to us ten times, "From all
the places where they live they will come up against us." 13 So in the
lowest parts of the space behind the wall, in open places, I stationed
the people according to their families, with their swords, their spears,
and their bows. 14 After I looked these things over, I stood up and said
to the nobles and the officials and the rest of the people, "Do not be
afraid of them. Remember the LORD, who is great and awesome, and
fight for your kin, your sons, your daughters, your wives, and your
homes."
15 When our enemies heard that their plot was known to us, and that
God had frustrated it, we all returned to the wall, each to his work. 16
From that day on, half of my servants worked on construction, and half
held the spears, shields, bows, and body-armor; and the leaders posted
themselves behind the whole house of Judah, 17 who were building
the wall. The burden bearers carried their loads in such a way that each
labored on the work with one hand and with the other held a weapon.
18 And each of the builders had his sword strapped at his side while he
built. The man who sounded the trumpet was beside me. 19 And I said
to the nobles, the officials, and the rest of the people, "The work is
great and widely spread out, and we are separated far from one
another on the wall. 20 Rally to us wherever you hear the sound of the
trumpet. Our God will fight for us."
21 So we labored at the work, and half of them held the spears from
break of dawn until the stars came out. 22 I also said to the people at
that time, "Let every man and his servant pass the night inside
Jerusalem, so that they may be a guard for us by night and may labor
by day." 23 So neither I nor my brothers nor my servants nor the men

920

NEHEMIAH 921

of the guard who followed me ever took off our clothes; each kept his
weapon in his right hand.
[Nehemiah 5]
Second obstacle: economic hardships
1 Now there was a great outcry of the people and of their wives
against their Jewish kin. 2 For there were those who said, "With our
sons and our daughters, we are many; we must get grain, so that we
may eat and stay alive." 3 There were also those who said, "We are
having to pledge our fields, our vineyards, and our houses in order to
get grain during the famine." 4 And there were those who said, "We
are having to borrow money on our fields and vineyards to pay the
king's tax. 5 Now our flesh is the same as that of our kindred; our
children are the same as their children; and yet we are forcing our sons
and daughters to be slaves, and some of our daughters have been
ravished; we are powerless, and our fields and vineyards now belong to
others."
Nehemiah's response
6 I was very angry when I heard their outcry and these complaints. 7
After thinking it over, I brought charges against the nobles and the
officials; I said to them, "You are all taking interest from your own
people." And I called a great assembly to deal with them, 8 and said to
them, "As far as we were able, we have bought back our Jewish
kindred who had been sold to other nations; but now you are selling
your own kin, who must then be bought back by us!" They were silent,
and could not find a word to say. 9 So I said, "The thing that you are
doing is not good. Should you not walk in the fear of our God, to
prevent the taunts of the nations our enemies? 10 Moreover I and my
brothers and my servants are lending them money and grain. Let us
stop this taking of interest. 11 Restore to them, this very day, their
fields, their vineyards, their olive orchards, and their houses, and the
interest on money, grain, wine, and oil that you have been exacting
from them." 12 Then they said, "We will restore everything and
demand nothing more from them. We will do as you say." And I called
the priests, and made them take an oath to do as they had promised.

921

NEHEMIAH 922

13 I also shook out the fold of my garment and said, "So may God
shake out everyone from house and from property who does not
perform this promise. Thus may they be shaken out and emptied." And
all the assembly said, "Amen," and praised the LORD. And the people
did as they had promised.
14 Moreover from the time that I was appointed to be their governor
in the land of Judah, from the twentieth year to the thirty-second year
of King Artaxerxes, twelve years, neither I nor my brothers ate the food
allowance of the governor. 15 The former governors who were before
me laid heavy burdens on the people, and took food and wine from
them, besides forty shekels of silver. Even their servants lorded it over
the people. But I did not do so, because of the fear of God. 16 Indeed, I
devoted myself to the work on this wall, and acquired no land; and all
my servants were gathered there for the work. 17 Moreover there were
at my table one hundred fifty people, Jews and officials, besides those
who came to us from the nations around us. 18 Now that which was
prepared for one day was one ox and six choice sheep; also fowls were
prepared for me, and every ten days skins of wine in abundance; yet
with all this I did not demand the food allowance of the governor,
because of the heavy burden of labor on the people. 19 Remember for
my good, O my God, all that I have done for this people.
[Nehemiah 6]
Third obstacle: plots against Nehemiah
1 Now when it was reported to Sanballat and Tobiah and to Geshem
the Arab and to the rest of our enemies that I had built the wall and
that there was no gap left in it (though up to that time I had not set up
the doors in the gates), 2 Sanballat and Geshem sent to me, saying,
"Come and let us meet together in one of the villages in the plain of
Ono." But they intended to do me harm. 3 So I sent messengers to
them, saying, "I am doing a great work and I cannot come down. Why
should the work stop while I leave it to come down to you?" 4 They
sent to me four times in this way, and I answered them in the same
manner. 5 In the same way Sanballat for the fifth time sent his servant
to me with an open letter in his hand. 6 In it was written, "It is
reported among the nations — and Geshem also says it — that you and

922

NEHEMIAH 923

the Jews intend to rebel; that is why you are building the wall; and
according to this report you wish to become their king. 7 You have also
set up prophets to proclaim in Jerusalem concerning you, 'There is a
king in Judah!' And now it will be reported to the king according to
these words. So come, therefore, and let us confer together." 8 Then I
sent to him, saying, "No such things as you say have been done; you
are inventing them out of your own mind" 9 — for they all wanted to
frighten us, thinking, "Their hands will drop from the work, and it will
not be done." But now, O God, strengthen my hands.
10 One day when I went into the house of Shemaiah son of Delaiah son
of Mehetabel, who was confined to his house, he said, "Let us meet
together in the house of God, within the temple, and let us close the
doors of the temple, for they are coming to kill you; indeed, tonight
they are coming to kill you." 11 But I said, "Should a man like me run
away? Would a man like me go into the temple to save his life? I will
not go in!" 12 Then I perceived and saw that God had not sent him at
all, but he had pronounced the prophecy against me because Tobiah
and Sanballat had hired him. 13 He was hired for this purpose, to
intimidate me and make me sin by acting in this way, and so they could
give me a bad name, in order to taunt me. 14 Remember Tobiah and
Sanballat, O my God, according to these things that they did, and also
the prophetess Noadiah and the rest of the prophets who wanted to
make me afraid.
The completion of the walls
15 So the wall was finished on the twenty-fifth day of the month Elul,
in fifty-two days. 16 And when all our enemies heard of it, all the
nations around us were afraid and fell greatly in their own esteem; for
they perceived that this work had been accomplished with the help of
our God. 17 Moreover in those days the nobles of Judah sent many
letters to Tobiah, and Tobiah's letters came to them. 18 For many in
Judah were bound by oath to him, because he was the son-in-law of
Shecaniah son of Arah: and his son Jehohanan had married the
daughter of Meshullam son of Berechiah. 19 Also they spoke of his
good deeds in my presence, and reported my words to him. And
Tobiah sent letters to intimidate me.

923

NEHEMIAH 924

[Nehemiah 7]
Setting up guards
1 Now when the wall had been built and I had set up the doors, and
the gatekeepers, the singers, and the Levites had been appointed, 2 I
gave my brother Hanani charge over Jerusalem, along with Hananiah
the commander of the citadel — for he was a faithful man and feared
God more than many. 3 And I said to them, "The gates of Jerusalem
are not to be opened until the sun is hot; while the gatekeepers are
still standing guard, let them shut and bar the doors. Appoint guards
from among the inhabitants of Jerusalem, some at their watch posts,
and others before their own houses." 4 The city was wide and large,
but the people within it were few and no houses had been built.
5 Then my God put it into my mind to assemble the nobles and the
officials and the people to be enrolled by genealogy. And I found the
book of the genealogy of those who were the first to come back, and I
found the following written in it:
Frame: repeated list of returnees
6 These are the people of the province who came up out of the
captivity of those exiles whom King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon had
carried into exile; they returned to Jerusalem and Judah, each to his
town. 7 They came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah,
Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum,
Baanah.
The number of the Israelite people: 8 the descendants of Parosh, two
thousand one hundred seventy-two. 9 Of Shephatiah, three hundred
seventy-two. 10 Of Arah, six hundred fifty-two. 11 Of Pahath-moab,
namely the descendants of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand eight
hundred eighteen. 12 Of Elam, one thousand two hundred fifty-four. 13
Of Zattu, eight hundred forty-five. 14 Of Zaccai, seven hundred sixty. 15
Of Binnui, six hundred forty-eight. 16 Of Bebai, six hundred twentyeight. 17 Of Azgad, two thousand three hundred twenty-two. 18 Of
Adonikam, six hundred sixty-seven. 19 Of Bigvai, two thousand sixtyseven. 20 Of Adin, six hundred fifty-five. 21 Of Ater, namely of

924

NEHEMIAH 925

Hezekiah, ninety-eight. 22 Of Hashum, three hundred twenty-eight. 23
Of Bezai, three hundred twenty-four. 24 Of Hariph, one hundred
twelve. 25 Of Gibeon, ninety-five. 26 The people of Bethlehem and
Netophah, one hundred eighty-eight. 27 Of Anathoth, one hundred
twenty-eight. 28 Of Beth-azmaveth, forty-two. 29 Of Kiriath-jearim,
Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred forty-three. 30 Of Ramah and
Geba, six hundred twenty-one. 31 Of Michmas, one hundred twentytwo. 32 Of Bethel and Ai, one hundred twenty-three. 33 Of the other
Nebo, fifty-two. 34 The descendants of the other Elam, one thousand
two hundred fifty-four. 35 Of Harim, three hundred twenty. 36 Of
Jericho, three hundred forty-five. 37 Of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven
hundred twenty-one. 38 Of Senaah, three thousand nine hundred
thirty.
39 The priests: the descendants of Jedaiah, namely the house of Jeshua,
nine hundred seventy-three. 40 Of Immer, one thousand fifty-two. 41
Of Pashhur, one thousand two hundred forty-seven. 42 Of Harim, one
thousand seventeen.
43 The Levites: the descendants of Jeshua, namely of Kadmiel of the
descendants of Hodevah, seventy-four. 44 The singers: the descendants
of Asaph, one hundred forty-eight. 45 The gatekeepers: the
descendants of Shallum, of Ater, of Talmon, of Akkub, of Hatita, of
Shobai, one hundred thirty-eight.
46 The temple servants: the descendants of Ziha, of Hasupha, of
Tabbaoth, 47 of Keros, of Sia, of Padon, 48 of Lebana, of Hagaba, of
Shalmai, 49 of Hanan, of Giddel, of Gahar, 50 of Reaiah, of Rezin, of
Nekoda, 51 of Gazzam, of Uzza, of Paseah, 52 of Besai, of Meunim, of
Nephushesim, 53 of Bakbuk, of Hakupha, of Harhur, 54 of Bazlith, of
Mehida, of Harsha, 55 of Barkos, of Sisera, of Temah, 56 of Neziah, of
Hatipha.
57 The descendants of Solomon's servants: of Sotai, of Sophereth, of
Perida, 58 of Jaala, of Darkon, of Giddel, 59 of Shephatiah, of Hattil, of
Pochereth-hazzebaim, of Amon.

925

NEHEMIAH 926

60 All the temple servants and the descendants of Solomon's servants
were three hundred ninety-two.
61 The following were those who came up from Tel-melah, Tel-harsha,
Cherub, Addon, and Immer, but they could not prove their ancestral
houses or their descent, whether they belonged to Israel: 62 the
descendants of Delaiah, of Tobiah, of Nekoda, six hundred forty-two.
63 Also, of the priests: the descendants of Hobaiah, of Hakkoz, of
Barzillai (who had married one of the daughters of Barzillai the
Gileadite and was called by their name). 64 These sought their
registration among those enrolled in the genealogies, but it was not
found there, so they were excluded from the priesthood as unclean; 65
the governor told them that they were not to partake of the most holy
food, until a priest with Urim and Thummim should come.
66 The whole assembly together was forty-two thousand three
hundred sixty, 67 besides their male and female slaves, of whom there
were seven thousand three hundred thirty-seven; and they had two
hundred forty-five singers, male and female. 68 They had seven
hundred thirty-six horses, two hundred forty-five mules, 69 four
hundred thirty-five camels, and six thousand seven hundred twenty
donkeys.
70 Now some of the heads of ancestral houses contributed to the work.
The governor gave to the treasury one thousand darics of gold, fifty
basins, and five hundred thirty priestly robes. 71 And some of the heads
of ancestral houses gave into the building fund twenty thousand darics
of gold and two thousand two hundred minas of silver. 72 And what
the rest of the people gave was twenty thousand darics of gold, two
thousand minas of silver, and sixty-seven priestly robes.
73a So the priests, the Levites, the gatekeepers, the singers, some of
the people, the temple servants, and all Israel settled in their towns.

926

NEHEMIAH 927

Celebration of renewal and reconstruction; first step: reading and
implementing the Torah
73b When the seventh month came — the people of Israel being
settled in their towns — [Nehemiah 8] 1 all the people gathered
together into the square before the Water Gate. They told the scribe
Ezra to bring the book of the law of Moses, which the LORD had given
to Israel. 2 Accordingly, the priest Ezra brought the law before the
assembly, both men and women and all who could hear with
understanding. This was on the first day of the seventh month. 3 He
read from it facing the square before the Water Gate from early
morning until midday, in the presence of the men and the women and
those who could understand; and the ears of all the people were
attentive to the book of the law. 4 The scribe Ezra stood on a wooden
platform that had been made for the purpose; and beside him stood
Mattithiah, Shema, Anaiah, Uriah, Hilkiah, and Maaseiah on his right
hand; and Pedaiah, Mishael, Malchijah, Hashum, Hash-baddanah,
Zechariah, and Meshullam on his left hand. 5 And Ezra opened the
book in the sight of all the people, for he was standing above all the
people; and when he opened it, all the people stood up. 6 Then Ezra
blessed the LORD, the great God, and all the people answered, "Amen,
Amen," lifting up their hands. Then they bowed their heads and
worshiped the LORD with their faces to the ground. 7 Also Jeshua, Bani,
Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodiah, Maaseiah, Kelita,
Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, the Levites, helped the people to
understand the law, while the people remained in their places. 8 So
they read from the book, from the law of God, with interpretation.
They gave the sense, so that the people understood the reading.
9 And Nehemiah, who was the governor, and Ezra the priest and
scribe, and the Levites who taught the people said to all the people,
"This day is holy to the LORD your God; do not mourn or weep." For all
the people wept when they heard the words of the law. 10 Then he
said to them, "Go your way, eat the fat and drink sweet wine and send
portions of them to those for whom nothing is prepared, for this day is
holy to our LORD; and do not be grieved, for the joy of the LORD is your
strength." 11 So the Levites stilled all the people, saying, "Be quiet, for
this day is holy; do not be grieved." 12 And all the people went their

927

NEHEMIAH 928

way to eat and drink and to send portions and to make great rejoicing,
because they had understood the words that were declared to them.
Implementing Torah: the festival of booths
13 On the second day the heads of ancestral houses of all the people,
with the priests and the Levites, came together to the scribe Ezra in
order to study the words of the law. 14 And they found it written in
the law, which the LORD had commanded by Moses, that the people of
Israel should live in booths during the festival of the seventh month, 15
and that they should publish and proclaim in all their towns and in
Jerusalem as follows, "Go out to the hills and bring branches of olive,
wild olive, myrtle, palm, and other leafy trees to make booths, as it is
written." 16 So the people went out and brought them, and made
booths for themselves, each on the roofs of their houses, and in their
courts and in the courts of the house of God, and in the square at the
Water Gate and in the square at the Gate of Ephraim. 17 And all the
assembly of those who had returned from the captivity made booths
and lived in them; for from the days of Jeshua son of Nun to that day
the people of Israel had not done so. And there was very great
rejoicing. 18 And day by day, from the first day to the last day, he read
from the book of the law of God. They kept the festival seven days;
and on the eighth day there was a solemn assembly, according to the
ordinance.
[Nehemiah 9]
Second step: confession and commitment; the great communal
confession rehearses Israel's history
1 Now on the twenty-fourth day of this month the people of Israel
were assembled with fasting and in sackcloth, and with earth on their
heads. 2 Then those of Israelite descent separated themselves from all
foreigners, and stood and confessed their sins and the iniquities of
their ancestors. 3 They stood up in their place and read from the book
of the law of the LORD their God for a fourth part of the day, and for
another fourth they made confession and worshiped the LORD their
God. 4 Then Jeshua, Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani,
and Chenani stood on the stairs of the Levites and cried out with a

928

NEHEMIAH 929

loud voice to the LORD their God. 5 Then the Levites, Jeshua, Kadmiel,
Bani, Hashabneiah, Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah, said,
"Stand up and bless the LORD your God from everlasting to everlasting.
Blessed be your glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and
praise."
The communal prayer; recitation of historical experience
6 And Ezra said: "You are the LORD, you alone; you have made heaven,
the heaven of heavens, with all their host, the earth and all that is on
it, the seas and all that is in them. To all of them you give life, and the
host of heaven worships you. 7 You are the LORD, the God who chose
Abram and brought him out of Ur of the Chaldeans and gave him the
name Abraham; 8 and you found his heart faithful before you, and
made with him a covenant to give to his descendants the land of the
Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, the Perizzite, the Jebusite, and the
Girgashite; and you have fulfilled your promise, for you are righteous.
9 "And you saw the distress of our ancestors in Egypt and heard their
cry at the Red Sea. 10 You performed signs and wonders against
Pharaoh and all his servants and all the people of his land, for you
knew that they acted insolently against our ancestors. You made a
name for yourself, which remains to this day. 11 And you divided the
sea before them, so that they passed through the sea on dry land, but
you threw their pursuers into the depths, like a stone into mighty
waters. 12 Moreover, you led them by day with a pillar of cloud, and by
night with a pillar of fire, to give them light on the way in which they
should go. 13 You came down also upon Mount Sinai, and spoke with
them from heaven, and gave them right ordinances and true laws,
good statutes and commandments, 14 and you made known your holy
sabbath to them and gave them commandments and statutes and a
law through your servant Moses. 15 For their hunger you gave them
bread from heaven, and for their thirst you brought water for them
out of the rock, and you told them to go in to possess the land that
you swore to give them.

929

NEHEMIAH 930

16 "But they and our ancestors acted presumptuously and stiffened
their necks and did not obey your commandments; 17 they refused to
obey, and were not mindful of the wonders that you performed
among them; but they stiffened their necks and determined to return
to their slavery in Egypt. But you are a God ready to forgive, gracious
and merciful, slow to anger and abounding in steadfast love, and you
did not forsake them. 18 Even when they had cast an image of a calf
for themselves and said, 'This is your God who brought you up out of
Egypt,' and had committed great blasphemies, 19 you in your great
mercies did not forsake them in the wilderness; the pillar of cloud that
led them in the way did not leave them by day, nor the pillar of fire by
night that gave them light on the way by which they should go. 20 You
gave your good spirit to instruct them, and did not withhold your
manna from their mouths, and gave them water for their thirst. 21
Forty years you sustained them in the wilderness so that they lacked
nothing; their clothes did not wear out and their feet did not swell. 22
And you gave them kingdoms and peoples, and allotted to them every
corner, so they took possession of the land of King Sihon of Heshbon
and the land of King Og of Bashan. 23 You multiplied their
descendants like the stars of heaven, and brought them into the land
that you had told their ancestors to enter and possess. 24 So the
descendants went in and possessed the land, and you subdued before
them the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, and gave them into
their hands, with their kings and the peoples of the land, to do with
them as they pleased. 25 And they captured fortress cities and a rich
land, and took possession of houses filled with all sorts of goods, hewn
cisterns, vineyards, olive orchards, and fruit trees in abundance; so they
ate, and were filled and became fat, and delighted themselves in your
great goodness.
26 "Nevertheless they were disobedient and rebelled against you and
cast your law behind their backs and killed your prophets, who had
warned them in order to turn them back to you, and they committed
great blasphemies. 27 Therefore you gave them into the hands of their
enemies, who made them suffer. Then in the time of their suffering
they cried out to you and you heard them from heaven, and according
to your great mercies you gave them saviors who saved them from the
hands of their enemies. 28 But after they had rest, they again did evil

930

NEHEMIAH 931

before you, and you abandoned them to the hands of their enemies, so
that they had dominion over them; yet when they turned and cried to
you, you heard from heaven, and many times you rescued them
according to your mercies. 29 And you warned them in order to turn
them back to your law. Yet they acted presumptuously and did not
obey your commandments, but sinned against your ordinances, by the
observance of which a person shall live. They turned a stubborn
shoulder and stiffened their neck and would not obey. 30 Many years
you were patient with them, and warned them by your spirit through
your prophets; yet they would not listen. Therefore you handed them
over to the peoples of the lands. 31 Nevertheless, in your great mercies
you did not make an end of them or forsake them, for you are a
gracious and merciful God.
The present distress
32 "Now therefore, our God — the great and mighty and awesome
God, keeping covenant and steadfast love — do not treat lightly all the
hardship that has come upon us, upon our kings, our officials, our
priests, our prophets, our ancestors, and all your people, since the time
of the kings of Assyria until today. 33 You have been just in all that has
come upon us, for you have dealt faithfully and we have acted
wickedly; 34 our kings, our officials, our priests, and our ancestors have
not kept your law or heeded the commandments and the warnings
that you gave them. 35 Even in their own kingdom, and in the great
goodness you bestowed on them, and in the large and rich land that
you set before them, they did not serve you and did not turn from
their wicked works. 36 Here we are, slaves to this day — slaves in the
land that you gave to our ancestors to enjoy its fruit and its good gifts.
37 Its rich yield goes to the kings whom you have set over us because of
our sins; they have power also over our bodies and over our livestock at
their pleasure, and we are in great distress."
Commitment: the communal pledge
38 Because of all this we make a firm agreement in writing, and on
that sealed document are inscribed the names of our officials, our
Levites, and our priests.

931

NEHEMIAH 932

[Nehemiah 10]
Signatories on behalf of the entire community
1 Upon the sealed document are the names of Nehemiah the governor,
son of Hacaliah, and Zedekiah; 2 Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah, 3 Pashhur,
Amariah, Malchijah, 4 Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch, 5 Harim,
Meremoth, Obadiah, 6 Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch, 7 Meshullam,
Abijah, Mijamin, 8 Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah; these are the priests. 9
And the Levites: Jeshua son of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of Henadad,
Kadmiel; 10 and their associates, Shebaniah, Hodiah, Kelita, Pelaiah,
Hanan, 11 Mica, Rehob, Hashabiah, 12 Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah, 13
Hodiah, Bani, Beninu. 14 The leaders of the people: Parosh, Pahathmoab, Elam, Zattu, Bani, 15 Bunni, Azgad, Bebai, 16 Adonijah, Bigvai,
Adin, 17 Ater, Hezekiah, Azzur, 18 Hodiah, Hashum, Bezai, 19 Hariph,
Anathoth, Nebai, 20 Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir, 21 Meshezabel,
Zadok, Jaddua, 22 Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah, 23 Hoshea, Hananiah,
Hasshub, 24 Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek, 25 Rehum, Hashabnah,
Maaseiah, 26 Ahiah, Hanan, Anan, 27 Malluch, Harim, and Baanah.
Voluntarily assumed obligations; protecting religious and ethnic
boundaries
28 The rest of the people, the priests, the Levites, the gatekeepers, the
singers, the temple servants, and all who have separated themselves
from the peoples of the lands to adhere to the law of God, their wives,
their sons, their daughters, all who have knowledge and
understanding, 29 join with their kin, their nobles, and enter into a
curse and an oath to walk in God's law, which was given by Moses the
servant of God, and to observe and do all the commandments of the
LORD our Lord and his ordinances and his statutes. 30 We will not give
our daughters to the peoples of the land or take their daughters for
our sons; 31 and if the peoples of the land bring in merchandise or any
grain on the sabbath day to sell, we will not buy it from them on the
sabbath or on a holy day; and we will forego the crops of the seventh
year and the exaction of every debt.

932

NEHEMIAH 933

Securing religious and social institutions
32 We also lay on ourselves the obligation to charge ourselves yearly
one-third of a shekel for the service of the house of our God: 33 for the
rows of bread, the regular grain offering, the regular burnt offering,
the sabbaths, the new moons, the appointed festivals, the sacred
donations, and the sin offerings to make atonement for Israel, and for
all the work of the house of our God. 34 We have also cast lots among
the priests, the Levites, and the people, for the wood offering, to bring
it into the house of our God, by ancestral houses, at appointed times,
year by year, to burn on the altar of the LORD our God, as it is written
in the law. 35 We obligate ourselves to bring the first fruits of our soil
and the first fruits of all fruit of every tree, year by year, to the house
of the LORD; 36 also to bring to the house of our God, to the priests
who minister in the house of our God, the firstborn of our sons and of
our livestock, as it is written in the law, and the firstlings of our herds
and of our flocks; 37 and to bring the first of our dough, and our
contributions, the fruit of every tree, the wine and the oil, to the
priests, to the chambers of the house of our God; and to bring to the
Levites the tithes from our soil, for it is the Levites who collect the
tithes in all our rural towns. 38 And the priest, the descendant of
Aaron, shall be with the Levites when the Levites receive the tithes;
and the Levites shall bring up a tithe of the tithes to the house of our
God, to the chambers of the storehouse. 39 For the people of Israel and
the sons of Levi shall bring the contribution of grain, wine, and oil to
the storerooms where the vessels of the sanctuary are, and where the
priests that minister, and the gatekeepers and the singers are. We will
not neglect the house of our God.
[Nehemiah 11]
Third step: repopulation and review
1 Now the leaders of the people lived in Jerusalem; and the rest of the
people cast lots to bring one out of ten to live in the holy city
Jerusalem, while nine-tenths remained in the other towns. 2 And the
people blessed all those who willingly offered to live in Jerusalem.

933

NEHEMIAH 934

Census of repopulated Jerusalem
3 These are the leaders of the province who lived in Jerusalem; but in
the towns of Judah all lived on their property in their towns: Israel, the
priests, the Levites, the temple servants, and the descendants of
Solomon's servants. 4 And in Jerusalem lived some of the Judahites and
of the Benjaminites. Of the Judahites: Athaiah son of Uzziah son of
Zechariah son of Amariah son of Shephatiah son of Mahalalel, of the
descendants of Perez; 5 and Maaseiah son of Baruch son of Col-hozeh
son of Hazaiah son of Adaiah son of Joiarib son of Zechariah son of the
Shilonite. 6 All the descendants of Perez who lived in Jerusalem were
four hundred sixty-eight valiant warriors.
7 And these are the Benjaminites: Sallu son of Meshullam son of Joed
son of Pedaiah son of Kolaiah son of Maaseiah son of Ithiel son of
Jeshaiah. 8 And his brothers Gabbai, Sallai: nine hundred twenty-eight.
9 Joel son of Zichri was their overseer; and Judah son of Hassenuah was
second in charge of the city.
10 Of the priests: Jedaiah son of Joiarib, Jachin, 11 Seraiah son of
Hilkiah son of Meshullam son of Zadok son of Meraioth son of Ahitub,
officer of the house of God, 12 and their associates who did the work
of the house, eight hundred twenty-two; and Adaiah son of Jeroham
son of Pelaliah son of Amzi son of Zechariah son of Pashhur son of
Malchijah, 13 and his associates, heads of ancestral houses, two
hundred forty-two; and Amashsai son of Azarel son of Ahzai son of
Meshillemoth son of Immer, 14 and their associates, valiant warriors,
one hundred twenty-eight; their overseer was Zabdiel son of
Haggedolim.
15 And of the Levites: Shemaiah son of Hasshub son of Azrikam son of
Hashabiah son of Bunni; 16 and Shabbethai and Jozabad, of the leaders
of the Levites, who were over the outside work of the house of God; 17
and Mattaniah son of Mica son of Zabdi son of Asaph, who was the
leader to begin the thanksgiving in prayer, and Bakbukiah, the second
among his associates; and Abda son of Shammua son of Galal son of
Jeduthun. 18 All the Levites in the holy city were two hundred eightyfour.

934

NEHEMIAH 935

19 The gatekeepers, Akkub, Talmon and their associates, who kept
watch at the gates, were one hundred seventy-two. 20 And the rest of
Israel, and of the priests and the Levites, were in all the towns of
Judah, all of them in their inheritance. 21 But the temple servants lived
on Ophel; and Ziha and Gishpa were over the temple servants.
22 The overseer of the Levites in Jerusalem was Uzzi son of Bani son of
Hashabiah son of Mattaniah son of Mica, of the descendants of Asaph,
the singers, in charge of the work of the house of God. 23 For there
was a command from the king concerning them, and a settled
provision for the singers, as was required every day. 24 And Pethahiah
son of Meshezabel, of the descendants of Zerah son of Judah, was at
the king's hand in all matters concerning the people.
Census of other Jewish settlements
25 And as for the villages, with their fields, some of the people of
Judah lived in Kiriath-arba and its villages, and in Dibon and its
villages, and in Jekabzeel and its villages, 26 and in Jeshua and in
Moladah and Beth-pelet, 27 in Hazar-shual, in Beer-sheba and its
villages, 28 in Ziklag, in Meconah and its villages, 29 in En-rimmon, in
Zorah, in Jarmuth, 30 Zanoah, Adullam, and their villages, Lachish and
its fields, and Azekah and its villages. So they camped from Beer-sheba
to the valley of Hinnom. 31 The people of Benjamin also lived from
Geba onward, at Michmash, Aija, Bethel and its villages, 32 Anathoth,
Nob, Ananiah, 33 Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim, 34 Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat,
35 Lod, and Ono, the valley of artisans. 36 And certain divisions of the
Levites in Judah were joined to Benjamin.
[Nehemiah 12]
Review of the priestly and Levitical genealogies
1 These are the priests and the Levites who came up with Zerubbabel
son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua: Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra, 2 Amariah,
Malluch, Hattush, 3 Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth, 4 Iddo, Ginnethoi,
Abijah, 5 Mijamin, Maadiah, Bilgah, 6 Shemaiah, Joiarib, Jedaiah, 7
Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah. These were the leaders of the priests and
of their associates in the days of Jeshua.

935

NEHEMIAH 936

8 And the Levites: Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, and
Mattaniah, who with his associates was in charge of the songs of
thanksgiving. 9 And Bakbukiah and Unno their associates stood
opposite them in the service. 10 Jeshua was the father of Joiakim,
Joiakim the father of Eliashib, Eliashib the father of Joiada, 11 Joiada
the father of Jonathan, and Jonathan the father of Jaddua.
12 In the days of Joiakim the priests, heads of ancestral houses, were: of
Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, Hananiah; 13 of Ezra, Meshullam; of
Amariah, Jehohanan; 14 of Malluchi, Jonathan; of Shebaniah, Joseph;
15 of Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, Helkai; 16 of Iddo, Zechariah; of
Ginnethon, Meshullam; 17 of Abijah, Zichri; of Miniamin, of Moadiah,
Piltai; 18 of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah, Jehonathan; 19 of Joiarib,
Mattenai; of Jedaiah, Uzzi; 20 of Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, Eber; 21 of
Hilkiah, Hashabiah; of Jedaiah, Nethanel.
22 As for the Levites, in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, Johanan, and
Jaddua, there were recorded the heads of ancestral houses; also the
priests until the reign of Darius the Persian. 23 The Levites, heads of
ancestral houses, were recorded in the Book of the Annals until the
days of Johanan son of Eliashib. 24 And the leaders of the Levites:
Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua son of Kadmiel, with their associates
over against them, to praise and to give thanks, according to the
commandment of David the man of God, section opposite to section.
25 Mattaniah, Bakbukiah, Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, and Akkub
were gatekeepers standing guard at the storehouses of the gates. 26
These were in the days of Joiakim son of Jeshua son of Jozadak, and in
the days of the governor Nehemiah and of the priest Ezra, the scribe.
Fourth step: a service of dedication: celebration, purification,
procession, and separation
27 Now at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem they sought out the
Levites in all their places, to bring them to Jerusalem to celebrate the
dedication with rejoicing, with thanksgivings and with singing, with
cymbals, harps, and lyres. 28 The companies of the singers gathered
together from the circuit around Jerusalem and from the villages of
the Netophathites; 29 also from Beth-gilgal and from the region of

936

NEHEMIAH 937

Geba and Azmaveth; for the singers had built for themselves villages
around Jerusalem. 30 And the priests and the Levites purified
themselves; and they purified the people and the gates and the wall.
31 Then I brought the leaders of Judah up onto the wall, and
appointed two great companies that gave thanks and went in
procession. One went to the right on the wall to the Dung Gate; 32 and
after them went Hoshaiah and half the officials of Judah, 33 and
Azariah, Ezra, Meshullam, 34 Judah, Benjamin, Shemaiah, and
Jeremiah, 35 and some of the young priests with trumpets: Zechariah
son of Jonathan son of Shemaiah son of Mattaniah son of Micaiah son
of Zaccur son of Asaph; 36 and his kindred, Shemaiah, Azarel, Milalai,
Gilalai, Maai, Nethanel, Judah, and Hanani, with the musical
instruments of David the man of God; and the scribe Ezra went in front
of them. 37 At the Fountain Gate, in front of them, they went straight
up by the stairs of the city of David, at the ascent of the wall, above
the house of David, to the Water Gate on the east.
38 The other company of those who gave thanks went to the left, and I
followed them with half of the people on the wall, above the Tower of
the Ovens, to the Broad Wall, 39 and above the Gate of Ephraim, and
by the Old Gate, and by the Fish Gate and the Tower of Hananel and
the Tower of the Hundred, to the Sheep Gate; and they came to a halt
at the Gate of the Guard. 40 So both companies of those who gave
thanks stood in the house of God, and I and half of the officials with
me; 41 and the priests Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Micaiah, Elioenai,
Zechariah, and Hananiah, with trumpets; 42 and Maaseiah, Shemaiah,
Eleazar, Uzzi, Jehohanan, Malchijah, Elam, and Ezer. And the singers
sang with Jezrahiah as their leader. 43 They offered great sacrifices
that day and rejoiced, for God had made them rejoice with great joy;
the women and children also rejoiced. The joy of Jerusalem was heard
far away.
Three additional communal actions on the day of dedication
44 On that day men were appointed over the chambers for the stores,
the contributions, the first fruits, and the tithes, to gather into them
the portions required by the law for the priests and for the Levites

937

NEHEMIAH 938

from the fields belonging to the towns; for Judah rejoiced over the
priests and the Levites who ministered. 45 They performed the service
of their God and the service of purification, as did the singers and the
gatekeepers, according to the command of David and his son Solomon.
46 For in the days of David and Asaph long ago there was a leader of
the singers, and there were songs of praise and thanksgiving to God.
47 In the days of Zerubbabel and in the days of Nehemiah all Israel
gave the daily portions for the singers and the gatekeepers. They set
apart that which was for the Levites; and the Levites set apart that
which was for the descendants of Aaron.
[Nehemiah 13]
1 On that day they read from the book of Moses in the hearing of the
people; and in it was found written that no Ammonite or Moabite
should ever enter the assembly of God, 2 because they did not meet
the Israelites with bread and water, but hired Balaam against them to
curse them — yet our God turned the curse into a blessing. 3 When the
people heard the law, they separated from Israel all those of foreign
descent.
Coda
4 Now before this, the priest Eliashib, who was appointed over the
chambers of the house of our God, and who was related to Tobiah, 5
prepared for Tobiah a large room where they had previously put the
grain offering, the frankincense, the vessels, and the tithes of grain,
wine, and oil, which were given by commandment to the Levites,
singers, and gatekeepers, and the contributions for the priests. 6 While
this was taking place I was not in Jerusalem, for in the thirty-second
year of King Artaxerxes of Babylon I went to the king. After some time
I asked leave of the king 7 and returned to Jerusalem. I then discovered
the wrong that Eliashib had done on behalf of Tobiah, preparing a
room for him in the courts of the house of God. 8 And I was very
angry, and I threw all the household furniture of Tobiah out of the
room. 9 Then I gave orders and they cleansed the chambers, and I
brought back the vessels of the house of God, with the grain offering
and the frankincense.

938

NEHEMIAH 939

Nehemiah rectifies violations regarding Levites and singers
10 I also found out that the portions of the Levites had not been given
to them; so that the Levites and the singers, who had conducted the
service, had gone back to their fields. 11 So I remonstrated with the
officials and said, "Why is the house of God forsaken?" And I gathered
them together and set them in their stations. 12 Then all Judah brought
the tithe of the grain, wine, and oil into the storehouses. 13 And I
appointed as treasurers over the storehouses the priest Shelemiah, the
scribe Zadok, and Pedaiah of the Levites, and as their assistant Hanan
son of Zaccur son of Mattaniah, for they were considered faithful; and
their duty was to distribute to their associates. 14 Remember me, O my
God, concerning this, and do not wipe out my good deeds that I have
done for the house of my God and for his service.
Nehemiah rectifies sabbath violations
15 In those days I saw in Judah people treading wine presses on the
sabbath, and bringing in heaps of grain and loading them on donkeys;
and also wine, grapes, figs, and all kinds of burdens, which they
brought into Jerusalem on the sabbath day; and I warned them at that
time against selling food. 16 Tyrians also, who lived in the city, brought
in fish and all kinds of merchandise and sold them on the sabbath to
the people of Judah, and in Jerusalem. 17 Then I remonstrated with the
nobles of Judah and said to them, "What is this evil thing that you are
doing, profaning the sabbath day? 18 Did not your ancestors act in this
way, and did not our God bring all this disaster on us and on this city?
Yet you bring more wrath on Israel by profaning the sabbath."
19 When it began to be dark at the gates of Jerusalem before the
sabbath, I commanded that the doors should be shut and gave orders
that they should not be opened until after the sabbath. And I set some
of my servants over the gates, to prevent any burden from being
brought in on the sabbath day. 20 Then the merchants and sellers of all
kinds of merchandise spent the night outside Jerusalem once or twice.
21 But I warned them and said to them, "Why do you spend the night
in front of the wall? If you do so again, I will lay hands on you." From
that time on they did not come on the sabbath. 22 And I commanded

939

NEHEMIAH 940

the Levites that they should purify themselves and come and guard the
gates, to keep the sabbath day holy. Remember this also in my favor, O
my God, and spare me according to the greatness of your steadfast
love.
Intermarriage problems
23 In those days also I saw Jews who had married women of Ashdod,
Ammon, and Moab; 24 and half of their children spoke the language
of Ashdod, and they could not speak the language of Judah, but spoke
the language of various peoples. 25 And I contended with them and
cursed them and beat some of them and pulled out their hair; and I
made them take an oath in the name of God, saying, "You shall not
give your daughters to their sons, or take their daughters for your sons
or for yourselves. 26 Did not King Solomon of Israel sin on account of
such women? Among the many nations there was no king like him,
and he was beloved by his God, and God made him king over all Israel;
nevertheless, foreign women made even him to sin. 27 Shall we then
listen to you and do all this great evil and act treacherously against our
God by marrying foreign women?"
Conclusion: Nehemiah's final calls for remembrance
28 And one of the sons of Jehoiada, son of the high priest Eliashib, was
the son-in-law of Sanballat the Horonite; I chased him away from me.
29 Remember them, O my God, because they have defiled the
priesthood, the covenant of the priests and the Levites.
30 Thus I cleansed them from everything foreign, and I established the
duties of the priests and Levites, each in his work; 31 and I provided for
the wood offering, at appointed times, and for the first fruits.
Remember me, O my God, for good.

940

ESTHER 941

ESTHER
Introduction
The book of Esther tells the story of how two wise and courageous
Jews, Mordecai and Queen Esther, aided by the providential hand of
fate, foil the genocidal schemes of Haman, the "enemy of the Jews."
The ensuing victory celebration of the fourteenth and fifteenth of the
month of Adar (February-March) becomes the occasion for
inaugurating a new Jewish festival, Purim. On both the evening and
morning of Purim, Jews have traditionally read aloud the entire book
of Esther, the last of the five festal scrolls (Megillot) in the Hebrew
Bible.
Despite the setting and the author's familiarity with Persian customs,
vocabulary, and names, Esther is not a work of history but a historical
novella, that is, a fictional story within a historical framework. Its
purpose is to entertain, but also to demonstrate the inevitability of
retributive justice and, paradoxically, the need for the oppressed to act
shrewdly and boldly for that justice to prevail. The seemingly historical
presentation also serves to legitimate the festival of Purim, which was
probably a Babylonian or Persian holiday adopted by Diaspora Jews,
and which was not authorized by the law of Moses.
The version of Esther found in the Hebrew Bible was probably
composed in the early Hellenistic period (late fourth-third century BCE)
before Jewish antagonism toward Gentiles was exacerbated by the
struggles of the Maccabean periods (167-135 BCE). Later in the
Hellenistic period the translation of Esther made for Greek-speaking
Jews lengthened the book by the addition of 107 verses and extra
phrases intended to make it a more conventionally religious book. The
King James Version (1611) included these Greek "Additions to the Book
of Esther" (which are not accepted as canonical by Jews or Protestant
Christians) among the books of the Apocrypha. A translation of the full
941

ESTHER 942

Greek text of Esther, including these additions, is included among the
Apocryphal and Deuterocanonical Books of the New Revised Standard
Version translation.
No other book of the Hebrew Bible has received such mixed reviews
from Jews and Christians alike. Not until the third century CE was
Esther fully accepted into the Jewish canon of scripture, and the
Protestant reformer Martin Luther (1483-1546) wished it had never
been written. Some have criticized the book for what it contains;
others, for what it lacks. The Persian king, for instance, is mentioned
190 times, but the God of Israel not once; nor are such basic Jewish
practices and concerns as the Law, covenant, prayer, dietary
regulations, or Jerusalem. Because fate is an acknowledged factor in
the story, some readers suggest that God, though hidden, is arranging
the events. Others see fate as impersonal and the heroes' triumph as a
measure of their individual resolve and quick-wittedness.
Jews and Christians have also been deeply troubled by the story's
uncritically enthusiastic account of the violence of the Jewish
community's response to their enemies, which involves not only selfdefense but also the slaughter of women and children, including the
sons of Haman (8.11-12; 9.9-10). The bloodthirsty language, however,
derives from the story's symmetric pattern of reversals, not from any
historical reality. Furthermore, the Hebrew version of Esther, in
contrast to the Greek version, does not view Gentiles as a whole in a
negative light.
The author-editor of Hebrew Esther may have been a Persian Jew
determined to live a full Jewish life within the Diaspora. This
perspective could account for the story's neglect of Jewish themes as it
focuses instead on an innovative Diaspora tradition, Purim. Esther
herself, as a woman, represents the marginal and sometimes precarious
status of Diaspora Jew who were obliged to accommodate their lives to
an alien environment. The point of view, therefore, differs markedly
from the outlook of Diaspora Jews like Ezra and Nehemiah.

942

ESTHER 943

Having acknowledged what makes Esther unusual in the Jewish canon
of scripture, it should be noted that the book is steeped in the literary
traditions of ancient Israel. In this way Esther resembles such later
Jewish compositions as Daniel and Judith. Most notable are the
allusions to the Joseph story (Gen 37-50), but either obliquely or
directly, the author also alludes to the exodus story (Ex 1-15), to the
conquest of Canaan (Josh 1-12) by the principles of holy war as found in
Deuteronomy (Deut 20), to the career of King Saul (1 Sam 15), and to
the story of Naboth's vineyard (1 Kings 21). Esther contains quotations
from the prophets Jeremiah, Zephaniah, Third Isaiah, and Zechariah.
Moreover, Esther contains vivid practical demonstrations of maxims
found in Israel's wisdom tradition; Proverbs, for example, cautions
against anger and boastfulness, distinguishes between true and false
joy, and advises the proper treatment of superiors, especially kings.
In Esther one encounters a surprisingly modern tension between
comedy (satire, irony, farce) and tragedy. These the author has adroitly
bound together and balanced within the narrative by complex patterns
of symmetries, reversals, foreshadowing, and recurring motifs. For
example, the story begins and ends with feats, while additional
banquets punctuate the narrative at key moments. Royal edicts
similarly mark the course of the action, but they are also highly ironic,
particularly in relation to each other. At different points in the story,
the leading characters variously resemble each other directly or in
reverse; the disobedient queen Vashti is deposed, but Esther, the new
queen who replaces her, triumphantly defies the law. Esther
successfully begs the king for the lives of her people whom Haman has
doomed; Haman in vain supplicate Esther for his own life. The most
cleverly constructed moment of the story occurs in ch 6 when Haman
suddenly finds himself in the humiliating position of presenting the
royal reward he expected himself to his hated nemesis, Mordecai,
instead.
While the main characters in Esther are essentially familiar stereotypes
without distinctive personalities, one character does change over the
course of the story. Esther begins as a passive figure notable only for
the beauty that gains her entry into the royal citadel and for her
obedient nature. Once in the royal harem, Esther's charm wins her

943

ESTHER 944

special advantages. After Mordecai's challenge to Esther in 4.13-14,
Esther seems to embrace her Jewishness anew; with this selfrecognition, Esther becomes the decisive actor in the story, risking her
life, issuing orders to Mordecai and later, to the king himself.
Ultimately it is on Esther's authority, albeit in concert with Mordecai,
that Purim is established, making Esther the only woman to authorize a
Jewish religious tradition.

[Esther 1]
King Ahasuerus holds a feast
1 This happened in the days of Ahasuerus, the same Ahasuerus who
ruled over one hundred twenty-seven provinces from India to Ethiopia.
2 In those days when King Ahasuerus sat on his royal throne in the
citadel of Susa, 3 in the third year of his reign, he gave a banquet for
all his officials and ministers. The army of Persia and Media and the
nobles and governors of the provinces were present, 4 while he
displayed the great wealth of his kingdom and the splendor and pomp
of his majesty for many days, one hundred eighty days in all.
5 When these days were completed, the king gave for all the people
present in the citadel of Susa, both great and small, a banquet lasting
for seven days, in the court of the garden of the king's palace. 6 There
were white cotton curtains and blue hangings tied with cords of fine
linen and purple to silver rings and marble pillars. There were couches
of gold and silver on a mosaic pavement of porphyry, marble, motherof-pearl, and colored stones. 7 Drinks were served in golden goblets,
goblets of different kinds, and the royal wine was lavished according
to the bounty of the king. 8 Drinking was by flagons, without restraint;
for the king had given orders to all the officials of his palace to do as
each one desired. 9 Furthermore, Queen Vashti gave a banquet for the
women in the palace of King Ahasuerus.

944

ESTHER 945

Queen Vashti's downfall
10 On the seventh day, when the king was merry with wine, he
commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha and Abagtha, Zethar
and Carkas, the seven eunuchs who attended him, 11 to bring Queen
Vashti before the king, wearing the royal crown, in order to show the
peoples and the officials her beauty; for she was fair to behold. 12 But
Queen Vashti refused to come at the king's command conveyed by the
eunuchs. At this the king was enraged, and his anger burned within
him.
13 Then the king consulted the sages who knew the laws (for this was
the king's procedure toward all who were versed in law and custom, 14
and those next to him were Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish,
Meres, Marsena, and Memucan, the seven officials of Persia and Media,
who had access to the king, and sat first in the kingdom): 15
"According to the law, what is to be done to Queen Vashti because she
has not performed the command of King Ahasuerus conveyed by the
eunuchs?" 16 Then Memucan said in the presence of the king and the
officials, "Not only has Queen Vashti done wrong to the king, but also
to all the officials and all the peoples who are in all the provinces of
King Ahasuerus. 17 For this deed of the queen will be made known to
all women, causing them to look with contempt on their husbands,
since they will say, 'King Ahasuerus commanded Queen Vashti to be
brought before him, and she did not come.' 18 This very day the noble
ladies of Persia and Media who have heard of the queen's behavior will
rebel against the king's officials, and there will be no end of contempt
and wrath! 19 If it pleases the king, let a royal order go out from him,
and let it be written among the laws of the Persians and the Medes so
that it may not be altered, that Vashti is never again to come before
King Ahasuerus; and let the king give her royal position to another
who is better than she. 20 So when the decree made by the king is
proclaimed throughout all his kingdom, vast as it is, all women will
give honor to their husbands, high and low alike."

945

ESTHER 946

21 This advice pleased the king and the officials, and the king did as
Memucan proposed; 22 he sent letters to all the royal provinces, to
every province in its own script and to every people in its own
language, declaring that every man should be master in his own house.
[Esther 2]
Esther becomes queen
1 After these things, when the anger of King Ahasuerus had abated, he
remembered Vashti and what she had done and what had been
decreed against her. 2 Then the king's servants who attended him said,
"Let beautiful young virgins be sought out for the king. 3 And let the
king appoint commissioners in all the provinces of his kingdom to
gather all the beautiful young virgins to the harem in the citadel of
Susa under custody of Hegai, the king's eunuch, who is in charge of the
women; let their cosmetic treatments be given them. 4 And let the girl
who pleases the king be queen instead of Vashti." This pleased the
king, and he did so.
Introducing two Jewish heroes: Mordecai and Esther
5 Now there was a Jew in the citadel of Susa whose name was
Mordecai son of Jair son of Shimei son of Kish, a Benjaminite. 6 Kish
had been carried away from Jerusalem among the captives carried
away with King Jeconiah of Judah, whom King Nebuchadnezzar of
Babylon had carried away. 7 Mordecai had brought up Hadassah, that
is Esther, his cousin, for she had neither father nor mother; the girl was
fair and beautiful, and when her father and her mother died, Mordecai
adopted her as his own daughter. 8 So when the king's order and his
edict were proclaimed, and when many young women were gathered
in the citadel of Susa in custody of Hegai, Esther also was taken into
the king's palace and put in custody of Hegai, who had charge of the
women. 9 The girl pleased him and won his favor, and he quickly
provided her with her cosmetic treatments and her portion of food,
and with seven chosen maids from the king's palace, and advanced her
and her maids to the best place in the harem. 10 Esther did not reveal
her people or kindred, for Mordecai had charged her not to tell. 11

946

ESTHER 947

Every day Mordecai would walk around in front of the court of the
harem, to learn how Esther was and how she fared.
Esther becomes queen
12 The turn came for each girl to go in to King Ahasuerus, after being
twelve months under the regulations for the women, since this was the
regular period of their cosmetic treatment, six months with oil of
myrrh and six months with perfumes and cosmetics for women. 13
When the girl went in to the king she was given whatever she asked
for to take with her from the harem to the king's palace. 14 In the
evening she went in; then in the morning she came back to the second
harem in custody of Shaashgaz, the king's eunuch, who was in charge
of the concubines; she did not go in to the king again, unless the king
delighted in her and she was summoned by name.
15 When the turn came for Esther daughter of Abihail the uncle of
Mordecai, who had adopted her as his own daughter, to go in to the
king, she asked for nothing except what Hegai the king's eunuch, who
had charge of the women, advised. Now Esther was admired by all who
saw her. 16 When Esther was taken to King Ahasuerus in his royal
palace in the tenth month, which is the month of Tebeth, in the
seventh year of his reign, 17 the king loved Esther more than all the
other women; of all the virgins she won his favor and devotion, so that
he set the royal crown on her head and made her queen instead of
Vashti. 18 Then the king gave a great banquet to all his officials and
ministers — "Esther's banquet." He also granted a holiday to the
provinces, and gave gifts with royal liberality.
Mordecai and Esther save the king's life
19 When the virgins were being gathered together, Mordecai was
sitting at the king's gate. 20 Now Esther had not revealed her kindred
or her people, as Mordecai had charged her; for Esther obeyed
Mordecai just as when she was brought up by him. 21 In those days,
while Mordecai was sitting at the king's gate, Bigthan and Teresh, two
of the king's eunuchs, who guarded the threshold, became angry and
conspired to assassinate King Ahasuerus. 22 But the matter came to the

947

ESTHER 948

knowledge of Mordecai, and he told it to Queen Esther, and Esther
told the king in the name of Mordecai. 23 When the affair was
investigated and found to be so, both the men were hanged on the
gallows. It was recorded in the book of the annals in the presence of
the king.
[Esther 3]
Wicked Haman plots to annihilate the Jews
1 After these things King Ahasuerus promoted Haman son of
Hammedatha the Agagite, and advanced him and set his seat above all
the officials who were with him. 2 And all the king's servants who were
at the king's gate bowed down and did obeisance to Haman; for the
king had so commanded concerning him. But Mordecai did not bow
down or do obeisance. 3 Then the king's servants who were at the
king's gate said to Mordecai, "Why do you disobey the king's
command?" 4 When they spoke to him day after day and he would not
listen to them, they told Haman, in order to see whether Mordecai's
words would avail; for he had told them that he was a Jew. 5 When
Haman saw that Mordecai did not bow down or do obeisance to him,
Haman was infuriated. 6 But he thought it beneath him to lay hands
on Mordecai alone. So, having been told who Mordecai's people were,
Haman plotted to destroy all the Jews, the people of Mordecai,
throughout the whole kingdom of Ahasuerus.
7 In the first month, which is the month of Nisan, in the twelfth year of
King Ahasuerus, they cast Pur — which means "the lot" — before
Haman for the day and for the month, and the lot fell on the
thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month of Adar. 8
Then Haman said to King Ahasuerus, "There is a certain people
scattered and separated among the peoples in all the provinces of your
kingdom; their laws are different from those of every other people,
and they do not keep the king's laws, so that it is not appropriate for
the king to tolerate them. 9 If it pleases the king, let a decree be issued
for their destruction, and I will pay ten thousand talents of silver into
the hands of those who have charge of the king's business, so that they
may put it into the king's treasuries." 10 So the king took his signet
ring from his hand and gave it to Haman son of Hammedatha the

948

ESTHER 949

Agagite, the enemy of the Jews. 11 The king said to Haman, "The
money is given to you, and the people as well, to do with them as it
seems good to you."
12 Then the king's secretaries were summoned on the thirteenth day of
the first month, and an edict, according to all that Haman commanded,
was written to the king's satraps and to the governors over all the
provinces and to the officials of all the peoples, to every province in its
own script and every people in its own language; it was written in the
name of King Ahasuerus and sealed with the king's ring. 13 Letters
were sent by couriers to all the king's provinces, giving orders to
destroy, to kill, and to annihilate all Jews, young and old, women and
children, in one day, the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is
the month of Adar, and to plunder their goods. 14 A copy of the
document was to be issued as a decree in every province by
proclamation, calling on all the peoples to be ready for that day. 15 The
couriers went quickly by order of the king, and the decree was issued
in the citadel of Susa. The king and Haman sat down to drink; but the
city of Susa was thrown into confusion.
[Esther 4]
Mordecai persuades Esther to risk her life to save her people
1 When Mordecai learned all that had been done, Mordecai tore his
clothes and put on sackcloth and ashes, and went through the city,
wailing with a loud and bitter cry; 2 he went up to the entrance of the
king's gate, for no one might enter the king's gate clothed with
sackcloth. 3 In every province, wherever the king's command and his
decree came, there was great mourning among the Jews, with fasting
and weeping and lamenting, and most of them lay in sackcloth and
ashes.
4 When Esther's maids and her eunuchs came and told her, the queen
was deeply distressed; she sent garments to clothe Mordecai, so that he
might take off his sackcloth; but he would not accept them. 5 Then
Esther called for Hathach, one of the king's eunuchs, who had been
appointed to attend her, and ordered him to go to Mordecai to learn
what was happening and why. 6 Hathach went out to Mordecai in the

949

ESTHER 950

open square of the city in front of the king's gate, 7 and Mordecai told
him all that had happened to him, and the exact sum of money that
Haman had promised to pay into the king's treasuries for the
destruction of the Jews. 8 Mordecai also gave him a copy of the
written decree issued in Susa for their destruction, that he might show
it to Esther, explain it to her, and charge her to go to the king to make
supplication to him and entreat him for her people.
9 Hathach went and told Esther what Mordecai had said. 10 Then
Esther spoke to Hathach and gave him a message for Mordecai, saying,
11 "All the king's servants and the people of the king's provinces know
that if any man or woman goes to the king inside the inner court
without being called, there is but one law — all alike are to be put to
death. Only if the king holds out the golden scepter to someone, may
that person live. I myself have not been called to come in to the king
for thirty days." 12 When they told Mordecai what Esther had said, 13
Mordecai told them to reply to Esther, "Do not think that in the king's
palace you will escape any more than all the other Jews. 14 For if you
keep silence at such a time as this, relief and deliverance will rise for
the Jews from another quarter, but you and your father's family will
perish. Who knows? Perhaps you have come to royal dignity for just
such a time as this." 15 Then Esther said in reply to Mordecai, 16 "Go,
gather all the Jews to be found in Susa, and hold a fast on my behalf,
and neither eat nor drink for three days, night or day. I and my maids
will also fast as you do. After that I will go to the king, though it is
against the law; and if I perish, I perish." 17 Mordecai then went away
and did everything as Esther had ordered him.
[Esther 5]
Esther before the king
1 On the third day Esther put on her royal robes and stood in the inner
court of the king's palace, opposite the king's hall. The king was sitting
on his royal throne inside the palace opposite the entrance to the
palace. 2 As soon as the king saw Queen Esther standing in the court,
she won his favor and he held out to her the golden scepter that was
in his hand. Then Esther approached and touched the top of the
scepter. 3 The king said to her, "What is it, Queen Esther? What is your

950

ESTHER 951

request? It shall be given you, even to the half of my kingdom." 4 Then
Esther said, "If it pleases the king, let the king and Haman come today
to a banquet that I have prepared for the king." 5 Then the king said,
"Bring Haman quickly, so that we may do as Esther desires." So the
king and Haman came to the banquet that Esther had prepared. 6
While they were drinking wine, the king said to Esther, "What is your
petition? It shall be granted you. And what is your request? Even to the
half of my kingdom, it shall be fulfilled." 7 Then Esther said, "This is my
petition and request: 8 If I have won the king's favor, and if it pleases
the king to grant my petition and fulfill my request, let the king and
Haman come tomorrow to the banquet that I will prepare for them,
and then I will do as the king has said."
Haman's happiness is spoiled
9 Haman went out that day happy and in good spirits. But when
Haman saw Mordecai in the king's gate, and observed that he neither
rose nor trembled before him, he was infuriated with Mordecai; 10
nevertheless Haman restrained himself and went home. Then he sent
and called for his friends and his wife Zeresh, 11 and Haman recounted
to them the splendor of his riches, the number of his sons, all the
promotions with which the king had honored him, and how he had
advanced him above the officials and the ministers of the king. 12
Haman added, "Even Queen Esther let no one but myself come with
the king to the banquet that she prepared. Tomorrow also I am invited
by her, together with the king. 13 Yet all this does me no good so long
as I see the Jew Mordecai sitting at the king's gate." 14 Then his wife
Zeresh and all his friends said to him, "Let a gallows fifty cubits high be
made, and in the morning tell the king to have Mordecai hanged on it;
then go with the king to the banquet in good spirits." This advice
pleased Haman, and he had the gallows made.
[Esther 6]
Mordecai's triumph
1 On that night the king could not sleep, and he gave orders to bring
the book of records, the annals, and they were read to the king. 2 It
was found written how Mordecai had told about Bigthana and Teresh,

951

ESTHER 952

two of the king's eunuchs, who guarded the threshold, and who had
conspired to assassinate King Ahasuerus. 3 Then the king said, "What
honor or distinction has been bestowed on Mordecai for this?" The
king's servants who attended him said, "Nothing has been done for
him." 4 The king said, "Who is in the court?" Now Haman had just
entered the outer court of the king's palace to speak to the king about
having Mordecai hanged on the gallows that he had prepared for him.
5 So the king's servants told him, "Haman is there, standing in the
court." The king said, "Let him come in." 6 So Haman came in, and the
king said to him, "What shall be done for the man whom the king
wishes to honor?" Haman said to himself, "Whom would the king wish
to honor more than me?" 7 So Haman said to the king, "For the man
whom the king wishes to honor, 8 let royal robes be brought, which
the king has worn, and a horse that the king has ridden, with a royal
crown on its head. 9 Let the robes and the horse be handed over to
one of the king's most noble officials; let him robe the man whom the
king wishes to honor, and let him conduct the man on horseback
through the open square of the city, proclaiming before him: 'Thus
shall it be done for the man whom the king wishes to honor.'" 10 Then
the king said to Haman, "Quickly, take the robes and the horse, as you
have said, and do so to the Jew Mordecai who sits at the king's gate.
Leave out nothing that you have mentioned." 11 So Haman took the
robes and the horse and robed Mordecai and led him riding through
the open square of the city, proclaiming, "Thus shall it be done for the
man whom the king wishes to honor."
12 Then Mordecai returned to the king's gate, but Haman hurried to his
house, mourning and with his head covered. 13 When Haman told his
wife Zeresh and all his friends everything that had happened to him,
his advisers and his wife Zeresh said to him, "If Mordecai, before whom
your downfall has begun, is of the Jewish people, you will not prevail
against him, but will surely fall before him."
Esther's second banquet and Haman's fall
14 While they were still talking with him, the king's eunuchs arrived
and hurried Haman off to the banquet that Esther had prepared.
[Esther 7] 1 So the king and Haman went in to feast with Queen Esther.

952

ESTHER 953

2 On the second day, as they were drinking wine, the king again said to
Esther, "What is your petition, Queen Esther? It shall be granted you.
And what is your request? Even to the half of my kingdom, it shall be
fulfilled." 3 Then Queen Esther answered, "If I have won your favor, O
king, and if it pleases the king, let my life be given me — that is my
petition — and the lives of my people — that is my request. 4 For we
have been sold, I and my people, to be destroyed, to be killed, and to
be annihilated. If we had been sold merely as slaves, men and women, I
would have held my peace; but no enemy can compensate for this
damage to the king." 5 Then King Ahasuerus said to Queen Esther,
"Who is he, and where is he, who has presumed to do this?" 6 Esther
said, "A foe and enemy, this wicked Haman!" Then Haman was
terrified before the king and the queen. 7 The king rose from the feast
in wrath and went into the palace garden, but Haman stayed to beg
his life from Queen Esther, for he saw that the king had determined to
destroy him. 8 When the king returned from the palace garden to the
banquet hall, Haman had thrown himself on the couch where Esther
was reclining; and the king said, "Will he even assault the queen in my
presence, in my own house?" As the words left the mouth of the king,
they covered Haman's face. 9 Then Harbona, one of the eunuchs in
attendance on the king, said, "Look, the very gallows that Haman has
prepared for Mordecai, whose word saved the king, stands at Haman's
house, fifty cubits high." And the king said, "Hang him on that." 10 So
they hanged Haman on the gallows that he had prepared for
Mordecai. Then the anger of the king abated.
[Esther 8]
The rise of Mordecai and the revocation of the anti-Jewish edict
1 On that day King Ahasuerus gave to Queen Esther the house of
Haman, the enemy of the Jews; and Mordecai came before the king,
for Esther had told what he was to her. 2 Then the king took off his
signet ring, which he had taken from Haman, and gave it to Mordecai.
So Esther set Mordecai over the house of Haman.
3 Then Esther spoke again to the king; she fell at his feet, weeping and
pleading with him to avert the evil design of Haman the Agagite and
the plot that he had devised against the Jews. 4 The king held out the

953

ESTHER 954

golden scepter to Esther, 5 and Esther rose and stood before the king.
She said, "If it pleases the king, and if I have won his favor, and if the
thing seems right before the king, and I have his approval, let an order
be written to revoke the letters devised by Haman son of Hammedatha
the Agagite, which he wrote giving orders to destroy the Jews who are
in all the provinces of the king. 6 For how can I bear to see the calamity
that is coming on my people? Or how can I bear to see the destruction
of my kindred?" 7 Then King Ahasuerus said to Queen Esther and to
the Jew Mordecai, "See, I have given Esther the house of Haman, and
they have hanged him on the gallows, because he plotted to lay hands
on the Jews. 8 You may write as you please with regard to the Jews, in
the name of the king, and seal it with the king's ring; for an edict
written in the name of the king and sealed with the king's ring cannot
be revoked."
9 The king's secretaries were summoned at that time, in the third
month, which is the month of Sivan, on the twenty-third day; and an
edict was written, according to all that Mordecai commanded, to the
Jews and to the satraps and the governors and the officials of the
provinces from India to Ethiopia, one hundred twenty-seven provinces,
to every province in its own script and to every people in its own
language, and also to the Jews in their script and their language. 10 He
wrote letters in the name of King Ahasuerus, sealed them with the
king's ring, and sent them by mounted couriers riding on fast steeds
bred from the royal herd. 11 By these letters the king allowed the Jews
who were in every city to assemble and defend their lives, to destroy,
to kill, and to annihilate any armed force of any people or province
that might attack them, with their children and women, and to
plunder their goods 12 on a single day throughout all the provinces of
King Ahasuerus, on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is
the month of Adar. 13 A copy of the writ was to be issued as a decree
in every province and published to all peoples, and the Jews were to be
ready on that day to take revenge on their enemies. 14 So the couriers,
mounted on their swift royal steeds, hurried out, urged by the king's
command. The decree was issued in the citadel of Susa.

954

ESTHER 955

15 Then Mordecai went out from the presence of the king, wearing
royal robes of blue and white, with a great golden crown and a mantle
of fine linen and purple, while the city of Susa shouted and rejoiced. 16
For the Jews there was light and gladness, joy and honor. 17 In every
province and in every city, wherever the king's command and his edict
came, there was gladness and joy among the Jews, a festival and a
holiday. Furthermore, many of the peoples of the country professed to
be Jews, because the fear of the Jews had fallen upon them.
[Esther 9]
The origins of Purim; the Jews triumph over their enemies
1 Now in the twelfth month, which is the month of Adar, on the
thirteenth day, when the king's command and edict were about to be
executed, on the very day when the enemies of the Jews hoped to gain
power over them, but which had been changed to a day when the
Jews would gain power over their foes, 2 the Jews gathered in their
cities throughout all the provinces of King Ahasuerus to lay hands on
those who had sought their ruin; and no one could withstand them,
because the fear of them had fallen upon all peoples. 3 All the officials
of the provinces, the satraps and the governors, and the royal officials
were supporting the Jews, because the fear of Mordecai had fallen
upon them. 4 For Mordecai was powerful in the king's house, and his
fame spread throughout all the provinces as the man Mordecai grew
more and more powerful. 5 So the Jews struck down all their enemies
with the sword, slaughtering, and destroying them, and did as they
pleased to those who hated them. 6 In the citadel of Susa the Jews
killed and destroyed five hundred people. 7 They killed Parshandatha,
Dalphon, Aspatha, 8 Poratha, Adalia, Aridatha, 9 Parmashta, Arisai,
Aridai, Vaizatha, 10 the ten sons of Haman son of Hammedatha, the
enemy of the Jews; but they did not touch the plunder.
11 That very day the number of those killed in the citadel of Susa was
reported to the king. 12 The king said to Queen Esther, "In the citadel
of Susa the Jews have killed five hundred people and also the ten sons
of Haman. What have they done in the rest of the king's provinces?
Now what is your petition? It shall be granted you. And what further is
your request? It shall be fulfilled." 13 Esther said, "If it pleases the king,

955

ESTHER 956

let the Jews who are in Susa be allowed tomorrow also to do according
to this day's edict, and let the ten sons of Haman be hanged on the
gallows." 14 So the king commanded this to be done; a decree was
issued in Susa, and the ten sons of Haman were hanged. 15 The Jews
who were in Susa gathered also on the fourteenth day of the month of
Adar and they killed three hundred persons in Susa; but they did not
touch the plunder.
16 Now the other Jews who were in the king's provinces also gathered
to defend their lives, and gained relief from their enemies, and killed
seventy-five thousand of those who hated them; but they laid no
hands on the plunder. 17 This was on the thirteenth day of the month
of Adar, and on the fourteenth day they rested and made that a day of
feasting and gladness.
18 But the Jews who were in Susa gathered on the thirteenth day and
on the fourteenth, and rested on the fifteenth day, making that a day
of feasting and gladness. 19 Therefore the Jews of the villages, who live
in the open towns, hold the fourteenth day of the month of Adar as a
day for gladness and feasting, a holiday on which they send gifts of
food to one another.
The inauguration of the feast of Purim
20 Mordecai recorded these things, and sent letters to all the Jews who
were in all the provinces of King Ahasuerus, both near and far, 21
enjoining them that they should keep the fourteenth day of the month
Adar and also the fifteenth day of the same month, year by year, 22 as
the days on which the Jews gained relief from their enemies, and as
the month that had been turned for them from sorrow into gladness
and from mourning into a holiday; that they should make them days of
feasting and gladness, days for sending gifts of food to one another
and presents to the poor. 23 So the Jews adopted as a custom what
they had begun to do, as Mordecai had written to them.
24 Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the enemy of all the Jews,
had plotted against the Jews to destroy them, and had cast Pur — that
is "the lot" — to crush and destroy them; 25 but when Esther came

956

ESTHER 957

before the king, he gave orders in writing that the wicked plot that he
had devised against the Jews should come upon his own head, and
that he and his sons should be hanged on the gallows. 26 Therefore
these days are called Purim, from the word Pur. Thus because of all
that was written in this letter, and of what they had faced in this
matter, and of what had happened to them, 27 the Jews established
and accepted as a custom for themselves and their descendants and all
who joined them, that without fail they would continue to observe
these two days every year, as it was written and at the time appointed.
28 These days should be remembered and kept throughout every
generation, in every family, province, and city; and these days of Purim
should never fall into disuse among the Jews, nor should the
commemoration of these days cease among their descendants.
29 Queen Esther daughter of Abihail, along with the Jew Mordecai,
gave full written authority, confirming this second letter about Purim.
30 Letters were sent wishing peace and security to all the Jews, to the
one hundred twenty-seven provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, 31
and giving orders that these days of Purim should be observed at their
appointed seasons, as the Jew Mordecai and Queen Esther enjoined on
the Jews, just as they had laid down for themselves and for their
descendants regulations concerning their fasts and their lamentations.
32 The command of Queen Esther fixed these practices of Purim, and it
was recorded in writing.
[Esther 10]
Postscript: the greatness of Ahasuerus and Mordecai
1 King Ahasuerus laid tribute on the land and on the islands of the sea.
2 All the acts of his power and might, and the full account of the high
honor of Mordecai, to which the king advanced him, are they not
written in the annals of the kings of Media and Persia? 3 For Mordecai
the Jew was next in rank to King Ahasuerus, and he was powerful
among the Jews and popular with his many kindred, for he sought the
good of his people and interceded for the welfare of all his
descendants.

957

INTRO TO THE POETICAL AND WISDOM BOOKS 958

INTRODUCTION TO THE
POETICAL AND WISDOM BOOKS
Contents and Placement
The Poetical and Wisdom Books — Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes,
and the Song of Solomon — do not form a totally coherent unit,
especially when compared to other canonical divisions, such as the
Historical Books or the Prophetic Books. These fives books were written
or collected at widely different times and consist of a number of
literary types: love poetry (the Song of Solomon), Temple liturgy
(Psalms), and wisdom literature (Job, Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes). It is
also likely that they entered the canon for quite different reasons:
Psalms was used for prayers; the Song of Solomon was probably first
canonized as an ancient erotic poem used in wedding ceremonies;
while Job, Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes may have been placed together in
the canon because all three belong to a category of writings known as
wisdom literature.
"Wisdom literature" describes works that do not focus on the nation
Israel, on its great formative historical memories, such as Exodus and
conquest, on the Temple and Jerusalem, and on covenant as the
central theological notion binding together God, the people Israel, and
the land of Israel. Wisdom books are thus in some ways a departure
from the concerns of other biblical books. They share, rather, as their
focus, reflection on universal human concerns, especially the
understanding of individual experiences and the maintenance of
ordered relationships that lead both to success on the human (social)
plane and to divine approval. In more recent scholarship, the concept
of "wisdom" has been criticized as too elastic and amorphous. Indeed,
the three wisdom books in this collection are remarkably different
from one another and do not form a clear unit: Proverbs, in contrast to
Job, suggest that the righteous are rewarded and do not suffer, while
Ecclesiastes, in contrast to both Job and Proverbs, is deeply skeptical of

958

INTRO TO THE POETICAL AND WISDOM BOOKS 959

the utility of wisdom. In addition, "wisdom" is a modern category,
deriving from the beginning of the twentieth century, and thus Job,
Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes were not originally grouped together on
generic grounds. They nevertheless share a thematic interdependence.
Proverbs provides a normative version of a type of ancient Near Eastern
thought that looked for pattern and repetition in nature and in the
moral life. In this tradition, the regular recurrence of natural
phenomena could provide an analogy to guide human beings in their
social interactions:
As charcoal is to hot embers and wood to fire,
so is a quarrelsome person for kindling strife (26.21).
The inevitability of the natural occurrence is mirrored in the
inevitability of the social one. This kind of thinking then was extended
to moral behavior, with the argument that good behavior, like good
farming practice, will be rewarded:
Anyone who tends a fig tree will eat its fruit,
and anyone who takes care of a master will be honored
(27.18).
Job and Ecclesiastes relate to this normative tradition in different ways.
Job denies the inevitability of rewards for living an upright life and
decisively refutes the idea that human suffering is always deserved.
Ecclesiastes treats the idea of inevitability in another way: The natural
repetitions of seasons, tasks, and occupations become the image of
futility. Each therefore, depends on the reader's acquaintance with the
normative tradition. It should be noted that the themes of the wisdom
tradition are continued in the Apocryphal/ Deuterocanonical books of
the Wisdom of Solomon and Sirach (Ecclesiasticus), both of which
combine didactic themes and style familiar especially from the book of
Proverbs with retrospective summaries of Israel's history.
Though these five books are loosely described as Poetical Books, they
are not all poetry, nor are all biblical poetic works found in this
canonical section. Although Ecclesiastes contains some poetical
sections, such as the poem of 3.1-8 ("For everything there is a

959

INTRO TO THE POETICAL AND WISDOM BOOKS 960

season..."), or quoted poetic proverbs (e.g., 7.1-6), the book is
predominantly prose. Additionally, the nature of the poetry in these
books is quite different, ranging from the highly structured, largely
static poetry of Proverbs, to the intensely erotic, more free-flowing
poetry of Song of Solomon.
The creation of a canonical division called the "Poetical Books" is a
relatively late development. In Jewish tradition these five books are
included in the Writings, the third division of the canon; their order
varies in different sources. The earliest evidence for seeing these five
books as a unit comes from the second century CE, though it took
many centuries for these five books, in the order found here, to be
recognized as the third section of the Bible. The order of these books
was variable, and some traditions placed them at the end of the
Christian Old Testament, while others put them as the second part of
that book immediately following the Pentateuch. Its current placement
in English Bibles follows some manuscript traditions which most likely
sought to organize the first section of the Bible by placing the Torah,
the most authoritative section, first, followed by works about the past
(the Historical Books), books about the present (the Poetical Books),
and books about the future (the Prophetic Books). This arrangement,
which places the prophets last, would be especially significant once the
Hebrew Bible became the Old Testament and was seen as a kind of
introduction to the New Testament. The Prophetic Books would then
immediately precede the Gospels as prophecy followed by fulfillment.
Authorship
At least four of the five Poetical Books cohere in terms of traditionally
ascribed authorship. Many of the Psalms contain superscriptions or
titles incorporating "of David," and many early Jewish and Christian
traditions ascribe the Psalter as a whole to David. Proverbs 1.1 ("The
proverbs of Solomon, son of David, king of Israel"), 10.1, and 25.1
explicitly ascribe (sections of) that book to Solomon. Ecclesiastes, in its
opening chapter, presents itself as the work of "the Teacher, when
king over Israel in Jerusalem" (1.12; cf. 1.1); Jewish and Christian
tradition understands this royal teacher to be Solomon, who is
described in 1 Kings as being exceedingly rich, just like the protagonist

960

INTRO TO THE POETICAL AND WISDOM BOOKS 961

of Ecclesiastes. Finally, the Song of Solomon opens with an explicit (but
secondary) ascription of authorship: "The Song of Songs, which is
Solomon's." Given the clear connection of Psalms, Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, and Song of Solomon to David and Solomon, it is
noteworthy that some early Christian interpreters connected Job as
well to the period of Solomon. It is thus likely that this canonical
division of five books came into being as the compilations connected to
David and Solomon, and was only secondarily labeled the "Poetical
Books." The traditional attributions of authorship, however, have for
the most part been rejected by modern scholarship; see the
Introduction to each book for a detailed discussion.
The Characteristics of Biblical Poetry
These books do, as noted above, incorporate a large amount of poetry,
so it is appropriate to here examine the basic structures of biblical
poetry. Poetry is a cross-cultural phenomenon: Most cultures
distinguish between an everyday type of discourse (prose), and
heightened discourse (poetry, and also philosophy). This heightening
may be accomplished in a number of different ways, which include the
use of figuration (e.g., metaphor, simile), meter, and certain types of
sound patterning, such as alliteration and rhyme. Yet there is no crosscultural pattern for poetry. Thus Hebrew poetry, unlike its classical
English counterpart, has neither (true) rhythm nor rhyme; nevertheless,
it is poetic in that it uses certain devices in significant enough
concentration to distinguish it from everyday speech, or prose.
Obviously, the prose-poetry distinction is relative rather than absolute;
as in English, we may speak of poetic prose or prosaic poetry. Thus,
"pure prose" and "pure poetry" should be seen as opposites on a
continuum, within which a large variety of possibilities evince
themselves in the Bible as in other literary traditions.
The main shared characteristic between typical English poetry and
biblical poetry is the use of figuration. This may be seen, for example,
in Ps 23. The central image of this psalm is introduced by the metaphor,
"The Lord is my shepherd" (v. 1). The following verses unveil or clarify
the meaning of this metaphor, noting in vv. 22-3 how God, the ideal
shepherd, tends his people/sheep:

961

INTRO TO THE POETICAL AND WISDOM BOOKS 962

He makes me lie down in green pastures;
he leads me beside still waters;
he restores my soul.
He leads me in right paths
for his name's sake.
Psalm 1 is characterized by a set of two contrasting similes: the
righteous
...are like trees
planted by streams of water,
which yield their fruit in its season,
and their leaves do not wither (v. 3),
while the wicked "are like chaff that the wind drives away" (v. 4). The
Song of Solomon is especially rich in similes and metaphors, as in the
beginning of ch 2:
I am a rose of Sharon,
a lily of the valleys.
As a lily among brambles,
so is my love among maidens.
As an apple tree among the trees of the wood,
so is my beloved among young men.
With great delight I sat in his shadow,
and his fruit was sweet to my taste.
The main characteristic of biblical poetry, nevertheless, is not
figuration, but parallelism, in which most poetic lines may be divided
into two (or sometimes three) parts; the second part of the line is
intimately connected to the first part, and typically seconds it in some
way. For example, Ps 6.2 reads:
Be gracious to me, O Lord, for I am languishing;
O Lord, heal me, for my bones are shaking with terror.
The verse clearly divides into two more or less equal sections, and each
element in the first part is mirrored, seconded, or paralleled in the

962

INTRO TO THE POETICAL AND WISDOM BOOKS 963

second: Be gracious to me || heal me; O Lord || O Lord; for I am
languishing || for my bones are shaking with terror. This parallelism,
which is not typical of biblical prose, serves as the backbone of biblical
poetry.
Since the eighteenth century, it has been customary to see three main
types of parallelism in the Bible: synonymous, antithetical, and
synthetic. The quotation above from Ps 6.2 is an example of
synonymous parallelism. Antithetical parallelism can be seen in Prov
10.1:
A wise child makes a glad father,
but a foolish child is a mother's grief.
In this balanced, two-part line, "a wise child" is antithetical, or
opposite, to "a foolish child," and "makes a glad father" is antithetical
to "is a mother's grief." In synthetic parallelism, the second part of the
line completes the thought of the first part, and is neither the same
nor the opposite. For example, Song 1.9 reads:
I compare you, my love,
to a mare among Pharaoh's chariots.
Here the second part concludes the thought of the first.
The appropriateness of the three labels — synonymous, antithetical,
and synthetic — which were accepted in biblical scholarship for two
centuries, has now been called into question on several grounds. First,
some have noted that languages have no true synonyms; thus
"synonymous parallelism" is a misleading term. Furthermore, very
often two parallel words can be similar, but are not truly synonymous,
as may be seen in the example of Ps 6.2: "I am languishing" || "my
bones are shaking with terror." The term antithetical parallelism has
been questioned because not all elements of part B are the antithesis
of part A. This may be seen in the example from Prov 10.1, where
"child" is used in both parts A and B; a true antithesis might contrast a
"wise child" with a "foolish parent." Finally, "synthetic" has been
criticized as too vague a term. These criticisms should not be

963

INTRO TO THE POETICAL AND WISDOM BOOKS 964

underestimated. Nevertheless, the three terms, if understood as ideal
types from which actual lines may deviate to a greater or lesser extent,
remain useful.
A much more serious criticism of the classical model emerged in the
mid-1980s when several scholars began to question the notion that
parallelism is formulaic in that the second half of the poetic line
typically adds little to the line, but merely seconds it. Several scholars
have suggested just the opposites, that the second part heightens or
extends the first. Thus, the typical biblical verse should be read "A, and
even more so, B." According to this model, which has gained
substantial support in the last two decades, we would not read Ps 6.2b,
"O Lord, heal me, for my bones are shaking with terror" as a type of
filler that merely restates "Be gracious to me, O Lord, for I am
languishing." Rather we would understand the verse as a whole as: "Be
gracious to me, O Lord, for I am languishing," and moreover, "O Lord,
heal me, for my bones are shaking with terror," where the claim "for
my bones are shaking with terror" is a more vivid description that
intensifies the verse's opening "for I am languishing."
Sometimes it is quite clear that the second part of the verse does not
merely parallel the first but does go beyond it in some significant
fashion, and thus justifies this newer model. Yet, there are a
substantial number of cases in which the second part actually does
seem to function as a mere filler, carrying little if any semantic weight,
let alone intensifying the first. For example, the major image of Ps 121 is
the ability of God to protect the individual. This is expressed at the
psalm's center, where God is imagined metaphorically as a "shade" (v.
5) from the intense Mediterranean heat. The psalm continues (v. 6):
"The sun shall not strike you by day, nor the moon by night." Clearly,
the second part, "nor the moon by night" is not an intensification; in
fact, it makes no sense, since no one in ancient Israel was afflicted with
moonburn or moonstroke. The second part here is probably an
antithetical filler and carries no semantic weight. It should be seen as
part of an ancient Near Eastern and biblical patter of word pairs,
where a particular word (e.g., "sun" or "father") automatically evokes
a realted ("synonymous" or "antithetical") word (e.g., "moon" or
"mother").

964

INTRO TO THE POETICAL AND WISDOM BOOKS 965

Thus, parallelism is much more complicated than would appear on the
surface. Clearly it is characterized by sets of lines, each of which may be
divided into two parts, typically of the same length and mirroring each
other on the semantic, syntactic, and phonological levels. It is unclear if
the second should typically be read as an intensification of the first, or
as a filler that carries little or no semantic value. This uncertainty is
extremely frustrating, not only because it leaves us unsure how to read
much of biblical poetry, especially the extent to which we do or do not
need to pay close attention to the second half of the line, but also
because our understanding of biblical poetry will affect our
reconstruction of many Israelite institutions. To return to Prov 10.1 —
"A A wise child makes a glad father, but a foolish child is a mother's
grief" — if we follow the older understanding of parallelism, the
second half is largely a filler, indicating that the father had the major
role in the child's upbringing in ancient Israel, while if we follow the
newer understanding, where the second intensifies the first, the
mother was primarily responsible for the child.
Another area that has engendered significant controversy over the last
few decades concerns the extent to which meter or rhythm existed in
biblical poetry. Much of this debate concerns the definition of meter.
In English and other modern Western languages, meter is generally
understood as a pattern of stressed and unstressed syllables; if this is
how we should understand it in biblical poetic texts, these texts in their
current form lack meter or rhythm. Metrical patterns can only be found
in biblical texts if they are emended or reconstructed extensively. There
is, however, a tendency for the parts of each line, in most poetic
genres, to be approximately the same length. There is some possibility
that this reflects the remnant of some metrical system, and that at an
earlier time, each part had not only the same length, but the same
meter, but this pattern of stressed and unstressed syllables has been
lost as a result of changes in the pronunciation of ancient Hebrew.
More likely, the similarity of length is part of the larger system of
parallelism, which encouraged each part to mirror its counterpart in
length, as well as in semantic, syntactic, and phonological structure.
Scholars have until recently been primarily concerned with the line as
the main unit of biblical poetry. This is not really surprising, given how
foreign biblical parallelism is to the modern Western (but not the

965

INTRO TO THE POETICAL AND WISDOM BOOKS 966

ancient Near Eastern) ear. This interest in the line has obscured the
significance of the strophe or stanza and of the poem as a whole. But
the last few decades have seen a legitimate return to these larger
units. For example, it had become a habit when studying passages like
Job 3 to concentrate solely on the parallelism of lines like v. 5:
Let gloom and deep darkness claim it.
Let clouds settle upon it;
let the blackness of the day terrify it.
Now, in addition to this type of analysis, scholars study how the poet
uses images of day and night, light and darkness, throughout the
chapter, in order to create this exquisite poem. This is not, however, an
either-or proposition: By studying how the individual line functions as
poetry and how these lines join together into stanzas, which combine
into complete poems, we gain a much fuller appreciation and
understanding of these Poetical Books.

Copyright ©2001, New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha: New Revised Standard
Version. Ed. Michael D. Coogan. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001. Used by
permission. All rights reserved.

966

JOB 967

JOB
Introduction
The book of Job is named after its protagonist, innocent man who
suffered loss and endured pain through no fault of his own. For many,
the man Job is most well-known through the cliché about "the
patience of Job," derived from the traditional translation of Jas 5.11.
The Greek term that is translated as "patience," however, means not so
much patience as "endurance," "persistence," or "steadfastness." And,
indeed, the Job that one encounters in the book that bears his name is
not patient, but he is persistent in his claim that he has suffered
undeservedly.
The provenance of the book is unknown. Its author is anonymous,
while its date and place of origin are matters of debate. Most scholars
places the bulk of the book, if not its final form, somewhere between
the seventh and the fourth centuries BCE, although also recognizing
that the final form is the result of a complex history of transmission.
The prose framework, what are now the book's prologue (1.1-2.13) and
epilogue (42.7.17), consists of a narrative that is likely based on an
ancient folktale about the undeserved suffering and final restoration
of the protagonist. The rest of the book consists of dialogues (written
in poetic style) between Job and the friends who had ostensibly come
to comfort him (3.1-31.40), and between Job and God (38.1-42.6).
Intruding into this material are a poetic interlude on the inaccessibility
of Wisdom (28.1-28) and the speeches of Elihu (32.1-37.24) that appear
to have been added at a later time. Interpreters have called attention
to certain linguistic and stylistic shifts, as well as occasional
inconsistencies in the story line. Such discrepancies have bee explained
in terms of multiple authors, a single author with multiple sources, a
primary work that has been redacted two or three times, or a single
author who has worked with the materials over a long period of time.

967

JOB 968

Whatever the truth, the book in its present form must be read as a
whole.
Although the book of Job in its entirety is unique in ancient literature,
it draws on a variety of traditions and genres that were known
throughout the ancient Near East. The character of Job himself is
presented as a non-Israelite from the land of Uz (perhaps northern
Arabia), and it is likely that versions of the story of Job were told by
many of the peoples of the region. In the sixth century BCE the
prophet Ezekiel mentions Job, along with Noah and Dan'el, as heroes
of antiquity who saved others by their righteousness (Ezek 14.14, 20).
Despite its mention by Ezekiel, this Dan'el (spelled "Daniel" in the
NRSV translation, but footnoted as "Danel") is not the same Daniel as
the biblical book of that name, but an ancient Canaanite king whose
story is known from the tablets found in the ruins of the second
millennium BCE city of Ugarit. Similar to Ezekiel's setting of Job among
the legendary figures of antiquity is the way in which the prose tale
presents Job as someone who apparently lived in the remote ancestral
period.
The influence of ancient Near Eastern literary forms and traditions are
also evident in the poetic dialogues. The problem of enigmatic
suffering was one that was explored in Mesopotamian literature in
poetic compositions in whihc a righteous or emblematic sufferer
described his sufferings, his confusion about the cause of his misery,
and his passionate desire for restoration (e.g., "I will Praise the Lord of
Wisdom" and the "Sumerian Job"). The most striking similarity,
however, exists between the dialogue sections of Job and "The
Babylonian Theodicy." In this composition an unnamed sufferer and his
friend speak alternately in a cycle of twenty-seven speeches. The
sufferer protests his misery, describing the injustice of the world and
the unfairness of the gods. His friend attempts to defend the
rationality of the world and urges his friend to seek the mercy of the
gods. In contrast to Job, however, "The Babylonian Theodicy" ends
without any appearance of the deity or narrative resolution.

968

JOB 969

Finally, the book of Job contains many allusions to mythological
traditions known throughout the ancient Near East. Repeated
reference is made to the cosmogonic struggle between God and the
sea, especially as represented by the dragon of chaos, Rahab or
Leviathan (3.8; 7.12; 10.13; 26.12/ 38.3-11; 41.1-34). It is often suggested
that the long descriptions of Behemoth and Leviathan in chs 40-41
draw on Egyptian imagery from the myths of Horus and Seth. The
descriptions of creation and of cosmic geography in chs 26 and 38 also
evoke the mythic traditions common to Israel and the other cultures of
the Near East.
Like other wisdom literature in the Hebrew Bible, the book of Job does
not make reference to specific Israelite legal or historical traditions. It
does, however, make a rich use of psalmic and other wisdom traditions.
In the dialogues the characters often make use of proverbs (e.g., 5.10,
17; 8.11; 12.11) or hymns (e.g., 5.8-16). Job is particularly adept at evoking
a hymn or psalm only to parody it. Although the clearest example is his
parody of Psalm 8 in 7.17-19, he uses this technique often (9.5-12; 12.1325).
The enigma of the suffering of the righteous and the good fortune of
the wicked was one addressed by Israelite literature, both in the psalms
and in other wisdom texts. Although not prominent in the book of
Proverbs, it emerges more strongly in the later wisdom books of
Ecclesiastes and Sirach. Several Psalms also address aspects of these
issues (Ps 37; 39; 49; 73), but they do not exhibit the radical protest and
questioning that one finds in the book of Job.
Distinctive to the book of Job is the way it situates these issues. The
book is neither a treatise on innocent suffering, as often supposed, nor
an apology for God's justice in the face of inexplicable human
suffering. Rather, the principal theological issue that the book raises is,
ironically, the question posed by the adversary in the divine council
(see 1.9): Will mortals be religious ("fear God") apart from rewards and
punishment? As the dialogue develops, however, the questions of
divine justice that torture Job's mind are not satisfactorily met by the
arguments of the friends. Job himself seeks to imagine a way in which
he might go to trial with God for a vindication of his righteousness and

969

JOB 970

perhaps an acknowledgment from God of God's mistreatment of Job
(9.2-35; 13.13-28; 16.18-22; 19.23-27; 23.1-7; 31.35-37). Yet when God
answers Job, it is neither as the friends have imagined God would
speak nor as Job had hoped God would answer him. The meaning and
significance of the divine speeches continue to be among the most
debated issues of the book. Some interpret the speeches as a
repudiation of a human's right to question God. Others understand
them as a necessary correction to Job's too limited understanding of
the nature of the cosmos as a place where all suffering can be reduced
to legal categories of guilt or innocence. All agree that the
extraordinary beauty of the poetry is part of its meaning. Perhaps the
very elusiveness of the divine speeches implies that no answer from
God to Job's questions can satisfy the human intellect. But as is known
by anyone, that is not true to our experience as humans. We yearn for
a response to the problem of evil, and continue to in part because the
book of Job provided no answer for us. Yet the ending suggest that
there is a resolution to be found in the depths of a pious life lived
before a mysterious God.

[Job 1]
The prologue
1 There was once a man in the land of Uz whose name was Job. That
man was blameless and upright, one who feared God and turned away
from evil. 2 There were born to him seven sons and three daughters. 3
He had seven thousand sheep, three thousand camels, five hundred
yoke of oxen, five hundred donkeys, and very many servants; so that
this man was the greatest of all the people of the east. 4 His sons used
to go and hold feasts in one another's houses in turn; and they would
send and invite their three sisters to eat and drink with them. 5 And
when the feast days had run their course, Job would send and sanctify
them, and he would rise early in the morning and offer burnt offerings
according to the number of them all; for Job said, "It may be that my
children have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts." This is what Job
always did.

970

JOB 971

6 One day the heavenly beings came to present themselves before the
LORD, and Satan also came among them. 7 The LORD said to Satan,
"Where have you come from?" Satan answered the LORD, "From going
to and fro on the earth, and from walking up and down on it." 8 The
LORD said to Satan, "Have you considered my servant Job? There is no
one like him on the earth, a blameless and upright man who fears God
and turns away from evil." 9 Then Satan answered the LORD, "Does Job
fear God for nothing? 10 Have you not put a fence around him and his
house and all that he has, on every side? You have blessed the work of
his hands, and his possessions have increased in the land. 11 But stretch
out your hand now, and touch all that he has, and he will curse you to
your face." 12 The LORD said to Satan, "Very well, all that he has is in
your power; only do not stretch out your hand against him!" So Satan
went out from the presence of the LORD.
13 One day when his sons and daughters were eating and drinking
wine in the eldest brother's house, 14 a messenger came to Job and
said, "The oxen were plowing and the donkeys were feeding beside
them, 15 and the Sabeans fell on them and carried them off, and killed
the servants with the edge of the sword; I alone have escaped to tell
you." 16 While he was still speaking, another came and said, "The fire
of God fell from heaven and burned up the sheep and the servants,
and consumed them; I alone have escaped to tell you." 17 While he was
still speaking, another came and said, "The Chaldeans formed three
columns, made a raid on the camels and carried them off, and killed
the servants with the edge of the sword; I alone have escaped to tell
you." 18 While he was still speaking, another came and said, "Your
sons and daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest
brother's house, 19 and suddenly a great wind came across the desert,
struck the four corners of the house, and it fell on the young people,
and they are dead; I alone have escaped to tell you."
20 Then Job arose, tore his robe, shaved his head, and fell on the
ground and worshiped. 21 He said, "Naked I came from my mother's
womb, and naked shall I return there; the LORD gave, and the LORD has
taken away; blessed be the name of the LORD."
22 In all this Job did not sin or charge God with wrongdoing.

971

JOB 972

[Job 2]
1 One day the heavenly beings came to present themselves before the
LORD, and Satan also came among them to present himself before the
LORD. 2 The LORD said to Satan, "Where have you come from?" Satan
answered the LORD, "From going to and fro on the earth, and from
walking up and down on it." 3 The LORD said to Satan, "Have you
considered my servant Job? There is no one like him on the earth, a
blameless and upright man who fears God and turns away from evil.
He still persists in his integrity, although you incited me against him, to
destroy him for no reason." 4 Then Satan answered the LORD, "Skin for
skin! All that people have they will give to save their lives. 5 But stretch
out your hand now and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will curse
you to your face." 6 The LORD said to Satan, "Very well, he is in your
power; only spare his life."
7 So Satan went out from the presence of the LORD, and inflicted
loathsome sores on Job from the sole of his foot to the crown of his
head. 8 Job took a potsherd with which to scrape himself, and sat
among the ashes.
9 Then his wife said to him, "Do you still persist in your integrity? Curse
God, and die." 10 But he said to her, "You speak as any foolish woman
would speak. Shall we receive the good at the hand of God, and not
receive the bad?" In all this Job did not sin with his lips.
11 Now when Job's three friends heard of all these troubles that had
come upon him, each of them set out from his home — Eliphaz the
Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite. They met
together to go and console and comfort him. 12 When they saw him
from a distance, they did not recognize him, and they raised their
voices and wept aloud; they tore their robes and threw dust in the air
upon their heads. 13 They sat with him on the ground seven days and
seven nights, and no one spoke a word to him, for they saw that his
suffering was very great.

972

JOB 973

[Job 3]
Job's curse of the day of his birth
1 After this Job opened his mouth and cursed the day of his birth. 2 Job
said:
3 "Let the day perish in which I was born,
and the night that said,
'A man-child is conceived.'
4 Let that day be darkness!
May God above not seek it,
or light shine on it.
5 Let gloom and deep darkness claim it.
Let clouds settle upon it;
let the blackness of the day terrify it.
6 That night — let thick darkness seize it!
let it not rejoice among the days of the year;
let it not come into the number of the months.
7 Yes, let that night be barren;
let no joyful cry be heard in it.
8 Let those curse it who curse the Sea,
those who are skilled to rouse up Leviathan.
9 Let the stars of its dawn be dark;
let it hope for light, but have none;
may it not see the eyelids of the morning —
10 because it did not shut the doors of my mother's womb,
and hide trouble from my eyes.
11 "Why did I not die at birth,
come forth from the womb and expire?
12 Why were there knees to receive me,
or breasts for me to suck?
13 Now I would be lying down and quiet;
I would be asleep; then I would be at rest
14 with kings and counselors of the earth
who rebuild ruins for themselves,
15 or with princes who have gold,
who fill their houses with silver.

973

JOB 974

16 Or why was I not buried like a stillborn child,
like an infant that never sees the light?
17 There the wicked cease from troubling,
and there the weary are at rest.
18 There the prisoners are at ease together;
they do not hear the voice of the taskmaster.
19 The small and the great are there,
and the slaves are free from their masters.
20 "Why is light given to one in misery,
and life to the bitter in soul,
21 who long for death, but it does not come,
and dig for it more than for hidden treasures;
22 who rejoice exceedingly,
and are glad when they find the grave?
23 Why is light given to one who cannot see the way,
whom God has fenced in?
24 For my sighing comes like my bread,
and my groanings are poured out like water.
25 Truly the thing that I fear comes upon me,
and what I dread befalls me.
26 I am not at ease, nor am I quiet;
I have no rest; but trouble comes."
[Job 4]
Eliphaz's first discourse
1 Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered:
2 "If one ventures a word with you, will you be offended?
But who can keep from speaking?
3 See, you have instructed many;
you have strengthened the weak hands.
4 Your words have supported those who were stumbling,
and you have made firm the feeble knees.
5 But now it has come to you, and you are impatient;
it touches you, and you are dismayed.
6 Is not your fear of God your confidence,
and the integrity of your ways your hope?

974

JOB 975

7 "Think now, who that was innocent ever perished?
Or where were the upright cut off?
8 As I have seen, those who plow iniquity
and sow trouble reap the same.
9 By the breath of God they perish,
and by the blast of his anger they are consumed.
10 The roar of the lion, the voice of the fierce lion,
and the teeth of the young lions are broken.
11 The strong lion perishes for lack of prey,
and the whelps of the lioness are scattered.
12 "Now a word came stealing to me,
my ear received the whisper of it.
13 Amid thoughts from visions of the night,
when deep sleep falls on mortals,
14 dread came upon me, and trembling,
which made all my bones shake.
15 A spirit glided past my face;
the hair of my flesh bristled.
16 It stood still,
but I could not discern its appearance.
A form was before my eyes;
there was silence, then I heard a voice:
17 'Can mortals be righteous before God?
Can human beings be pure before their Maker?
18 Even in his servants he puts no trust,
and his angels he charges with error;
19 how much more those who live in houses of clay,
whose foundation is in the dust,
who are crushed like a moth.
20 Between morning and evening they are destroyed;
they perish forever without any regarding it.
21 Their tent-cord is plucked up within them,
and they die devoid of wisdom.'

975

JOB 976

[Job 5]
1 "Call now; is there anyone who will answer you?
To which of the holy ones will you turn?
2 Surely vexation kills the fool,
and jealousy slays the simple.
3 I have seen fools taking root,
but suddenly I cursed their dwelling.
4 Their children are far from safety,
they are crushed in the gate,
and there is no one to deliver them.
5 The hungry eat their harvest,
and they take it even out of the thorns;
and the thirsty pant after their wealth.
6 For misery does not come from the earth,
nor does trouble sprout from the ground;
7 but human beings are born to trouble
just as sparks fly upward.
8 "As for me, I would seek God,
and to God I would commit my cause.
9 He does great things and unsearchable,
marvelous things without number.
10 He gives rain on the earth
and sends waters on the fields;
11 he sets on high those who are lowly,
and those who mourn are lifted to safety.
12 He frustrates the devices of the crafty,
so that their hands achieve no success.
13 He takes the wise in their own craftiness;
and the schemes of the wily are brought to a quick end.
14 They meet with darkness in the daytime,
and grope at noonday as in the night.
15 But he saves the needy from the sword of their mouth,
from the hand of the mighty.
16 So the poor have hope,
and injustice shuts its mouth.

976

JOB 977

17 "How happy is the one whom God reproves;
therefore do not despise the discipline of the Almighty.
18 For he wounds, but he binds up;
he strikes, but his hands heal.
19 He will deliver you from six troubles;
in seven no harm shall touch you.
20 In famine he will redeem you from death,
and in war from the power of the sword.
21 You shall be hidden from the scourge of the tongue,
and shall not fear destruction when it comes.
22 At destruction and famine you shall laugh,
and shall not fear the wild animals of the earth.
23 For you shall be in league with the stones of the field,
and the wild animals shall be at peace with you.
24 You shall know that your tent is safe,
you shall inspect your fold and miss nothing.
25 You shall know that your descendants will be many,
and your offspring like the grass of the earth.
26 You shall come to your grave in ripe old age,
as a shock of grain comes up to the threshing floor in its season.
27 See, we have searched this out; it is true.
Hear, and know it for yourself."
[Job 6]
Job's response
1 Then Job answered:
2 "O that my vexation were weighed,
and all my calamity laid in the balances!
3 For then it would be heavier than the sand of the sea;
therefore my words have been rash.
4 For the arrows of the Almighty are in me;
my spirit drinks their poison;
the terrors of God are arrayed against me.
5 Does the wild ass bray over its grass,
or the ox low over its fodder?
6 Can that which is tasteless be eaten without salt,
or is there any flavor in the juice of mallows?

977

JOB 978

7 My appetite refuses to touch them;
they are like food that is loathsome to me.
8 "O that I might have my request,
and that God would grant my desire;
9 that it would please God to crush me,
that he would let loose his hand and cut me off!
10 This would be my consolation;
I would even exult in unrelenting pain;
for I have not denied the words of the Holy One.
11 What is my strength, that I should wait?
And what is my end, that I should be patient?
12 Is my strength the strength of stones,
or is my flesh bronze?
13 In truth I have no help in me,
and any resource is driven from me.
14 "Those who withhold kindness from a friend
forsake the fear of the Almighty.
15 My companions are treacherous like a torrent-bed,
like freshets that pass away,
16 that run dark with ice,
turbid with melting snow.
17 In time of heat they disappear;
when it is hot, they vanish from their place.
18 The caravans turn aside from their course;
they go up into the waste, and perish.
19 The caravans of Tema look,
the travelers of Sheba hope.
20 They are disappointed because they were confident;
they come there and are confounded.
21 Such you have now become to me;
you see my calamity, and are afraid.
22 Have I said, 'Make me a gift'?
Or, 'From your wealth offer a bribe for me'?
23 Or, 'Save me from an opponent's hand'?
Or, 'Ransom me from the hand of oppressors'?

978

JOB 979

24 "Teach me, and I will be silent;
make me understand how I have gone wrong.
25 How forceful are honest words!
But your reproof, what does it reprove?
26 Do you think that you can reprove words,
as if the speech of the desperate were wind?
27 You would even cast lots over the orphan,
and bargain over your friend.
28 "But now, be pleased to look at me;
for I will not lie to your face.
29 Turn, I pray, let no wrong be done.
Turn now, my vindication is at stake.
30 Is there any wrong on my tongue?
Cannot my taste discern calamity?
[Job 7]
1 "Do not human beings have a hard service on earth,
and are not their days like the days of a laborer?
2 Like a slave who longs for the shadow,
and like laborers who look for their wages,
3 so I am allotted months of emptiness,
and nights of misery are apportioned to me.
4 When I lie down I say, 'When shall I rise?'
But the night is long,
and I am full of tossing until dawn.
5 My flesh is clothed with worms and dirt;
my skin hardens, then breaks out again.
6 My days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle,
and come to their end without hope.
7 "Remember that my life is a breath;
my eye will never again see good.
8 The eye that beholds me will see me no more;
while your eyes are upon me, I shall be gone.
9 As the cloud fades and vanishes,
so those who go down to Sheol do not come up;

979

JOB 980

10 they return no more to their houses,
nor do their places know them any more.
11 "Therefore I will not restrain my mouth;
I will speak in the anguish of my spirit;
I will complain in the bitterness of my soul.
12 Am I the Sea, or the Dragon,
that you set a guard over me?
13 When I say, 'My bed will comfort me,
my couch will ease my complaint,'
14 then you scare me with dreams
and terrify me with visions,
15 so that I would choose strangling
and death rather than this body.
16 I loathe my life; I would not live forever.
Let me alone, for my days are a breath.
17 What are human beings, that you make so much of them,
that you set your mind on them,
18 visit them every morning,
test them every moment?
19 Will you not look away from me for a while,
let me alone until I swallow my spittle?
20 If I sin, what do I do to you, you watcher of humanity?
Why have you made me your target?
Why have I become a burden to you?
21 Why do you not pardon my transgression
and take away my iniquity?
For now I shall lie in the earth;
you will seek me, but I shall not be."
[Job 8]
Bildad's first discourse
1 Then Bildad the Shuhite answered:
2 "How long will you say these things,
and the words of your mouth be a great wind?
3 Does God pervert justice?
Or does the Almighty pervert the right?

980

JOB 981

4 If your children sinned against him,
he delivered them into the power of their transgression.
5 If you will seek God
and make supplication to the Almighty,
6 if you are pure and upright,
surely then he will rouse himself for you
and restore to you your rightful place.
7 Though your beginning was small,
your latter days will be very great.
8 "For inquire now of bygone generations,
and consider what their ancestors have found;
9 for we are but of yesterday, and we know nothing,
for our days on earth are but a shadow.
10 Will they not teach you and tell you
and utter words out of their understanding?
11 "Can papyrus grow where there is no marsh?
Can reeds flourish where there is no water?
12 While yet in flower and not cut down,
they wither before any other plant.
13 Such are the paths of all who forget God;
the hope of the godless shall perish.
14 Their confidence is gossamer,
a spider's house their trust.
15 If one leans against its house, it will not stand;
if one lays hold of it, it will not endure.
16 The wicked thrive before the sun,
and their shoots spread over the garden.
17 Their roots twine around the stoneheap;
they live among the rocks.
18 If they are destroyed from their place,
then it will deny them, saying, 'I have never seen you.'
19 See, these are their happy ways,
and out of the earth still others will spring.
20 "See, God will not reject a blameless person,
nor take the hand of evildoers.

981

JOB 982

21 He will yet fill your mouth with laughter,
and your lips with shouts of joy.
22 Those who hate you will be clothed with shame,
and the tent of the wicked will be no more."
[Job 9]
Job's response
1 Then Job answered:
2 "Indeed I know that this is so;
but how can a mortal be just before God?
3 If one wished to contend with him,
one could not answer him once in a thousand.
4 He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength
— who has resisted him, and succeeded? —
5 he who removes mountains, and they do not know it,
when he overturns them in his anger;
6 who shakes the earth out of its place,
and its pillars tremble;
7 who commands the sun, and it does not rise;
who seals up the stars;
8 who alone stretched out the heavens
and trampled the waves of the Sea;
9 who made the Bear and Orion,
the Pleiades and the chambers of the south;
10 who does great things beyond understanding,
and marvelous things without number.
11 Look, he passes by me, and I do not see him;
he moves on, but I do not perceive him.
12 He snatches away; who can stop him?
Who will say to him, 'What are you doing?'
13 "God will not turn back his anger;
the helpers of Rahab bowed beneath him.
14 How then can I answer him,
choosing my words with him?
15 Though I am innocent, I cannot answer him;
I must appeal for mercy to my accuser.

982

JOB 983

16 If I summoned him and he answered me,
I do not believe that he would listen to my voice.
17 For he crushes me with a tempest,
and multiplies my wounds without cause;
18 he will not let me get my breath,
but fills me with bitterness.
19 If it is a contest of strength, he is the strong one!
If it is a matter of justice, who can summon him?
20 Though I am innocent, my own mouth would condemn me;
though I am blameless, he would prove me perverse.
21 I am blameless; I do not know myself;
I loathe my life.
22 It is all one; therefore I say,
he destroys both the blameless and the wicked.
23 When disaster brings sudden death,
he mocks at the calamity of the innocent.
24 The earth is given into the hand of the wicked;
he covers the eyes of its judges —
if it is not he, who then is it?
25 "My days are swifter than a runner;
they flee away, they see no good.
26 They go by like skiffs of reed,
like an eagle swooping on the prey.
27 If I say, 'I will forget my complaint;
I will put off my sad countenance and be of good cheer,'
28 I become afraid of all my suffering,
for I know you will not hold me innocent.
29 I shall be condemned;
why then do I labor in vain?
30 If I wash myself with soap
and cleanse my hands with lye,
31 yet you will plunge me into filth,
and my own clothes will abhor me.
32 For he is not a mortal, as I am, that I might answer him,
that we should come to trial together.
33 There is no umpire between us,
who might lay his hand on us both.

983

JOB 984

34 If he would take his rod away from me,
and not let dread of him terrify me,
35 then I would speak without fear of him,
for I know I am not what I am thought to be.
[Job 10]
1 "I loathe my life;
I will give free utterance to my complaint;
I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.
2 I will say to God, Do not condemn me;
let me know why you contend against me.
3 Does it seem good to you to oppress,
to despise the work of your hands
and favor the schemes of the wicked?
4 Do you have eyes of flesh?
Do you see as humans see?
5 Are your days like the days of mortals,
or your years like human years,
6 that you seek out my iniquity
and search for my sin,
7 although you know that I am not guilty,
and there is no one to deliver out of your hand?
8 Your hands fashioned and made me;
and now you turn and destroy me.
9 Remember that you fashioned me like clay;
and will you turn me to dust again?
10 Did you not pour me out like milk
and curdle me like cheese?
11 You clothed me with skin and flesh,
and knit me together with bones and sinews.
12 You have granted me life and steadfast love,
and your care has preserved my spirit.
13 Yet these things you hid in your heart;
I know that this was your purpose.
14 If I sin, you watch me,
and do not acquit me of my iniquity.

984

JOB 985

15 If I am wicked, woe to me!
If I am righteous, I cannot lift up my head,
for I am filled with disgrace
and look upon my affliction.
16 Bold as a lion you hunt me;
you repeat your exploits against me.
17 You renew your witnesses against me,
and increase your vexation toward me;
you bring fresh troops against me.
18 "Why did you bring me forth from the womb?
Would that I had died before any eye had seen me,
19 and were as though I had not been,
carried from the womb to the grave.
20 Are not the days of my life few?
Let me alone, that I may find a little comfort
21 before I go, never to return,
to the land of gloom and deep darkness,
22 the land of gloom and chaos,
where light is like darkness."
[Job 11]
Zophar's first discourse
1 Then Zophar the Naamathite answered:
2 "Should a multitude of words go unanswered,
and should one full of talk be vindicated?
3 Should your babble put others to silence,
and when you mock, shall no one shame you?
4 For you say, 'My conduct is pure,
and I am clean in God's sight.'
5 But O that God would speak,
and open his lips to you,
6 and that he would tell you the secrets of wisdom!
For wisdom is many-sided.
Know then that God exacts of you less than your guilt deserves.

985

JOB 986

7 "Can you find out the deep things of God?
Can you find out the limit of the Almighty?
8 It is higher than heaven — what can you do?
Deeper than Sheol — what can you know?
9 Its measure is longer than the earth,
and broader than the sea.
10 If he passes through, and imprisons,
and assembles for judgment, who can hinder him?
11 For he knows those who are worthless;
when he sees iniquity, will he not consider it?
12 But a stupid person will get understanding,
when a wild ass is born human.
13 "If you direct your heart rightly,
you will stretch out your hands toward him.
14 If iniquity is in your hand, put it far away,
and do not let wickedness reside in your tents.
15 Surely then you will lift up your face without blemish;
you will be secure, and will not fear.
16 You will forget your misery;
you will remember it as waters that have passed away.
17 And your life will be brighter than the noonday;
its darkness will be like the morning.
18 And you will have confidence, because there is hope;
you will be protected and take your rest in safety.
19 You will lie down, and no one will make you afraid;
many will entreat your favor.
20 But the eyes of the wicked will fail;
all way of escape will be lost to them,
and their hope is to breathe their last."
[Job 12]
Job's response
1 Then Job answered:
2 "No doubt you are the people,
and wisdom will die with you.

986

JOB 987

3 But I have understanding as well as you;
I am not inferior to you.
Who does not know such things as these?
4 I am a laughingstock to my friends;
I, who called upon God and he answered me,
a just and blameless man, I am a laughingstock.
5 Those at ease have contempt for misfortune,
but it is ready for those whose feet are unstable.
6 The tents of robbers are at peace,
and those who provoke God are secure,
who bring their god in their hands.
7 "But ask the animals, and they will teach you;
the birds of the air, and they will tell you;
8 ask the plants of the earth, and they will teach you;
and the fish of the sea will declare to you.
9 Who among all these does not know
that the hand of the LORD has done this?
10 In his hand is the life of every living thing
and the breath of every human being.
11 Does not the ear test words
as the palate tastes food?
12 Is wisdom with the aged,
and understanding in length of days?
13 "With God are wisdom and strength;
he has counsel and understanding.
14 If he tears down, no one can rebuild;
if he shuts someone in, no one can open up.
15 If he withholds the waters, they dry up;
if he sends them out, they overwhelm the land.
16 With him are strength and wisdom;
the deceived and the deceiver are his.
17 He leads counselors away stripped,
and makes fools of judges.
18 He looses the sash of kings,
and binds a waistcloth on their loins.

987

JOB 988

19 He leads priests away stripped,
and overthrows the mighty.
20 He deprives of speech those who are trusted,
and takes away the discernment of the elders.
21 He pours contempt on princes,
and looses the belt of the strong.
22 He uncovers the deeps out of darkness,
and brings deep darkness to light.
23 He makes nations great, then destroys them;
he enlarges nations, then leads them away.
24 He strips understanding from the leaders of the earth,
and makes them wander in a pathless waste.
25 They grope in the dark without light;
he makes them stagger like a drunkard.
[Job 13]
1 "Look, my eye has seen all this,
my ear has heard and understood it.
2 What you know, I also know;
I am not inferior to you.
3 But I would speak to the Almighty,
and I desire to argue my case with God.
4 As for you, you whitewash with lies;
all of you are worthless physicians.
5 If you would only keep silent,
that would be your wisdom!
6 Hear now my reasoning,
and listen to the pleadings of my lips.
7 Will you speak falsely for God,
and speak deceitfully for him?
8 Will you show partiality toward him,
will you plead the case for God?
9 Will it be well with you when he searches you out?
Or can you deceive him, as one person deceives another?
10 He will surely rebuke you
if in secret you show partiality.

988

JOB 989

11 Will not his majesty terrify you,
and the dread of him fall upon you?
12 Your maxims are proverbs of ashes,
your defenses are defenses of clay.
13 "Let me have silence, and I will speak,
and let come on me what may.
14 I will take my flesh in my teeth,
and put my life in my hand.
15 See, he will kill me; I have no hope;
but I will defend my ways to his face.
16 This will be my salvation,
that the godless shall not come before him.
17 Listen carefully to my words,
and let my declaration be in your ears.
18 I have indeed prepared my case;
I know that I shall be vindicated.
19 Who is there that will contend with me?
For then I would be silent and die.
20 Only grant two things to me,
then I will not hide myself from your face:
21 withdraw your hand far from me,
and do not let dread of you terrify me.
22 Then call, and I will answer;
or let me speak, and you reply to me.
23 How many are my iniquities and my sins?
Make me know my transgression and my sin.
24 Why do you hide your face,
and count me as your enemy?
25 Will you frighten a windblown leaf
and pursue dry chaff?
26 For you write bitter things against me,
and make me reap the iniquities of my youth.
27 You put my feet in the stocks,
and watch all my paths;
you set a bound to the soles of my feet.
28 One wastes away like a rotten thing,
like a garment that is moth-eaten.

989

JOB 990

[Job 14]
1 "A mortal, born of woman, few of days and full of trouble,
2 comes up like a flower and withers,
flees like a shadow and does not last.
3 Do you fix your eyes on such a one?
Do you bring me into judgment with you?
4 Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?
No one can.
5 Since their days are determined,
and the number of their months is known to you,
and you have appointed the bounds that they cannot pass,
6 look away from them, and desist,
that they may enjoy, like laborers, their days.
7 "For there is hope for a tree,
if it is cut down, that it will sprout again,
and that its shoots will not cease.
8 Though its root grows old in the earth,
and its stump dies in the ground,
9 yet at the scent of water it will bud
and put forth branches like a young plant.
10 But mortals die, and are laid low;
humans expire, and where are they?
11 As waters fail from a lake,
and a river wastes away and dries up,
12 so mortals lie down and do not rise again;
until the heavens are no more, they will not awake
or be roused out of their sleep.
13 O that you would hide me in Sheol,
that you would conceal me until your wrath is past,
that you would appoint me a set time, and remember me!
14 If mortals die, will they live again?
All the days of my service I would wait
until my release should come.
15 You would call, and I would answer you;
you would long for the work of your hands.

990

JOB 991

16 For then you would not number my steps,
you would not keep watch over my sin;
17 my transgression would be sealed up in a bag,
and you would cover over my iniquity.
18 "But the mountain falls and crumbles away,
and the rock is removed from its place;
19 the waters wear away the stones;
the torrents wash away the soil of the earth;
so you destroy the hope of mortals.
20 You prevail forever against them, and they pass away;
you change their countenance, and send them away.
21 Their children come to honor, and they do not know it;
they are brought low, and it goes unnoticed.
22 They feel only the pain of their own bodies,
and mourn only for themselves."
[Job 15]
Eliphaz's second discourse
1 Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered:
2 "Should the wise answer with windy knowledge,
and fill themselves with the east wind?
3 Should they argue in unprofitable talk,
or in words with which they can do no good?
4 But you are doing away with the fear of God,
and hindering meditation before God.
5 For your iniquity teaches your mouth,
and you choose the tongue of the crafty.
6 Your own mouth condemns you, and not I;
your own lips testify against you.
7 "Are you the firstborn of the human race?
Were you brought forth before the hills?
8 Have you listened in the council of God?
And do you limit wisdom to yourself?

991

JOB 992

9 What do you know that we do not know?
What do you understand that is not clear to us?
10 The gray-haired and the aged are on our side,
those older than your father.
11 Are the consolations of God too small for you,
or the word that deals gently with you?
12 Why does your heart carry you away,
and why do your eyes flash,
13 so that you turn your spirit against God,
and let such words go out of your mouth?
14 What are mortals, that they can be clean?
Or those born of woman, that they can be righteous?
15 God puts no trust even in his holy ones,
and the heavens are not clean in his sight;
16 how much less one who is abominable and corrupt,
one who drinks iniquity like water!
17 "I will show you; listen to me;
what I have seen I will declare —
18 what sages have told,
and their ancestors have not hidden,
19 to whom alone the land was given,
and no stranger passed among them.
20 The wicked writhe in pain all their days,
through all the years that are laid up for the ruthless.
21 Terrifying sounds are in their ears;
in prosperity the destroyer will come upon them.
22 They despair of returning from darkness,
and they are destined for the sword.
23 They wander abroad for bread, saying, 'Where is it?'
They know that a day of darkness is ready at hand;
24 distress and anguish terrify them;
they prevail against them, like a king prepared for battle.
25 Because they stretched out their hands against God,
and bid defiance to the Almighty,
26 running stubbornly against him
with a thick-bossed shield;

992

JOB 993

27 because they have covered their faces with their fat,
and gathered fat upon their loins,
28 they will live in desolate cities,
in houses that no one should inhabit,
houses destined to become heaps of ruins;
29 they will not be rich, and their wealth will not endure,
nor will they strike root in the earth;
30 they will not escape from darkness;
the flame will dry up their shoots,
and their blossom will be swept away by the wind.
31 Let them not trust in emptiness, deceiving themselves;
for emptiness will be their recompense.
32 It will be paid in full before their time,
and their branch will not be green.
33 They will shake off their unripe grape, like the vine,
and cast off their blossoms, like the olive tree.
34 For the company of the godless is barren,
and fire consumes the tents of bribery.
35 They conceive mischief and bring forth evil
and their heart prepares deceit."
[Job 16]
Job's response
1 Then Job answered:
2 "I have heard many such things;
miserable comforters are you all.
3 Have windy words no limit?
Or what provokes you that you keep on talking?
4 I also could talk as you do,
if you were in my place;
I could join words together against you,
and shake my head at you.
5 I could encourage you with my mouth,
and the solace of my lips would assuage your pain.
6 "If I speak, my pain is not assuaged,
and if I forbear, how much of it leaves me?

993

JOB 994

7 Surely now God has worn me out;
he has made desolate all my company.
8 And he has shriveled me up,
which is a witness against me;
my leanness has risen up against me,
and it testifies to my face.
9 He has torn me in his wrath, and hated me;
he has gnashed his teeth at me;
my adversary sharpens his eyes against me.
10 They have gaped at me with their mouths;
they have struck me insolently on the cheek;
they mass themselves together against me.
11 God gives me up to the ungodly,
and casts me into the hands of the wicked.
12 I was at ease, and he broke me in two;
he seized me by the neck and dashed me to pieces;
he set me up as his target;
13
his archers surround me.
He slashes open my kidneys, and shows no mercy;
he pours out my gall on the ground.
14 He bursts upon me again and again;
he rushes at me like a warrior.
15 I have sewed sackcloth upon my skin,
and have laid my strength in the dust.
16 My face is red with weeping,
and deep darkness is on my eyelids,
17 though there is no violence in my hands,
and my prayer is pure.
18 "O earth, do not cover my blood;
let my outcry find no resting place.
19 Even now, in fact, my witness is in heaven,
and he that vouches for me is on high.
20 My friends scorn me;
my eye pours out tears to God,
21 that he would maintain the right of a mortal with God,
as one does for a neighbor.

994

JOB 995

22 For when a few years have come,
I shall go the way from which I shall not return.
[Job 17]
1 My spirit is broken, my days are extinct,
the grave is ready for me.
2 Surely there are mockers around me,
and my eye dwells on their provocation.
3 "Lay down a pledge for me with yourself;
who is there that will give surety for me?
4 Since you have closed their minds to understanding,
therefore you will not let them triumph.
5 Those who denounce friends for reward —
the eyes of their children will fail.
6 "He has made me a byword of the peoples,
and I am one before whom people spit.
7 My eye has grown dim from grief,
and all my members are like a shadow.
8 The upright are appalled at this,
and the innocent stir themselves up against the godless.
9 Yet the righteous hold to their way,
and they that have clean hands grow stronger and stronger.
10 But you, come back now, all of you,
and I shall not find a sensible person among you.
11 My days are past, my plans are broken off,
the desires of my heart.
12 They make night into day;
'The light,' they say, 'is near to the darkness.'
13 If I look for Sheol as my house,
if I spread my couch in darkness,
14 if I say to the Pit, 'You are my father,'
and to the worm, 'My mother,' or 'My sister,'
15 where then is my hope?
Who will see my hope?

995

JOB 996

16 Will it go down to the bars of Sheol?
Shall we descend together into the dust?"
[Job 18]
Bildad's second discourse
1 Then Bildad the Shuhite answered:
2 "How long will you hunt for words?
Consider, and then we shall speak.
3 Why are we counted as cattle?
Why are we stupid in your sight?
4 You who tear yourself in your anger —
shall the earth be forsaken because of you,
or the rock be removed out of its place?
5 "Surely the light of the wicked is put out,
and the flame of their fire does not shine.
6 The light is dark in their tent,
and the lamp above them is put out.
7 Their strong steps are shortened,
and their own schemes throw them down.
8 For they are thrust into a net by their own feet,
and they walk into a pitfall.
9 A trap seizes them by the heel;
a snare lays hold of them.
10 A rope is hid for them in the ground,
a trap for them in the path.
11 Terrors frighten them on every side,
and chase them at their heels.
12 Their strength is consumed by hunger,
and calamity is ready for their stumbling.
13 By disease their skin is consumed,
the firstborn of Death consumes their limbs.
14 They are torn from the tent in which they trusted,
and are brought to the king of terrors.
15 In their tents nothing remains;
sulfur is scattered upon their habitations.

996

JOB 997

16 Their roots dry up beneath,
and their branches wither above.
17 Their memory perishes from the earth,
and they have no name in the street.
18 They are thrust from light into darkness,
and driven out of the world.
19 They have no offspring or descendant among their people,
and no survivor where they used to live.
20 They of the west are appalled at their fate,
and horror seizes those of the east.
21 Surely such are the dwellings of the ungodly,
such is the place of those who do not know God."
[Job 19]
Job's response
1 Then Job answered:
2 "How long will you torment me,
and break me in pieces with words?
3 These ten times you have cast reproach upon me;
are you not ashamed to wrong me?
4 And even if it is true that I have erred,
my error remains with me.
5 If indeed you magnify yourselves against me,
and make my humiliation an argument against me,
6 know then that God has put me in the wrong,
and closed his net around me.
7 Even when I cry out, 'Violence!' I am not answered;
I call aloud, but there is no justice.
8 He has walled up my way so that I cannot pass,
and he has set darkness upon my paths.
9 He has stripped my glory from me,
and taken the crown from my head.
10 He breaks me down on every side, and I am gone,
he has uprooted my hope like a tree.
11 He has kindled his wrath against me,
and counts me as his adversary.

997

JOB 998

12 His troops come on together;
they have thrown up siegeworks against me,
and encamp around my tent.
13 "He has put my family far from me,
and my acquaintances are wholly estranged from me.
14 My relatives and my close friends have failed me;
15 the guests in my house have forgotten me;
my serving girls count me as a stranger;
I have become an alien in their eyes.
16 I call to my servant, but he gives me no answer;
I must myself plead with him.
17 My breath is repulsive to my wife;
I am loathsome to my own family.
18 Even young children despise me;
when I rise, they talk against me.
19 All my intimate friends abhor me,
and those whom I loved have turned against me.
20 My bones cling to my skin and to my flesh,
and I have escaped by the skin of my teeth.
21 Have pity on me, have pity on me, O you my friends,
for the hand of God has touched me!
22 Why do you, like God, pursue me,
never satisfied with my flesh?
23 "O that my words were written down!
O that they were inscribed in a book!
24 O that with an iron pen and with lead
they were engraved on a rock forever!
25 For I know that my Redeemer lives,
and that at the last he will stand upon the earth;
26 and after my skin has been thus destroyed,
then in my flesh I shall see God,
27 whom I shall see on my side,
and my eyes shall behold, and not another.
My heart faints within me!

998

JOB 999

28 If you say, 'How we will persecute him!'
and, 'The root of the matter is found in him';
29 be afraid of the sword,
for wrath brings the punishment of the sword,
so that you may know there is a judgment."
[Job 20]
Zophar's second discourse
1 Then Zophar the Naamathite answered:
2 "Pay attention! My thoughts urge me to answer,
because of the agitation within me.
3 I hear censure that insults me,
and a spirit beyond my understanding answers me.
4 Do you not know this from of old,
ever since mortals were placed on earth,
5 that the exulting of the wicked is short,
and the joy of the godless is but for a moment?
6 Even though they mount up high as the heavens,
and their head reaches to the clouds,
7 they will perish forever like their own dung;
those who have seen them will say, 'Where are they?'
8 They will fly away like a dream, and not be found;
they will be chased away like a vision of the night.
9 The eye that saw them will see them no more,
nor will their place behold them any longer.
10 Their children will seek the favor of the poor,
and their hands will give back their wealth.
11 Their bodies, once full of youth,
will lie down in the dust with them.
12 "Though wickedness is sweet in their mouth,
though they hide it under their tongues,
13 though they are loath to let it go,
and hold it in their mouths,
14 yet their food is turned in their stomachs;
it is the venom of asps within them.

999

JOB 1000

15 They swallow down riches and vomit them up again;
God casts them out of their bellies.
16 They will suck the poison of asps;
the tongue of a viper will kill them.
17 They will not look on the rivers,
the streams flowing with honey and curds.
18 They will give back the fruit of their toil,
and will not swallow it down;
from the profit of their trading
they will get no enjoyment.
19 For they have crushed and abandoned the poor,
they have seized a house that they did not build.
20 "They knew no quiet in their bellies;
in their greed they let nothing escape.
21 There was nothing left after they had eaten;
therefore their prosperity will not endure.
22 In full sufficiency they will be in distress;
all the force of misery will come upon them.
23 To fill their belly to the full
God will send his fierce anger into them,
and rain it upon them as their food.
24 They will flee from an iron weapon;
a bronze arrow will strike them through.
25 It is drawn forth and comes out of their body,
and the glittering point comes out of their gall;
terrors come upon them.
26 Utter darkness is laid up for their treasures;
a fire fanned by no one will devour them;
what is left in their tent will be consumed.
27 The heavens will reveal their iniquity,
and the earth will rise up against them.
28 The possessions of their house will be carried away,
dragged off in the day of God's wrath.
29 This is the portion of the wicked from God,
the heritage decreed for them by God."

1000

JOB 1001

[Job 21]
Job's response
1 Then Job answered:
2 "Listen carefully to my words,
and let this be your consolation.
3 Bear with me, and I will speak;
then after I have spoken, mock on.
4 As for me, is my complaint addressed to mortals?
Why should I not be impatient?
5 Look at me, and be appalled,
and lay your hand upon your mouth.
6 When I think of it I am dismayed,
and shuddering seizes my flesh.
7 Why do the wicked live on,
reach old age, and grow mighty in power?
8 Their children are established in their presence,
and their offspring before their eyes.
9 Their houses are safe from fear,
and no rod of God is upon them.
10 Their bull breeds without fail;
their cow calves and never miscarries.
11 They send out their little ones like a flock,
and their children dance around.
12 They sing to the tambourine and the lyre,
and rejoice to the sound of the pipe.
13 They spend their days in prosperity,
and in peace they go down to Sheol.
14 They say to God, 'Leave us alone!
We do not desire to know your ways.
15 What is the Almighty, that we should serve him?
And what profit do we get if we pray to him?'
16 Is not their prosperity indeed their own achievement?
The plans of the wicked are repugnant to me.
17 "How often is the lamp of the wicked put out?
How often does calamity come upon them?
How often does God distribute pains in his anger?

1001

JOB 1002

18 How often are they like straw before the wind,
and like chaff that the storm carries away?
19 You say, 'God stores up their iniquity for their children.'
Let it be paid back to them, so that they may know it.
20 Let their own eyes see their destruction,
and let them drink of the wrath of the Almighty.
21 For what do they care for their household after them,
when the number of their months is cut off?
22 Will any teach God knowledge,
seeing that he judges those that are on high?
23 One dies in full prosperity,
being wholly at ease and secure,
24 his loins full of milk
and the marrow of his bones moist.
25 Another dies in bitterness of soul,
never having tasted of good.
26 They lie down alike in the dust,
and the worms cover them.
27 "Oh, I know your thoughts,
and your schemes to wrong me.
28 For you say, 'Where is the house of the prince?
Where is the tent in which the wicked lived?'
29 Have you not asked those who travel the roads,
and do you not accept their testimony,
30 that the wicked are spared in the day of calamity,
and are rescued in the day of wrath?
31 Who declares their way to their face,
and who repays them for what they have done?
32 When they are carried to the grave,
a watch is kept over their tomb.
33 The clods of the valley are sweet to them;
everyone will follow after,
and those who went before are innumerable.
34 How then will you comfort me with empty nothings?
There is nothing left of your answers but falsehood."

1002

JOB 1003

[Job 22]
Eliphaz's third discourse
1 Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered:
2 "Can a mortal be of use to God?
Can even the wisest be of service to him?
3 Is it any pleasure to the Almighty if you are righteous,
or is it gain to him if you make your ways blameless?
4 Is it for your piety that he reproves you,
and enters into judgment with you?
5 Is not your wickedness great?
There is no end to your iniquities.
6 For you have exacted pledges from your family for no reason,
and stripped the naked of their clothing.
7 You have given no water to the weary to drink,
and you have withheld bread from the hungry.
8 The powerful possess the land,
and the favored live in it.
9 You have sent widows away empty-handed,
and the arms of the orphans you have crushed.
10 Therefore snares are around you,
and sudden terror overwhelms you,
11 or darkness so that you cannot see;
a flood of water covers you.
12 "Is not God high in the heavens?
See the highest stars, how lofty they are!
13 Therefore you say, 'What does God know?
Can he judge through the deep darkness?
14 Thick clouds enwrap him, so that he does not see,
and he walks on the dome of heaven.'
15 Will you keep to the old way
that the wicked have trod?
16 They were snatched away before their time;
their foundation was washed away by a flood.
17 They said to God, 'Leave us alone,'
and 'What can the Almighty do to us?'

1003

JOB 1004

18 Yet he filled their houses with good things —
but the plans of the wicked are repugnant to me.
19 The righteous see it and are glad;
the innocent laugh them to scorn,
20 saying, 'Surely our adversaries are cut off,
and what they left, the fire has consumed.'
21 "Agree with God, and be at peace;
in this way good will come to you.
22 Receive instruction from his mouth,
and lay up his words in your heart.
23 If you return to the Almighty, you will be restored,
if you remove unrighteousness from your tents,
24 if you treat gold like dust,
and gold of Ophir like the stones of the torrent-bed,
25 and if the Almighty is your gold
and your precious silver,
26 then you will delight yourself in the Almighty,
and lift up your face to God.
27 You will pray to him, and he will hear you,
and you will pay your vows.
28 You will decide on a matter, and it will be established for you,
and light will shine on your ways.
29 When others are humiliated, you say it is pride;
for he saves the humble.
30 He will deliver even those who are guilty;
they will escape because of the cleanness of your hands."
[Job 23]
Job's response
1 Then Job answered:
2 "Today also my complaint is bitter;
his hand is heavy despite my groaning.
3 Oh, that I knew where I might find him,
that I might come even to his dwelling!

1004

JOB 1005

4 I would lay my case before him,
and fill my mouth with arguments.
5 I would learn what he would answer me,
and understand what he would say to me.
6 Would he contend with me in the greatness of his power?
No; but he would give heed to me.
7 There an upright person could reason with him,
and I should be acquitted forever by my judge.
8 "If I go forward, he is not there;
or backward, I cannot perceive him;
9 on the left he hides, and I cannot behold him;
I turn to the right, but I cannot see him.
10 But he knows the way that I take;
when he has tested me, I shall come out like gold.
11 My foot has held fast to his steps;
I have kept his way and have not turned aside.
12 I have not departed from the commandment of his lips;
I have treasured in my bosom the words of his mouth.
13 But he stands alone and who can dissuade him?
What he desires, that he does.
14 For he will complete what he appoints for me;
and many such things are in his mind.
15 Therefore I am terrified at his presence;
when I consider, I am in dread of him.
16 God has made my heart faint;
the Almighty has terrified me;
17 If only I could vanish in darkness,
and thick darkness would cover my face!
[Job 24]
1 "Why are times not kept by the Almighty,
and why do those who know him never see his days?
2 The wicked remove landmarks;
they seize flocks and pasture them.
3 They drive away the donkey of the orphan;
they take the widow's ox for a pledge.

1005

JOB 1006

4 They thrust the needy off the road;
the poor of the earth all hide themselves.
5 Like wild asses in the desert
they go out to their toil,
scavenging in the wasteland
food for their young.
6 They reap in a field not their own
and they glean in the vineyard of the wicked.
7 They lie all night naked, without clothing,
and have no covering in the cold.
8 They are wet with the rain of the mountains,
and cling to the rock for want of shelter.
9 "There are those who snatch the orphan child from the breast,
and take as a pledge the infant of the poor.
10 They go about naked, without clothing;
though hungry, they carry the sheaves;
11 between their terraces they press out oil;
they tread the wine presses, but suffer thirst.
12 From the city the dying groan,
and the throat of the wounded cries for help;
yet God pays no attention to their prayer.
13 "There are those who rebel against the light,
who are not acquainted with its ways,
and do not stay in its paths.
14 The murderer rises at dusk
to kill the poor and needy,
and in the night is like a thief.
15 The eye of the adulterer also waits for the twilight,
saying, 'No eye will see me';
and he disguises his face.
16 In the dark they dig through houses;
by day they shut themselves up;
they do not know the light.
17 For deep darkness is morning to all of them;
for they are friends with the terrors of deep darkness.

1006

JOB 1007

18 "Swift are they on the face of the waters;
their portion in the land is cursed;
no treader turns toward their vineyards.
19 Drought and heat snatch away the snow waters;
so does Sheol those who have sinned.
20 The womb forgets them;
the worm finds them sweet;
they are no longer remembered;
so wickedness is broken like a tree.
21 "They harm the childless woman,
and do no good to the widow.
22 Yet God prolongs the life of the mighty by his power;
they rise up when they despair of life.
23 He gives them security, and they are supported;
his eyes are upon their ways.
24 They are exalted a little while, and then are gone;
they wither and fade like the mallow;
they are cut off like the heads of grain.
25 If it is not so, who will prove me a liar,
and show that there is nothing in what I say?"
[Job 25]
Bildad speaks
1 Then Bildad the Shuhite answered:
2 "Dominion and fear are with God;
he makes peace in his high heaven.
3 Is there any number to his armies?
Upon whom does his light not arise?
4 How then can a mortal be righteous before God?
How can one born of woman be pure?
5 If even the moon is not bright
and the stars are not pure in his sight,
6 how much less a mortal, who is a maggot,
and a human being, who is a worm!"

1007

JOB 1008

[Job 26]
Job interrupts
1 Then Job answered:
2 "How you have helped one who has no power!
How you have assisted the arm that has no strength!
3 How you have counseled one who has no wisdom,
and given much good advice!
4 With whose help have you uttered words,
and whose spirit has come forth from you?
Bildad continues
5 The shades below tremble,
the waters and their inhabitants.
6 Sheol is naked before God,
and Abaddon has no covering.
7 He stretches out Zaphon over the void,
and hangs the earth upon nothing.
8 He binds up the waters in his thick clouds,
and the cloud is not torn open by them.
9 He covers the face of the full moon,
and spreads over it his cloud.
10 He has described a circle on the face of the waters,
at the boundary between light and darkness.
11 The pillars of heaven tremble,
and are astounded at his rebuke.
12 By his power he stilled the Sea;
by his understanding he struck down Rahab.
13 By his wind the heavens were made fair;
his hand pierced the fleeing serpent.
14 These are indeed but the outskirts of his ways;
and how small a whisper do we hear of him!
But the thunder of his power who can understand?"

1008

JOB 1009

[Job 27]
Job continues
1 Job again took up his discourse and said:
2 "As God lives, who has taken away my right,
and the Almighty, who has made my soul bitter,
3 as long as my breath is in me
and the spirit of God is in my nostrils,
4 my lips will not speak falsehood,
and my tongue will not utter deceit.
5 Far be it from me to say that you are right;
until I die I will not put away my integrity from me.
6 I hold fast my righteousness, and will not let it go;
my heart does not reproach me for any of my days.
7 "May my enemy be like the wicked,
and may my opponent be like the unrighteous.
8 For what is the hope of the godless when God cuts them off,
when God takes away their lives?
9 Will God hear their cry
when trouble comes upon them?
10 Will they take delight in the Almighty?
Will they call upon God at all times?
11 I will teach you concerning the hand of God;
that which is with the Almighty I will not conceal.
12 All of you have seen it yourselves;
why then have you become altogether vain?
13 "This is the portion of the wicked with God,
and the heritage that oppressors receive from the Almighty:
14 If their children are multiplied, it is for the sword;
and their offspring have not enough to eat.
15 Those who survive them the pestilence buries,
and their widows make no lamentation.
16 Though they heap up silver like dust,
and pile up clothing like clay —
17 they may pile it up, but the just will wear it,
and the innocent will divide the silver.

1009

JOB 1010

18 They build their houses like nests,
like booths made by sentinels of the vineyard.
19 They go to bed with wealth, but will do so no more;
they open their eyes, and it is gone.
20 Terrors overtake them like a flood;
in the night a whirlwind carries them off.
21 The east wind lifts them up and they are gone;
it sweeps them out of their place.
22 It hurls at them without pity;
they flee from its power in headlong flight.
23 It claps its hands at them,
and hisses at them from its place.
[Job 28]
A poem on Wisdom
1 "Surely there is a mine for silver,
and a place for gold to be refined.
2 Iron is taken out of the earth,
and copper is smelted from ore.
3 Miners put an end to darkness,
and search out to the farthest bound
the ore in gloom and deep darkness.
4 They open shafts in a valley away from human habitation;
they are forgotten by travelers,
they sway suspended, remote from people.
5 As for the earth, out of it comes bread;
but underneath it is turned up as by fire.
6 Its stones are the place of sapphires,
and its dust contains gold.
7 "That path no bird of prey knows,
and the falcon's eye has not seen it.
8 The proud wild animals have not trodden it;
the lion has not passed over it.
9 "They put their hand to the flinty rock,
and overturn mountains by the roots.

1010

JOB 1011

10 They cut out channels in the rocks,
and their eyes see every precious thing.
11 The sources of the rivers they probe;
hidden things they bring to light.
12 "But where shall wisdom be found?
And where is the place of understanding?
13 Mortals do not know the way to it,
and it is not found in the land of the living.
14 The deep says, 'It is not in me,'
and the sea says, 'It is not with me.'
15 It cannot be gotten for gold,
and silver cannot be weighed out as its price.
16 It cannot be valued in the gold of Ophir,
in precious onyx or sapphire.
17 Gold and glass cannot equal it,
nor can it be exchanged for jewels of fine gold.
18 No mention shall be made of coral or of crystal;
the price of wisdom is above pearls.
19 The chrysolite of Ethiopia cannot compare with it,
nor can it be valued in pure gold.
20 "Where then does wisdom come from?
And where is the place of understanding?
21 It is hidden from the eyes of all living,
and concealed from the birds of the air.
22 Abaddon and Death say,
'We have heard a rumor of it with our ears.'
23 "God understands the way to it,
and he knows its place.
24 For he looks to the ends of the earth,
and sees everything under the heavens.
25 When he gave to the wind its weight,
and apportioned out the waters by measure;
26 when he made a decree for the rain,
and a way for the thunderbolt;
27 then he saw it and declared it;
he established it, and searched it out.

1011

JOB 1012

28 And he said to humankind,
'Truly, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom;
and to depart from evil is understanding.'"
[Job 29]
Job's speech
1 Job again took up his discourse and said:
2 "O that I were as in the months of old,
as in the days when God watched over me;
3 when his lamp shone over my head,
and by his light I walked through darkness;
4 when I was in my prime,
when the friendship of God was upon my tent;
5 when the Almighty was still with me,
when my children were around me;
6 when my steps were washed with milk,
and the rock poured out for me streams of oil!
7 When I went out to the gate of the city,
when I took my seat in the square,
8 the young men saw me and withdrew,
and the aged rose up and stood;
9 the nobles refrained from talking,
and laid their hands on their mouths;
10 the voices of princes were hushed,
and their tongues stuck to the roof of their mouths.
11 When the ear heard, it commended me,
and when the eye saw, it approved;
12 because I delivered the poor who cried,
and the orphan who had no helper.
13 The blessing of the wretched came upon me,
and I caused the widow's heart to sing for joy.
14 I put on righteousness, and it clothed me;
my justice was like a robe and a turban.
15 I was eyes to the blind,
and feet to the lame.
16 I was a father to the needy,
and I championed the cause of the stranger.

1012

JOB 1013

17 I broke the fangs of the unrighteous,
and made them drop their prey from their teeth.
18 Then I thought, 'I shall die in my nest,
and I shall multiply my days like the phoenix;
19 my roots spread out to the waters,
with the dew all night on my branches;
20 my glory was fresh with me,
and my bow ever new in my hand.'
21 "They listened to me, and waited,
and kept silence for my counsel.
22 After I spoke they did not speak again,
and my word dropped upon them like dew.
23 They waited for me as for the rain;
they opened their mouths as for the spring rain.
24 I smiled on them when they had no confidence;
and the light of my countenance they did not extinguish.
25 I chose their way, and sat as chief,
and I lived like a king among his troops,
like one who comforts mourners.
[Job 30]
1 "But now they make sport of me,
those who are younger than I,
whose fathers I would have disdained
to set with the dogs of my flock.
2 What could I gain from the strength of their hands?
All their vigor is gone.
3 Through want and hard hunger
they gnaw the dry and desolate ground,
4 they pick mallow and the leaves of bushes,
and to warm themselves the roots of broom.
5 They are driven out from society;
people shout after them as after a thief.
6 In the gullies of wadis they must live,
in holes in the ground, and in the rocks.

1013

JOB 1014

7 Among the bushes they bray;
under the nettles they huddle together.
8 A senseless, disreputable brood,
they have been whipped out of the land.
9 "And now they mock me in song;
I am a byword to them.
10 They abhor me, they keep aloof from me;
they do not hesitate to spit at the sight of me.
11 Because God has loosed my bowstring and humbled me,
they have cast off restraint in my presence.
12 On my right hand the rabble rise up;
they send me sprawling,
and build roads for my ruin.
13 They break up my path,
they promote my calamity;
no one restrains them.
14 As through a wide breach they come;
amid the crash they roll on.
15 Terrors are turned upon me;
my honor is pursued as by the wind,
and my prosperity has passed away like a cloud.
16 "And now my soul is poured out within me;
days of affliction have taken hold of me.
17 The night racks my bones,
and the pain that gnaws me takes no rest.
18 With violence he seizes my garment;
he grasps me by the collar of my tunic.
19 He has cast me into the mire,
and I have become like dust and ashes.
20 I cry to you and you do not answer me;
I stand, and you merely look at me.
21 You have turned cruel to me;
with the might of your hand you persecute me.
22 You lift me up on the wind, you make me ride on it,
and you toss me about in the roar of the storm.

1014

JOB 1015

23 I know that you will bring me to death,
and to the house appointed for all living.
24 "Surely one does not turn against the needy,
when in disaster they cry for help.
25 Did I not weep for those whose day was hard?
Was not my soul grieved for the poor?
26 But when I looked for good, evil came;
and when I waited for light, darkness came.
27 My inward parts are in turmoil, and are never still;
days of affliction come to meet me.
28 I go about in sunless gloom;
I stand up in the assembly and cry for help.
29 I am a brother of jackals,
and a companion of ostriches.
30 My skin turns black and falls from me,
and my bones burn with heat.
31 My lyre is turned to mourning,
and my pipe to the voice of those who weep.
[Job 31]
1 "I have made a covenant with my eyes;
how then could I look upon a virgin?
2 What would be my portion from God above,
and my heritage from the Almighty on high?
3 Does not calamity befall the unrighteous,
and disaster the workers of iniquity?
4 Does he not see my ways,
and number all my steps?
5 "If I have walked with falsehood,
and my foot has hurried to deceit —
6 let me be weighed in a just balance,
and let God know my integrity! —
7 if my step has turned aside from the way,
and my heart has followed my eyes,
and if any spot has clung to my hands;

1015

JOB 1016

8 then let me sow, and another eat;
and let what grows for me be rooted out.
9 "If my heart has been enticed by a woman,
and I have lain in wait at my neighbor's door;
10 then let my wife grind for another,
and let other men kneel over her.
11 For that would be a heinous crime;
that would be a criminal offense;
12 for that would be a fire consuming down to Abaddon,
and it would burn to the root all my harvest.
13 "If I have rejected the cause of my male or female slaves,
when they brought a complaint against me;
14 what then shall I do when God rises up?
When he makes inquiry, what shall I answer him?
15 Did not he who made me in the womb make them?
And did not one fashion us in the womb?
16 "If I have withheld anything that the poor desired,
or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail,
17 or have eaten my morsel alone,
and the orphan has not eaten from it —
18 for from my youth I reared the orphan like a father,
and from my mother's womb I guided the widow —
19 if I have seen anyone perish for lack of clothing,
or a poor person without covering,
20 whose loins have not blessed me,
and who was not warmed with the fleece of my sheep;
21 if I have raised my hand against the orphan,
because I saw I had supporters at the gate;
22 then let my shoulder blade fall from my shoulder,
and let my arm be broken from its socket.
23 For I was in terror of calamity from God,
and I could not have faced his majesty.
24 "If I have made gold my trust,
or called fine gold my confidence;

1016

JOB 1017

25 if I have rejoiced because my wealth was great,
or because my hand had gotten much;
26 if I have looked at the sun when it shone,
or the moon moving in splendor,
27 and my heart has been secretly enticed,
and my mouth has kissed my hand;
28 this also would be an iniquity to be punished by the judges,
for I should have been false to God above.
29 "If I have rejoiced at the ruin of those who hated me,
or exulted when evil overtook them —
30 I have not let my mouth sin
by asking for their lives with a curse —
31 if those of my tent ever said,
'O that we might be sated with his flesh!' —
32 the stranger has not lodged in the street;
I have opened my doors to the traveler —
33 if I have concealed my transgressions as others do,
by hiding my iniquity in my bosom,
34 because I stood in great fear of the multitude,
and the contempt of families terrified me,
so that I kept silence, and did not go out of doors —
35 O that I had one to hear me!
(Here is my signature! Let the Almighty answer me!)
O, that I had the indictment written by my adversary!
36 Surely I would carry it on my shoulder;
I would bind it on me like a crown;
37 I would give him an account of all my steps;
like a prince I would approach him.
38 "If my land has cried out against me,
and its furrows have wept together;
39 if I have eaten its yield without payment,
and caused the death of its owners;
40 let thorns grow instead of wheat,
and foul weeds instead of barley."
The words of Job are ended.

1017

JOB 1018

[Job 32]
Elihu's disputations; prose and poetic introduction
1 So these three men ceased to answer Job, because he was righteous
in his own eyes. 2 Then Elihu son of Barachel the Buzite, of the family
of Ram, became angry. He was angry at Job because he justified
himself rather than God; 3 he was angry also at Job's three friends
because they had found no answer, though they had declared Job to
be in the wrong. 4 Now Elihu had waited to speak to Job, because they
were older than he. 5 But when Elihu saw that there was no answer in
the mouths of these three men, he became angry.
6 Elihu son of Barachel the Buzite answered:
"I am young in years,
and you are aged;
therefore I was timid and afraid
to declare my opinion to you.
7 I said, 'Let days speak,
and many years teach wisdom.'
8 But truly it is the spirit in a mortal,
the breath of the Almighty, that makes for understanding.
9 It is not the old that are wise,
nor the aged that understand what is right.
10 Therefore I say, 'Listen to me;
let me also declare my opinion.'
11 "See, I waited for your words,
I listened for your wise sayings,
while you searched out what to say.
12 I gave you my attention,
but there was in fact no one that confuted Job,
no one among you that answered his words.
13 Yet do not say, 'We have found wisdom;
God may vanquish him, not a human.'
14 He has not directed his words against me,
and I will not answer him with your speeches.

1018

JOB 1019

15 "They are dismayed, they answer no more;
they have not a word to say.
16 And am I to wait, because they do not speak,
because they stand there, and answer no more?
17 I also will give my answer;
I also will declare my opinion.
18 For I am full of words;
the spirit within me constrains me.
19 My heart is indeed like wine that has no vent;
like new wineskins, it is ready to burst.
20 I must speak, so that I may find relief;
I must open my lips and answer.
21 I will not show partiality to any person
or use flattery toward anyone.
22 For I do not know how to flatter —
or my Maker would soon put an end to me!
[Job 33]
1 "But now, hear my speech, O Job,
and listen to all my words.
2 See, I open my mouth;
the tongue in my mouth speaks.
3 My words declare the uprightness of my heart,
and what my lips know they speak sincerely.
4 The spirit of God has made me,
and the breath of the Almighty gives me life.
5 Answer me, if you can;
set your words in order before me; take your stand.
6 See, before God I am as you are;
I too was formed from a piece of clay.
7 No fear of me need terrify you;
my pressure will not be heavy on you.
Elihu's first disputation
8 "Surely, you have spoken in my hearing,
and I have heard the sound of your words.

1019

JOB 1020

9 You say, 'I am clean, without transgression;
I am pure, and there is no iniquity in me.
10 Look, he finds occasions against me,
he counts me as his enemy;
11 he puts my feet in the stocks,
and watches all my paths.'
12 "But in this you are not right. I will answer you:
God is greater than any mortal.
13 Why do you contend against him,
saying, 'He will answer none of my words'?
14 For God speaks in one way,
and in two, though people do not perceive it.
15 In a dream, in a vision of the night,
when deep sleep falls on mortals,
while they slumber on their beds,
16 then he opens their ears,
and terrifies them with warnings,
17 that he may turn them aside from their deeds,
and keep them from pride,
18 to spare their souls from the Pit,
their lives from traversing the River.
19 They are also chastened with pain upon their beds,
and with continual strife in their bones,
20 so that their lives loathe bread,
and their appetites dainty food.
21 Their flesh is so wasted away that it cannot be seen;
and their bones, once invisible, now stick out.
22 Their souls draw near the Pit,
and their lives to those who bring death.
23 Then, if there should be for one of them an angel,
a mediator, one of a thousand,
one who declares a person upright,
24 and he is gracious to that person, and says,
'Deliver him from going down into the Pit;
I have found a ransom;
25 let his flesh become fresh with youth;
let him return to the days of his youthful vigor';

1020

JOB 1021

26 then he prays to God, and is accepted by him,
he comes into his presence with joy,
and God repays him for his righteousness.
27
That person sings to others and says,
'I sinned, and perverted what was right,
and it was not paid back to me.
28 He has redeemed my soul from going down to the Pit,
and my life shall see the light.'
29 "God indeed does all these things,
twice, three times, with mortals,
30 to bring back their souls from the Pit,
so that they may see the light of life.
31 Pay heed, Job, listen to me;
be silent, and I will speak.
32 If you have anything to say, answer me;
speak, for I desire to justify you.
33 If not, listen to me;
be silent, and I will teach you wisdom."
[Job 34]
Elihu's second disputation
1 Then Elihu continued and said:
2 "Hear my words, you wise men,
and give ear to me, you who know;
3 for the ear tests words
as the palate tastes food.
4 Let us choose what is right;
let us determine among ourselves what is good.
5 For Job has said, 'I am innocent,
and God has taken away my right;
6 in spite of being right I am counted a liar;
my wound is incurable, though I am without transgression.'
7 Who is there like Job,
who drinks up scoffing like water,
8 who goes in company with evildoers
and walks with the wicked?

1021

JOB 1022

9 For he has said, 'It profits one nothing
to take delight in God.'
10 "Therefore, hear me, you who have sense,
far be it from God that he should do wickedness,
and from the Almighty that he should do wrong.
11 For according to their deeds he will repay them,
and according to their ways he will make it befall them.
12 Of a truth, God will not do wickedly,
and the Almighty will not pervert justice.
13 Who gave him charge over the earth
and who laid on him the whole world?
14 If he should take back his spirit to himself,
and gather to himself his breath,
15 all flesh would perish together,
and all mortals return to dust.
16 "If you have understanding, hear this;
listen to what I say.
17 Shall one who hates justice govern?
Will you condemn one who is righteous and mighty,
18 who says to a king, 'You scoundrel!'
and to princes, 'You wicked men!';
19 who shows no partiality to nobles,
nor regards the rich more than the poor,
for they are all the work of his hands?
20 In a moment they die;
at midnight the people are shaken and pass away,
and the mighty are taken away by no human hand.
21 "For his eyes are upon the ways of mortals,
and he sees all their steps.
22 There is no gloom or deep darkness
where evildoers may hide themselves.
23 For he has not appointed a time for anyone
to go before God in judgment.
24 He shatters the mighty without investigation,
and sets others in their place.

1022

JOB 1023

25 Thus, knowing their works,
he overturns them in the night, and they are crushed.
26 He strikes them for their wickedness
while others look on,
27 because they turned aside from following him,
and had no regard for any of his ways,
28 so that they caused the cry of the poor to come to him,
and he heard the cry of the afflicted —
29 When he is quiet, who can condemn?
When he hides his face, who can behold him,
whether it be a nation or an individual? —
30 so that the godless should not reign,
or those who ensnare the people.
31 "For has anyone said to God,
'I have endured punishment; I will not offend any more;
32 teach me what I do not see;
if I have done iniquity, I will do it no more'?
33 Will he then pay back to suit you,
because you reject it?
For you must choose, and not I;
therefore declare what you know.
34 Those who have sense will say to me,
and the wise who hear me will say,
35 'Job speaks without knowledge,
his words are without insight.'
36 Would that Job were tried to the limit,
because his answers are those of the wicked.
37 For he adds rebellion to his sin;
he claps his hands among us,
and multiplies his words against God."
[Job 35]
Elihu's third disputation
1 Elihu continued and said:
2 "Do you think this to be just?
You say, 'I am in the right before God.'

1023

JOB 1024

3 If you ask, 'What advantage have I?
How am I better off than if I had sinned?'
4 I will answer you
and your friends with you.
5 Look at the heavens and see;
observe the clouds, which are higher than you.
6 If you have sinned, what do you accomplish against him?
And if your transgressions are multiplied, what do you do to him?
7 If you are righteous, what do you give to him;
or what does he receive from your hand?
8 Your wickedness affects others like you,
and your righteousness, other human beings.
9 "Because of the multitude of oppressions people cry out;
they call for help because of the arm of the mighty.
10 But no one says, 'Where is God my Maker,
who gives strength in the night,
11 who teaches us more than the animals of the earth,
and makes us wiser than the birds of the air?'
12 There they cry out, but he does not answer,
because of the pride of evildoers.
13 Surely God does not hear an empty cry,
nor does the Almighty regard it.
14 How much less when you say that you do not see him,
that the case is before him, and you are waiting for him!
15 And now, because his anger does not punish,
and he does not greatly heed transgression,
16 Job opens his mouth in empty talk,
he multiplies words without knowledge."
[Job 36]
Elihu's fourth disputation
1 Elihu continued and said:
2 "Bear with me a little, and I will show you,
for I have yet something to say on God's behalf.
3 I will bring my knowledge from far away,
and ascribe righteousness to my Maker.

1024

JOB 1025

4 For truly my words are not false;
one who is perfect in knowledge is with you.
5 "Surely God is mighty and does not despise any;
he is mighty in strength of understanding.
6 He does not keep the wicked alive,
but gives the afflicted their right.
7 He does not withdraw his eyes from the righteous,
but with kings on the throne
he sets them forever, and they are exalted.
8 And if they are bound in fetters
and caught in the cords of affliction,
9 then he declares to them their work
and their transgressions, that they are behaving arrogantly.
10 He opens their ears to instruction,
and commands that they return from iniquity.
11 If they listen, and serve him,
they complete their days in prosperity,
and their years in pleasantness.
12 But if they do not listen, they shall perish by the sword,
and die without knowledge.
13 "The godless in heart cherish anger;
they do not cry for help when he binds them.
14 They die in their youth,
and their life ends in shame.
15 He delivers the afflicted by their affliction,
and opens their ear by adversity.
16 He also allured you out of distress
into a broad place where there was no constraint,
and what was set on your table was full of fatness.
17 "But you are obsessed with the case of the wicked;
judgment and justice seize you.
18 Beware that wrath does not entice you into scoffing,
and do not let the greatness of the ransom turn you aside.
19 Will your cry avail to keep you from distress,
or will all the force of your strength?

1025

JOB 1026

20 Do not long for the night,
when peoples are cut off in their place.
21 Beware! Do not turn to iniquity;
because of that you have been tried by affliction.
22 See, God is exalted in his power;
who is a teacher like him?
23 Who has prescribed for him his way,
or who can say, 'You have done wrong'?
24 "Remember to extol his work,
of which mortals have sung.
25 All people have looked on it;
everyone watches it from far away.
26 Surely God is great, and we do not know him;
the number of his years is unsearchable.
27 For he draws up the drops of water;
he distills his mist in rain,
28 which the skies pour down
and drop upon mortals abundantly.
29 Can anyone understand the spreading of the clouds,
the thunderings of his pavilion?
30 See, he scatters his lightning around him
and covers the roots of the sea.
31 For by these he governs peoples;
he gives food in abundance.
32 He covers his hands with the lightning,
and commands it to strike the mark.
33 Its crashing tells about him;
he is jealous with anger against iniquity.
[Job 37]
1 "At this also my heart trembles,
and leaps out of its place.
2 Listen, listen to the thunder of his voice
and the rumbling that comes from his mouth.
3 Under the whole heaven he lets it loose,
and his lightning to the corners of the earth.

1026

JOB 1027

4 After it his voice roars;
he thunders with his majestic voice
and he does not restrain the lightnings when his voice is heard.
5 God thunders wondrously with his voice;
he does great things that we cannot comprehend.
6 For to the snow he says, 'Fall on the earth';
and the shower of rain, his heavy shower of rain,
7 serves as a sign on everyone's hand,
so that all whom he has made may know it.
8 Then the animals go into their lairs
and remain in their dens.
9 From its chamber comes the whirlwind,
and cold from the scattering winds.
10 By the breath of God ice is given,
and the broad waters are frozen fast.
11 He loads the thick cloud with moisture;
the clouds scatter his lightning.
12 They turn round and round by his guidance,
to accomplish all that he commands them
on the face of the habitable world.
13 Whether for correction, or for his land,
or for love, he causes it to happen.
14 "Hear this, O Job;
stop and consider the wondrous works of God.
15 Do you know how God lays his command upon them,
and causes the lightning of his cloud to shine?
16 Do you know the balancings of the clouds,
the wondrous works of the one whose knowledge is perfect,
17 you whose garments are hot
when the earth is still because of the south wind?
18 Can you, like him, spread out the skies,
hard as a molten mirror?
19 Teach us what we shall say to him;
we cannot draw up our case because of darkness.
20 Should he be told that I want to speak?
Did anyone ever wish to be swallowed up?

1027

JOB 1028

21 Now, no one can look on the light
when it is bright in the skies,
when the wind has passed and cleared them.
22 Out of the north comes golden splendor;
around God is awesome majesty.
23 The Almighty — we cannot find him;
he is great in power and justice,
and abundant righteousness he will not violate.
24 Therefore mortals fear him;
he does not regard any who are wise in their own conceit."
[Job 38]
God speaks from the whirlwind
1 Then the LORD answered Job out of the whirlwind:
2 "Who is this that darkens counsel by words without knowledge?
3 Gird up your loins like a man,
I will question you, and you shall declare to me.
4 "Where were you when I laid the foundation of the earth?
Tell me, if you have understanding.
5 Who determined its measurements — surely you know!
Or who stretched the line upon it?
6 On what were its bases sunk,
or who laid its cornerstone
7 when the morning stars sang together
and all the heavenly beings shouted for joy?
8 "Or who shut in the sea with doors
when it burst out from the womb? —
9 when I made the clouds its garment,
and thick darkness its swaddling band,
10 and prescribed bounds for it,
and set bars and doors,
11 and said, 'Thus far shall you come, and no farther,
and here shall your proud waves be stopped'?

1028

JOB 1029

12 "Have you commanded the morning since your days began,
and caused the dawn to know its place,
13 so that it might take hold of the skirts of the earth,
and the wicked be shaken out of it?
14 It is changed like clay under the seal,
and it is dyed like a garment.
15 Light is withheld from the wicked,
and their uplifted arm is broken.
16 "Have you entered into the springs of the sea,
or walked in the recesses of the deep?
17 Have the gates of death been revealed to you,
or have you seen the gates of deep darkness?
18 Have you comprehended the expanse of the earth?
Declare, if you know all this.
19 "Where is the way to the dwelling of light,
and where is the place of darkness,
20 that you may take it to its territory
and that you may discern the paths to its home?
21 Surely you know, for you were born then,
and the number of your days is great!
22 "Have you entered the storehouses of the snow,
or have you seen the storehouses of the hail,
23 which I have reserved for the time of trouble,
for the day of battle and war?
24 What is the way to the place where the light is distributed,
or where the east wind is scattered upon the earth?
25 "Who has cut a channel for the torrents of rain,
and a way for the thunderbolt,
26 to bring rain on a land where no one lives,
on the desert, which is empty of human life,
27 to satisfy the waste and desolate land,
and to make the ground put forth grass?
28 "Has the rain a father,
or who has begotten the drops of dew?

1029

JOB 1030

29 From whose womb did the ice come forth,
and who has given birth to the hoarfrost of heaven?
30 The waters become hard like stone,
and the face of the deep is frozen.
31 "Can you bind the chains of the Pleiades,
or loose the cords of Orion?
32 Can you lead forth the Mazzaroth in their season,
or can you guide the Bear with its children?
33 Do you know the ordinances of the heavens?
Can you establish their rule on the earth?
34 "Can you lift up your voice to the clouds,
so that a flood of waters may cover you?
35 Can you send forth lightnings, so that they may go
and say to you, 'Here we are'?
36 Who has put wisdom in the inward parts,
or given understanding to the mind?
37 Who has the wisdom to number the clouds?
Or who can tilt the waterskins of the heavens,
38 when the dust runs into a mass
and the clods cling together?
39 "Can you hunt the prey for the lion,
or satisfy the appetite of the young lions,
40 when they crouch in their dens,
or lie in wait in their covert?
41 Who provides for the raven its prey,
when its young ones cry to God,
and wander about for lack of food?
[Job 39]
1 "Do you know when the mountain goats give birth?
Do you observe the calving of the deer?
2 Can you number the months that they fulfill,
and do you know the time when they give birth,
3 when they crouch to give birth to their offspring,
and are delivered of their young?

1030

JOB 1031

4 Their young ones become strong, they grow up in the open;
they go forth, and do not return to them.
5 "Who has let the wild ass go free?
Who has loosed the bonds of the swift ass,
6 to which I have given the steppe for its home,
the salt land for its dwelling place?
7 It scorns the tumult of the city;
it does not hear the shouts of the driver.
8 It ranges the mountains as its pasture,
and it searches after every green thing.
9 "Is the wild ox willing to serve you?
Will it spend the night at your crib?
10 Can you tie it in the furrow with ropes,
or will it harrow the valleys after you?
11 Will you depend on it because its strength is great,
and will you hand over your labor to it?
12 Do you have faith in it that it will return,
and bring your grain to your threshing floor?
13 "The ostrich's wings flap wildly,
though its pinions lack plumage.
14 For it leaves its eggs to the earth,
and lets them be warmed on the ground,
15 forgetting that a foot may crush them,
and that a wild animal may trample them.
16 It deals cruelly with its young, as if they were not its own;
though its labor should be in vain, yet it has no fear;
17 because God has made it forget wisdom,
and given it no share in understanding.
18 When it spreads its plumes aloft,
it laughs at the horse and its rider.
19 "Do you give the horse its might?
Do you clothe its neck with mane?
20 Do you make it leap like the locust?
Its majestic snorting is terrible.

1031

JOB 1032

21 It paws violently, exults mightily;
it goes out to meet the weapons.
22 It laughs at fear, and is not dismayed;
it does not turn back from the sword.
23 Upon it rattle the quiver,
the flashing spear, and the javelin.
24 With fierceness and rage it swallows the ground;
it cannot stand still at the sound of the trumpet.
25 When the trumpet sounds, it says 'Aha!'
From a distance it smells the battle,
the thunder of the captains, and the shouting.
26 "Is it by your wisdom that the hawk soars,
and spreads its wings toward the south?
27 Is it at your command that the eagle mounts up
and makes its nest on high?
28 It lives on the rock and makes its home
in the fastness of the rocky crag.
29 From there it spies the prey;
its eyes see it from far away.
30 Its young ones suck up blood;
and where the slain are, there it is."
[Job 40]
Question and response
1 And the LORD said to Job:
2 "Shall a faultfinder contend with the Almighty?
Anyone who argues with God must respond."
3 Then Job answered the LORD:
4 "See, I am of small account; what shall I answer you?
I lay my hand on my mouth.
5 I have spoken once, and I will not answer;
twice, but will proceed no further."

1032

JOB 1033

God's second speech
6 Then the LORD answered Job out of the whirlwind:
7 "Gird up your loins like a man;
I will question you, and you declare to me.
8 Will you even put me in the wrong?
Will you condemn me that you may be justified?
9 Have you an arm like God,
and can you thunder with a voice like his?
10 "Deck yourself with majesty and dignity;
clothe yourself with glory and splendor.
11 Pour out the overflowings of your anger,
and look on all who are proud, and abase them.
12 Look on all who are proud, and bring them low;
tread down the wicked where they stand.
13 Hide them all in the dust together;
bind their faces in the world below.
14 Then I will also acknowledge to you
that your own right hand can give you victory.
15 "Look at Behemoth,
which I made just as I made you;
it eats grass like an ox.
16 Its strength is in its loins,
and its power in the muscles of its belly.
17 It makes its tail stiff like a cedar;
the sinews of its thighs are knit together.
18 Its bones are tubes of bronze,
its limbs like bars of iron.
19 "It is the first of the great acts of God —
only its Maker can approach it with the sword.
20 For the mountains yield food for it
where all the wild animals play.
21 Under the lotus plants it lies,
in the covert of the reeds and in the marsh.

1033

JOB 1034

22 The lotus trees cover it for shade;
the willows of the wadi surround it.
23 Even if the river is turbulent, it is not frightened;
it is confident though Jordan rushes against its mouth.
24 Can one take it with hooks
or pierce its nose with a snare?
[Job 41]
1 "Can you draw out Leviathan with a fishhook,
or press down its tongue with a cord?
2 Can you put a rope in its nose,
or pierce its jaw with a hook?
3 Will it make many supplications to you?
Will it speak soft words to you?
4 Will it make a covenant with you
to be taken as your servant forever?
5 Will you play with it as with a bird,
or will you put it on leash for your girls?
6 Will traders bargain over it?
Will they divide it up among the merchants?
7 Can you fill its skin with harpoons,
or its head with fishing spears?
8 Lay hands on it;
think of the battle; you will not do it again!
9 Any hope of capturing it will be disappointed;
were not even the gods overwhelmed at the sight of it?
10 No one is so fierce as to dare to stir it up.
Who can stand before it?
11 Who can confront it and be safe?
— under the whole heaven, who?
12 "I will not keep silence concerning its limbs,
or its mighty strength, or its splendid frame.
13 Who can strip off its outer garment?
Who can penetrate its double coat of mail?
14 Who can open the doors of its face?
There is terror all around its teeth.

1034

JOB 1035

15 Its back is made of shields in rows,
shut up closely as with a seal.
16 One is so near to another
that no air can come between them.
17 They are joined one to another;
they clasp each other and cannot be separated.
18 Its sneezes flash forth light,
and its eyes are like the eyelids of the dawn.
19 From its mouth go flaming torches;
sparks of fire leap out.
20 Out of its nostrils comes smoke,
as from a boiling pot and burning rushes.
21 Its breath kindles coals,
and a flame comes out of its mouth.
22 In its neck abides strength,
and terror dances before it.
23 The folds of its flesh cling together;
it is firmly cast and immovable.
24 Its heart is as hard as stone,
as hard as the lower millstone.
25 When it raises itself up the gods are afraid;
at the crashing they are beside themselves.
26 Though the sword reaches it, it does not avail,
nor does the spear, the dart, or the javelin.
27 It counts iron as straw,
and bronze as rotten wood.
28 The arrow cannot make it flee;
slingstones, for it, are turned to chaff.
29 Clubs are counted as chaff;
it laughs at the rattle of javelins.
30 Its underparts are like sharp potsherds;
it spreads itself like a threshing sledge on the mire.
31 It makes the deep boil like a pot;
it makes the sea like a pot of ointment.
32 It leaves a shining wake behind it;
one would think the deep to be white-haired.
33 On earth it has no equal,
a creature without fear.

1035

JOB 1036

34 It surveys everything that is lofty;
it is king over all that are proud."
[Job 42]
Job's second response
1 Then Job answered the LORD:
2 "I know that you can do all things,
and that no purpose of yours can be thwarted.
3 'Who is this that hides counsel without knowledge?'
Therefore I have uttered what I did not understand,
things too wonderful for me, which I did not know.
4 'Hear, and I will speak;
I will question you, and you declare to me.'
5 I had heard of you by the hearing of the ear,
but now my eye sees you;
6 therefore I despise myself,
and repent in dust and ashes."
Epilogue
7 After the LORD had spoken these words to Job, the LORD said to
Eliphaz the Temanite: "My wrath is kindled against you and against
your two friends; for you have not spoken of me what is right, as my
servant Job has. 8 Now therefore take seven bulls and seven rams, and
go to my servant Job, and offer up for yourselves a burnt offering; and
my servant Job shall pray for you, for I will accept his prayer not to deal
with you according to your folly; for you have not spoken of me what
is right, as my servant Job has done." 9 So Eliphaz the Temanite and
Bildad the Shuhite and Zophar the Naamathite went and did what the
LORD had told them; and the LORD accepted Job's prayer.
10 And the LORD restored the fortunes of Job when he had prayed for
his friends; and the LORD gave Job twice as much as he had before. 11
Then there came to him all his brothers and sisters and all who had
known him before, and they ate bread with him in his house; they
showed him sympathy and comforted him for all the evil that the LORD
had brought upon him; and each of them gave him a piece of money

1036

JOB 1037

and a gold ring. 12 The LORD blessed the latter days of Job more than
his beginning; and he had fourteen thousand sheep, six thousand
camels, a thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand donkeys. 13 He also
had seven sons and three daughters. 14 He named the first Jemimah,
the second Keziah, and the third Keren-happuch. 15 In all the land
there were no women so beautiful as Job's daughters; and their father
gave them an inheritance along with their brothers. 16 After this Job
lived one hundred and forty years, and saw his children, and his
children's children, four generations. 17 And Job died, old and full of
days.

1037

PSALMS 1038

PSALMS
Introduction
The Psalms is a collection of sung poetic prayers (see the Introduction
to the Poetical and Wisdom Books) associated with divine worship in
Israel. The word "psalm" is derived from the Greek "psalmos," which
translates the Hebrew "mizmor"; these all mean a song recited to the
accompaniment of a stringed instrument. The times of composition for
the psalms range across at least five centuries; the earliest psalm is
probably Ps 29, which is adapted from early Canaanite worship, while
several psalms contain contextual (e.g., Ps 126), linguistic, or other
evidence that they are from the postexilic period (Ps 51; 114; 137). While
psalms are Judean in origin, the language or internal references in
several psalms suggest that they originated in the Northern Kingdom
(e.g., Ps 80 and 81, which contain references to Joseph); these most
likely were brought to Judah after the destruction of the Northern
Kingdom in 722 BCE. The majority of the psalms, however, originated
in the preexilic, monarchic period, and are associated with the
Jerusalem Temple.
HT

TH

The psalms likely functioned as a musical libretto for sections of the
Temple worship, though exactly when and how they were used is
unclear. Psalm 118.27, "The Lord is God, and he has given us light. Bind
the festal procession with branches, up to the horns of the altar"
suggests that some psalms were used in connection to the sacrifices,
while Ps 141.2, "Let my prayer be counted as incense before you, and
the lifting up of my hands as an evening sacrifice" might indicate that
some were recited when the incense was offered. Several psalms
contain allusions to musical performance (e.g., 13.6; 26.7; 30.4; 33.2-3),
and may of the superscriptions (headings, though not included in this
specific online version — see the NRSV) contain detailed, technical
references to how the performance should be completed.
Unfortunately, many of the technical terms that are ubiquitous in the
1038

PSALMS 1039

psalms, including the frequent "Selah," are imperfectly understood,
and it is thus very difficult to reconstruct with any certainty exactly
how these poems were performed. (The term "Selah" was not included
in this online version of Psalms.)
From the beginning of the 20th century, many attempts have been
made, especially by biblical scholars interested in form criticism (see
"Form Criticism" in the related essays section), to follow clues in the
psalms, in order to reconstruct the original "Sitz im Leben," or setting
in life, of the psalms. This scholarship has suggested that the psalms are
to be divided into several genres. The two main types are laments,
forming approximately a third of the Psalter, and hymns. Laments can
be either individual (Ps 3) or communal (Ps 44). The lament's
component parts include the invocation of the name of God, the
complaint wherein the psalmist describes the distress experienced, and
appeals for divine intervention. Many of these laments include
expressions of trust, couched in the past (Ps 6.9, "The Lord has heard
my supplication; the Lord accepts my prayer"). It is unclear if this is a
reflection of the psalmist's great faith, which is furthered through the
recitation of the psalms, or if part of the recitation of the psalm might
have included a response to the lament by a cultic official, and the the
psalmist might have expressed trust only after this divine reassurance,
which does not usually appear in the psalm. The hymns typically focus
on the role of God as creator (e.g., Ps 8; 19, 104) or redeemer (Ps 66;
98). These hymns are not connected to specific requests; they are
reflective of the religious individual, who wants to have a close
connection with God, in the belief that "It is good to give thanks to the
Lord, to sing praise to your name, O Most High" (Ps 92.1). The Hebrew
title of Psalms, "tehillim" ("praises"), reflects the significance of the
genre of hymns to the book.
Still other types of psalms may be isolated in Psalms. For example, Ps 15,
which recounts the ideal qualities of the individual who "may abide in
your tent" and "may dwell on your holy hill" (v. 1) is likely an entrance
liturgy, recited by the worshiper while approaching the Temple. There
are several royal psalms (Ps 2), which focus on the king. The number of
these psalms, and by extension, the extent to which the Psalter should
be viewed as a work with specifically royal focus, is debated, with some

1039

PSALMS 1040

scholars contending that the "I" of the Psalter is typically the king. A
handful of psalms (e.g., 37; 119) contain the vocabulary of the wisdom
books — Job, Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes — and focus on issues that
characterize those books, such as righteousness in contrast to evil; for
this reason, they are often called wisdom psalms. Several psalms,
especially 93-99, focus on the kingship of God; it is unclear how these
might have been used ritually, and especially if they might reflect a
Judean New Year festival, which had significant parallels to a
Babylonian festival, in which the deity was ritually reinstated as king.
Form critics continue to debate the genres of specific psalms, the
number of different genres contained in the Psalter, and the psalms'
Sitz im Leben, namely the ways in which they were connected to
ancient Israelite worship.
The book of Psalms came together over a long period of time. This is
clear from the final verse of Ps 72, "The prayers of David son of Jesse
are ended." This is further reflected through the existence of several
collections or anthologies within the Psalter; the clearest of these is
composed of Ps 120-134, each of which begins "A song of ascents." Ps
42-83 are also a collection ("the elohistic Psalter"); these typically call
the deity "elohim" (translated "God"), rather than "yhwh" (translated
"Lord"), which typifies the rest of the Psalter. A comparison of Ps 14 to
the parallel Ps 53 (from the elohistic Psalter) is especially enlightening
as an illustration of the anthological nature of the Psalter. Clusters of
psalms also begin or end with the words "halelu-yah," "Praise the
Lord" (Ps 105-106; 111-113; 115-117; 146-150).
This brief reconstruction of the history of the Psalter indicates that the
early Jewish and Christian tradition, reflected among the Dead Sea
community as well, that David composed the entirety of the book of
Psalms, is secondary. The tradition arose from an interpretation of the
many psalms that do begin "of David," a phrase understood to mean
of Davidic authorship, as well as the traditions in other books that
David was a poet and musician (1 Sam 16.16-17; 2 Sam 1.17-27) and the
patron of the Jerusalem Temple (1 Chr 29.1-5), constructed by his son,
Solomon. The historical headings of several psalms (not included in this
online NRSV version; see a print version) (Ps 3; 18; 34; 51) reflect early
exegetical attempts to link the psalms with incidents in the life of

1040

PSALMS 1041

David in 1-2 Samuel. This desire to connect the psalms directly to the
life of David is further shown in additional historical headings found in
the Septuagint, the second-century BCE translation of the Bible, as well
as in later Jewish exegesis. These illustrate a movement away from
understanding Psalms as a loose collection of liturgical works, to
viewing it as a thematic book.
This attempt to understand Psalms as a book is echoed in the manner
in which the book is subdivided into five parts or books, through the
secondary insertion of doxologies (detailed praises of God), at the end
of Ps 41; 72; 89; 106, and through the functioning of the last psalm(s) of
the Psalter (Ps 146-150 alone) as a doxology. Thus the book in its final
form is structure as a Pentateuch (five books), just like the Torah. The
reference to "the Torah (NRSV "law") of the Lord" in the introductory
psalm (v. 2) suggests that, at some level, the book of Psalms as a whole
is to be read as Torah and is to be studied as Torah. This may represent
the period after the destruction of the Second Temple (70 CE), when
study of psalms replaced their liturgical recitation.
There are thus many ways that the individual psalms might be read. In
their earliest stages, they are individual compositions, recited for
particular occasions at a variety of sacred sites. Later, some of these
were anthologized, and might be understood within the anthology
that they are in; e.g., Ps 123 might be understood within the Songs of
Ascent. Finally, individual psalms might be understood within the
Psalter as a book, either narrating a biography of David, or a book of
teaching like the Torah. The main function of psalms within later
Jewish and Christian tradition, however, has been as a type of
inspirational literature, where later worshipers may find proper words
in tradition to express the depths of their religious experience and
feelings.

1041

PSALMS 1042

BOOK I (PSALMS 1-41)
[Psalms 1]
The two ways
1 Happy are those
who do not follow the advice of the wicked,
or take the path that sinners tread,
or sit in the seat of scoffers;
2 but their delight is in the law of the LORD,
and on his law they meditate day and night.
3 They are like trees
planted by streams of water,
which yield their fruit in its season,
and their leaves do not wither.
In all that they do, they prosper.
4 The wicked are not so,
but are like chaff that the wind drives away.
5 Therefore the wicked will not stand in the judgment,
nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous;
6 for the LORD watches over the way of the righteous,
but the way of the wicked will perish.
[Psalm 2]
God's royal son
1 Why do the nations conspire,
and the peoples plot in vain?
2 The kings of the earth set themselves,
and the rulers take counsel together,
against the LORD and his anointed, saying,
3 "Let us burst their bonds asunder,
and cast their cords from us."
4 He who sits in the heavens laughs;
the LORD has them in derision.

1042

PSALMS 1043

5 Then he will speak to them in his wrath,
and terrify them in his fury, saying,
6 "I have set my king on Zion, my holy hill."
7 I will tell of the decree of the LORD:
He said to me, "You are my son;
today I have begotten you.
8 Ask of me, and I will make the nations your heritage,
and the ends of the earth your possession.
9 You shall break them with a rod of iron,
and dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel."
10 Now therefore, O kings, be wise;
be warned, O rulers of the earth.
11 Serve the LORD with fear,
with trembling 12 kiss his feet,
or he will be angry, and you will perish in the way;
for his wrath is quickly kindled.
Happy are all who take refuge in him.
[Psalm 3]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 O LORD, how many are my foes!
Many are rising against me;
2 many are saying to me,
"There is no help for you in God."
3 But you, O LORD, are a shield around me,
my glory, and the one who lifts up my head.
4 I cry aloud to the LORD,
and he answers me from his holy hill.
5 I lie down and sleep;
I wake again, for the LORD sustains me.
6 I am not afraid of ten thousands of people
who have set themselves against me all around.

1043

PSALMS 1044

7 Rise up, O LORD!
Deliver me, O my God!
For you strike all my enemies on the cheek;
you break the teeth of the wicked.
8 Deliverance belongs to the LORD;
may your blessing be on your people!
[Psalm 4]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 Answer me when I call, O God of my right!
You gave me room when I was in distress.
Be gracious to me, and hear my prayer.
2 How long, you people, shall my honor suffer shame?
How long will you love vain words, and seek after lies?
3 But know that the LORD has set apart the faithful for himself;
the LORD hears when I call to him.
4 When you are disturbed, do not sin;
ponder it on your beds, and be silent.
5 Offer right sacrifices,
and put your trust in the LORD.
6 There are many who say, "O that we might see some good!
Let the light of your face shine on us, O LORD!"
7 You have put gladness in my heart
more than when their grain and wine abound.
8 I will both lie down and sleep in peace;
for you alone, O LORD, make me lie down in safety.

1044

PSALMS 1045

[Psalm 5]
Prayer for access to the Temple
1 Give ear to my words, O LORD;
give heed to my sighing.
2 Listen to the sound of my cry,
my King and my God,
for to you I pray.
3 O LORD, in the morning you hear my voice;
in the morning I plead my case to you, and watch.
4 For you are not a God who delights in wickedness;
evil will not sojourn with you.
5 The boastful will not stand before your eyes;
you hate all evildoers.
6 You destroy those who speak lies;
the LORD abhors the bloodthirsty and deceitful.
7 But I, through the abundance of your steadfast love,
will enter your house,
I will bow down toward your holy temple
in awe of you.
8 Lead me, O LORD, in your righteousness
because of my enemies;
make your way straight before me.
9 For there is no truth in their mouths;
their hearts are destruction;
their throats are open graves;
they flatter with their tongues.
10 Make them bear their guilt, O God;
let them fall by their own counsels;
because of their many transgressions cast them out,
for they have rebelled against you.

1045

PSALMS 1046

11 But let all who take refuge in you rejoice;
let them ever sing for joy.
Spread your protection over them,
so that those who love your name may exult in you.
12 For you bless the righteous, O LORD;
you cover them with favor as with a shield.
[Psalm 6]
Prayer for healing
1 O LORD, do not rebuke me in your anger,
or discipline me in your wrath.
2 Be gracious to me, O LORD, for I am languishing;
O LORD, heal me, for my bones are shaking with terror.
3 My soul also is struck with terror,
while you, O LORD — how long?
4 Turn, O LORD, save my life;
deliver me for the sake of your steadfast love.
5 For in death there is no remembrance of you;
in Sheol who can give you praise?
6 I am weary with my moaning;
every night I flood my bed with tears;
I drench my couch with my weeping.
7 My eyes waste away because of grief;
they grow weak because of all my foes.
8 Depart from me, all you workers of evil,
for the LORD has heard the sound of my weeping.
9 The LORD has heard my supplication;
the LORD accepts my prayer.
10 All my enemies shall be ashamed and struck with terror;
they shall turn back, and in a moment be put to shame.

1046

PSALMS 1047

[Psalm 7]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 O LORD my God, in you I take refuge;
save me from all my pursuers, and deliver me,
2 or like a lion they will tear me apart;
they will drag me away, with no one to rescue.
3 O LORD my God, if I have done this,
if there is wrong in my hands,
4 if I have repaid my ally with harm
or plundered my foe without cause,
5 then let the enemy pursue and overtake me,
trample my life to the ground,
and lay my soul in the dust.
6 Rise up, O LORD, in your anger;
lift yourself up against the fury of my enemies;
awake, O my God; you have appointed a judgment.
7 Let the assembly of the peoples be gathered around you,
and over it take your seat on high.
8 The LORD judges the peoples;
judge me, O LORD, according to my righteousness
and according to the integrity that is in me.
9 O let the evil of the wicked come to an end,
but establish the righteous,
you who test the minds and hearts,
O righteous God.
10 God is my shield,
who saves the upright in heart.
11 God is a righteous judge,
and a God who has indignation every day.
12 If one does not repent, God will whet his sword;
he has bent and strung his bow;
13 he has prepared his deadly weapons,
making his arrows fiery shafts.

1047

PSALMS 1048

14 See how they conceive evil,
and are pregnant with mischief,
and bring forth lies.
15 They make a pit, digging it out,
and fall into the hole that they have made.
16 Their mischief returns upon their own heads,
and on their own heads their violence descends.
17 I will give to the LORD the thanks due to his righteousness,
and sing praise to the name of the LORD, the Most High.
[Psalm 8]
Praise of the creator
1 O LORD, our Sovereign,
how majestic is your name in all the earth!
You have set your glory above the heavens.
2
Out of the mouths of babes and infants
you have founded a bulwark because of your foes,
to silence the enemy and the avenger.
3 When I look at your heavens, the work of your fingers,
the moon and the stars that you have established;
4 what are human beings that you are mindful of them,
mortals that you care for them?
5 Yet you have made them a little lower than God,
and crowned them with glory and honor.
6 You have given them dominion over the works of your hands;
you have put all things under their feet,
7 all sheep and oxen,
and also the beasts of the field,
8 the birds of the air, and the fish of the sea,
whatever passes along the paths of the seas.
9 O LORD, our Sovereign,
how majestic is your name in all the earth!

1048

PSALMS 1049

[Psalm 9]
Victory over enemies and petition for justice
1 I will give thanks to the LORD with my whole heart;
I will tell of all your wonderful deeds.
2 I will be glad and exult in you;
I will sing praise to your name, O Most High.
3 When my enemies turned back,
they stumbled and perished before you.
4 For you have maintained my just cause;
you have sat on the throne giving righteous judgment.
5 You have rebuked the nations, you have destroyed the wicked;
you have blotted out their name forever and ever.
6 The enemies have vanished in everlasting ruins;
their cities you have rooted out;
the very memory of them has perished.
7 But the LORD sits enthroned forever,
he has established his throne for judgment.
8 He judges the world with righteousness;
he judges the peoples with equity.
9 The LORD is a stronghold for the oppressed,
a stronghold in times of trouble.
10 And those who know your name put their trust in you,
for you, O LORD, have not forsaken those who seek you.
11 Sing praises to the LORD, who dwells in Zion.
Declare his deeds among the peoples.
12 For he who avenges blood is mindful of them;
he does not forget the cry of the afflicted.
13 Be gracious to me, O LORD.
See what I suffer from those who hate me;
you are the one who lifts me up from the gates of death,

1049

PSALMS 1050

14 so that I may recount all your praises,
and, in the gates of daughter Zion,
rejoice in your deliverance.
15 The nations have sunk in the pit that they made;
in the net that they hid has their own foot been caught.
16 The LORD has made himself known, he has executed judgment;
the wicked are snared in the work of their own hands.
17 The wicked shall depart to Sheol,
all the nations that forget God.
18 For the needy shall not always be forgotten,
nor the hope of the poor perish forever.
19 Rise up, O LORD! Do not let mortals prevail;
let the nations be judged before you.
20 Put them in fear, O LORD;
let the nations know that they are only human.
[Psalm 10]
1 Why, O LORD, do you stand far off?
Why do you hide yourself in times of trouble?
2 In arrogance the wicked persecute the poor —
let them be caught in the schemes they have devised.
3 For the wicked boast of the desires of their heart,
those greedy for gain curse and renounce the LORD.
4 In the pride of their countenance the wicked say, "God will not
seek it out"; all their thoughts are, "There is no God."
5 Their ways prosper at all times;
your judgments are on high, out of their sight;
as for their foes, they scoff at them.
6 They think in their heart, "We shall not be moved;
throughout all generations we shall not meet adversity."

1050

PSALMS 1051

7 Their mouths are filled with cursing and deceit and oppression;
under their tongues are mischief and iniquity.
8 They sit in ambush in the villages;
in hiding places they murder the innocent.
Their eyes stealthily watch for the helpless;
9
they lurk in secret like a lion in its covert;
they lurk that they may seize the poor;
they seize the poor and drag them off in their net.
10 They stoop, they crouch,
and the helpless fall by their might.
11 They think in their heart, "God has forgotten,
he has hidden his face, he will never see it."
12 Rise up, O LORD; O God, lift up your hand;
do not forget the oppressed.
13 Why do the wicked renounce God,
and say in their hearts, "You will not call us to account"?
14 But you do see! Indeed you note trouble and grief,
that you may take it into your hands;
the helpless commit themselves to you;
you have been the helper of the orphan.
15 Break the arm of the wicked and evildoers;
seek out their wickedness until you find none.
16 The LORD is king forever and ever;
the nations shall perish from his land.
17 O LORD, you will hear the desire of the meek;
you will strengthen their heart, you will incline your ear
18 to do justice for the orphan and the oppressed,
so that those from earth may strike terror no more.

1051

PSALMS 1052

[Psalm 11]
The Lord, just protector of the upright
1 In the LORD I take refuge; how can you say to me,
"Flee like a bird to the mountains;
2 for look, the wicked bend the bow,
they have fitted their arrow to the string,
to shoot in the dark at the upright in heart.
3 If the foundations are destroyed,
what can the righteous do?"
4 The LORD is in his holy temple;
the LORD's throne is in heaven.
His eyes behold, his gaze examines humankind.
5 The LORD tests the righteous and the wicked,
and his soul hates the lover of violence.
6 On the wicked he will rain coals of fire and sulfur;
a scorching wind shall be the portion of their cup.
7 For the LORD is righteous;
he loves righteous deeds;
the upright shall behold his face.
[Psalm 12]
Prayer for deliverance and divine response
1 Help, O LORD, for there is no longer anyone who is godly;
the faithful have disappeared from humankind.
2 They utter lies to each other;
with flattering lips and a double heart they speak.
3 May the LORD cut off all flattering lips,
the tongue that makes great boasts,
4 those who say, "With our tongues we will prevail;
our lips are our own — who is our master?"

1052

PSALMS 1053

5 "Because the poor are despoiled, because the needy groan,
I will now rise up," says the LORD;
"I will place them in the safety for which they long."
6 The promises of the LORD are promises that are pure,
silver refined in a furnace on the ground,
purified seven times.
7 You, O LORD, will protect us;
you will guard us from this generation forever.
8 On every side the wicked prowl,
as vileness is exalted among humankind.
[Psalm 13]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 How long, O LORD? Will you forget me forever?
How long will you hide your face from me?
2 How long must I bear pain in my soul,
and have sorrow in my heart all day long?
How long shall my enemy be exalted over me?
3 Consider and answer me, O LORD my God!
Give light to my eyes, or I will sleep the sleep of death,
4 and my enemy will say, "I have prevailed";
my foes will rejoice because I am shaken.
5 But I trusted in your steadfast love;
my heart shall rejoice in your salvation.
6 I will sing to the LORD,
because he has dealt bountifully with me.
[Psalm 14]
Condemnation of foolish evildoers
1 Fools say in their hearts, "There is no God."
They are corrupt, they do abominable deeds;
there is no one who does good.

1053

PSALMS 1054

2 The LORD looks down from heaven on humankind
to see if there are any who are wise,
who seek after God.
3 They have all gone astray, they are all alike perverse;
there is no one who does good,
no, not one.
4 Have they no knowledge, all the evildoers
who eat up my people as they eat bread,
and do not call upon the LORD?
5 There they shall be in great terror,
for God is with the company of the righteous.
6 You would confound the plans of the poor,
but the LORD is their refuge.
7 O that deliverance for Israel would come from Zion!
When the LORD restores the fortunes of his people,
Jacob will rejoice; Israel will be glad.
[Psalm 15]
Ritual for admission into the Temple
1 O LORD, who may abide in your tent?
Who may dwell on your holy hill?
2 Those who walk blamelessly, and do what is right,
and speak the truth from their heart;
3 who do not slander with their tongue,
and do no evil to their friends,
nor take up a reproach against their neighbors;
4 in whose eyes the wicked are despised,
but who honor those who fear the LORD;
who stand by their oath even to their hurt;

1054

PSALMS 1055

5 who do not lend money at interest,
and do not take a bribe against the innocent.
Those who do these things shall never be moved.
[Psalm 16]
A prayer for admission to the Temple
1 Protect me, O God, for in you I take refuge.
2 I say to the LORD, "You are my Lord;
I have no good apart from you."
3 As for the holy ones in the land, they are the noble,
in whom is all my delight.
4 Those who choose another god multiply their sorrows;
their drink offerings of blood I will not pour out
or take their names upon my lips.
5 The LORD is my chosen portion and my cup;
you hold my lot.
6 The boundary lines have fallen for me in pleasant places;
I have a goodly heritage.
7 I bless the LORD who gives me counsel;
in the night also my heart instructs me.
8 I keep the LORD always before me;
because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved.
9 Therefore my heart is glad, and my soul rejoices;
my body also rests secure.
10 For you do not give me up to Sheol,
or let your faithful one see the Pit.
11 You show me the path of life.
In your presence there is fullness of joy;
in your right hand are pleasures forevermore.

1055

PSALMS 1056

[Psalm 17]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 Hear a just cause, O LORD; attend to my cry;
give ear to my prayer from lips free of deceit.
2 From you let my vindication come;
let your eyes see the right.
3 If you try my heart, if you visit me by night,
if you test me, you will find no wickedness in me;
my mouth does not transgress.
4 As for what others do, by the word of your lips
I have avoided the ways of the violent.
5 My steps have held fast to your paths;
my feet have not slipped.
6 I call upon you, for you will answer me, O God;
incline your ear to me, hear my words.
7 Wondrously show your steadfast love,
O savior of those who seek refuge
from their adversaries at your right hand.
8 Guard me as the apple of the eye;
hide me in the shadow of your wings,
9 from the wicked who despoil me,
my deadly enemies who surround me.
10 They close their hearts to pity;
with their mouths they speak arrogantly.
11 They track me down; now they surround me;
they set their eyes to cast me to the ground.
12 They are like a lion eager to tear,
like a young lion lurking in ambush.

1056

PSALMS 1057

13 Rise up, O LORD, confront them, overthrow them!
By your sword deliver my life from the wicked,
14 from mortals — by your hand, O LORD —
from mortals whose portion in life is in this world.
May their bellies be filled with what you have stored up for them;
may their children have more than enough;
may they leave something over to their little ones.
15 As for me, I shall behold your face in righteousness;
when I awake I shall be satisfied, beholding your likeness.
[Psalm 18]
A royal thanksgiving hymn
1 I love you, O LORD, my strength.
2 The LORD is my rock, my fortress, and my deliverer,
my God, my rock in whom I take refuge,
my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my stronghold.
3 I call upon the LORD, who is worthy to be praised,
so I shall be saved from my enemies.
4 The cords of death encompassed me;
the torrents of perdition assailed me;
5 the cords of Sheol entangled me;
the snares of death confronted me.
6 In my distress I called upon the LORD;
to my God I cried for help.
From his temple he heard my voice,
and my cry to him reached his ears.
7 Then the earth reeled and rocked;
the foundations also of the mountains trembled
and quaked, because he was angry.
8 Smoke went up from his nostrils,
and devouring fire from his mouth;
glowing coals flamed forth from him.

1057

PSALMS 1058

9 He bowed the heavens, and came down;
thick darkness was under his feet.
10 He rode on a cherub, and flew;
he came swiftly upon the wings of the wind.
11 He made darkness his covering around him,
his canopy thick clouds dark with water.
12 Out of the brightness before him
there broke through his clouds
hailstones and coals of fire.
13 The LORD also thundered in the heavens,
and the Most High uttered his voice.
14 And he sent out his arrows, and scattered them;
he flashed forth lightnings, and routed them.
15 Then the channels of the sea were seen,
and the foundations of the world were laid bare
at your rebuke, O LORD,
at the blast of the breath of your nostrils.
16 He reached down from on high, he took me;
he drew me out of mighty waters.
17 He delivered me from my strong enemy,
and from those who hated me;
for they were too mighty for me.
18 They confronted me in the day of my calamity;
but the LORD was my support.
19 He brought me out into a broad place;
he delivered me, because he delighted in me.
20 The LORD rewarded me according to my righteousness;
according to the cleanness of my hands he recompensed me.
21 For I have kept the ways of the LORD,
and have not wickedly departed from my God.
22 For all his ordinances were before me,
and his statutes I did not put away from me.
23 I was blameless before him,
and I kept myself from guilt.

1058

PSALMS 1059

24 Therefore the LORD has recompensed me according to
my righteousness, according to the cleanness of my
hands in his sight.
25 With the loyal you show yourself loyal;
with the blameless you show yourself blameless;
26 with the pure you show yourself pure;
and with the crooked you show yourself perverse.
27 For you deliver a humble people,
but the haughty eyes you bring down.
28 It is you who light my lamp;
the LORD, my God, lights up my darkness.
29 By you I can crush a troop,
and by my God I can leap over a wall.
30 This God — his way is perfect;
the promise of the LORD proves true;
he is a shield for all who take refuge in him.
31 For who is God except the LORD?
And who is a rock besides our God? —
32 the God who girded me with strength,
and made my way safe.
33 He made my feet like the feet of a deer,
and set me secure on the heights.
34 He trains my hands for war,
so that my arms can bend a bow of bronze.
35 You have given me the shield of your salvation,
and your right hand has supported me;
your help has made me great.
36 You gave me a wide place for my steps under me,
and my feet did not slip.
37 I pursued my enemies and overtook them;
and did not turn back until they were consumed.
38 I struck them down, so that they were not able to rise;
they fell under my feet.
39 For you girded me with strength for the battle;
you made my assailants sink under me.
40 You made my enemies turn their backs to me,
and those who hated me I destroyed.

1059

PSALMS 1060

41 They cried for help, but there was no one to save them;
they cried to the LORD, but he did not answer them.
42 I beat them fine, like dust before the wind;
I cast them out like the mire of the streets.
43 You delivered me from strife with the peoples;
you made me head of the nations;
people whom I had not known served me.
44 As soon as they heard of me they obeyed me;
foreigners came cringing to me.
45 Foreigners lost heart,
and came trembling out of their strongholds.
46 The LORD lives! Blessed be my rock,
and exalted be the God of my salvation,
47 the God who gave me vengeance
and subdued peoples under me;
48 who delivered me from my enemies;
indeed, you exalted me above my adversaries;
you delivered me from the violent.
49 For this I will extol you, O LORD, among the nations,
and sing praises to your name.
50 Great triumphs he gives to his king,
and shows steadfast love to his anointed,
to David and his descendants forever.
[Psalm 19]
Hymn to God the creator and lawgiver
1 The heavens are telling the glory of God;
and the firmament proclaims his handiwork.
2 Day to day pours forth speech,
and night to night declares knowledge.
3 There is no speech, nor are there words;
their voice is not heard;
4 yet their voice goes out through all the earth,
and their words to the end of the world.

1060

PSALMS 1061

In the heavens he has set a tent for the sun,
5 which comes out like a bridegroom from his wedding canopy,
and like a strong man runs its course with joy.
6 Its rising is from the end of the heavens,
and its circuit to the end of them;
and nothing is hid from its heat.
7 The law of the LORD is perfect,
reviving the soul;
the decrees of the LORD are sure,
making wise the simple;
8 the precepts of the LORD are right,
rejoicing the heart;
the commandment of the LORD is clear,
enlightening the eyes;
9 the fear of the LORD is pure,
enduring forever;
the ordinances of the LORD are true
and righteous altogether.
10 More to be desired are they than gold,
even much fine gold;
sweeter also than honey,
and drippings of the honeycomb.
11 Moreover by them is your servant warned;
in keeping them there is great reward.
12 But who can detect their errors?
Clear me from hidden faults.
13 Keep back your servant also from the insolent;
do not let them have dominion over me.
Then I shall be blameless,
and innocent of great transgression.
14 Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart
be acceptable to you,
O LORD, my rock and my redeemer.

1061

PSALMS 1062

[Psalm 20]
Prayer for the king's victory in battle
1 The LORD answer you in the day of trouble!
The name of the God of Jacob protect you!
2 May he send you help from the sanctuary,
and give you support from Zion.
3 May he remember all your offerings,
and regard with favor your burnt sacrifices.
4 May he grant you your heart's desire,
and fulfill all your plans.
5 May we shout for joy over your victory,
and in the name of our God set up our banners.
May the LORD fulfill all your petitions.
6 Now I know that the LORD will help his anointed;
he will answer him from his holy heaven
with mighty victories by his right hand.
7 Some take pride in chariots, and some in horses,
but our pride is in the name of the LORD our God.
8 They will collapse and fall,
but we shall rise and stand upright.
9 Give victory to the king, O LORD;
answer us when we call.
[Psalm 21]
Royal thanksgiving for victory
1 In your strength the king rejoices, O LORD,
and in your help how greatly he exults!
2 You have given him his heart's desire,
and have not withheld the request of his lips.
3 For you meet him with rich blessings;
you set a crown of fine gold on his head.
4 He asked you for life; you gave it to him —
length of days forever and ever.

1062

PSALMS 1063

5 His glory is great through your help;
splendor and majesty you bestow on him.
6 You bestow on him blessings forever;
you make him glad with the joy of your presence.
7 For the king trusts in the LORD,
and through the steadfast love of the Most High he shall
not be moved.
8 Your hand will find out all your enemies;
your right hand will find out those who hate you.
9 You will make them like a fiery furnace
when you appear.
The LORD will swallow them up in his wrath,
and fire will consume them.
10 You will destroy their offspring from the earth,
and their children from among humankind.
11 If they plan evil against you,
if they devise mischief, they will not succeed.
12 For you will put them to flight;
you will aim at their faces with your bows.
13 Be exalted, O LORD, in your strength!
We will sing and praise your power.
[Psalm 22]
Prayer of a person abandoned by God
1 My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?
Why are you so far from helping me, from the words
of my groaning?
2 O my God, I cry by day, but you do not answer;
and by night, but find no rest.
3 Yet you are holy,
enthroned on the praises of Israel.
4 In you our ancestors trusted;
they trusted, and you delivered them.

1063

PSALMS 1064

5 To you they cried, and were saved;
in you they trusted, and were not put to shame.
6 But I am a worm, and not human;
scorned by others, and despised by the people.
7 All who see me mock at me;
they make mouths at me, they shake their heads;
8 "Commit your cause to the LORD; let him deliver —
let him rescue the one in whom he delights!"
9 Yet it was you who took me from the womb;
you kept me safe on my mother's breast.
10 On you I was cast from my birth,
and since my mother bore me you have been my God.
11 Do not be far from me,
for trouble is near
and there is no one to help.
12 Many bulls encircle me,
strong bulls of Bashan surround me;
13 they open wide their mouths at me,
like a ravening and roaring lion.
14 I am poured out like water,
and all my bones are out of joint;
my heart is like wax;
it is melted within my breast;
15 my mouth is dried up like a potsherd,
and my tongue sticks to my jaws;
you lay me in the dust of death.
16 For dogs are all around me;
a company of evildoers encircles me.
My hands and feet have shriveled;
17 I can count all my bones.
They stare and gloat over me;
18 they divide my clothes among themselves,
and for my clothing they cast lots.

1064

PSALMS 1065

19 But you, O LORD, do not be far away!
O my help, come quickly to my aid!
20 Deliver my soul from the sword,
my life from the power of the dog!
21
Save me from the mouth of the lion!
From the horns of the wild oxen you have rescued me.
22 I will tell of your name to my brothers and sisters;
in the midst of the congregation I will praise you:
23 You who fear the LORD, praise him!
All you offspring of Jacob, glorify him;
stand in awe of him, all you offspring of Israel!
24 For he did not despise or abhor
the affliction of the afflicted;
he did not hide his face from me,
but heard when I cried to him.
25 From you comes my praise in the great congregation;
my vows I will pay before those who fear him.
26 The poor shall eat and be satisfied;
those who seek him shall praise the LORD.
May your hearts live forever!
27 All the ends of the earth shall remember
and turn to the LORD;
and all the families of the nations
shall worship before him.
28 For dominion belongs to the LORD,
and he rules over the nations.
29 To him, indeed, shall all who sleep in the earth bow down;
before him shall bow all who go down to the dust,
and I shall live for him.
30 Posterity will serve him;
future generations will be told about the Lord,
31 and proclaim his deliverance to a people yet unborn,
saying that he has done it.

1065

PSALMS 1066

[Psalm 23]
The Lord as Shepherd-king and host
1 The LORD is my shepherd, I shall not want.
2
He makes me lie down in green pastures;
he leads me beside still waters;
3
he restores my soul.
He leads me in right paths
for his name's sake.
4 Even though I walk through the darkest valley,
I fear no evil;
for you are with me;
your rod and your staff —
they comfort me.
5 You prepare a table before me
in the presence of my enemies;
you anoint my head with oil;
my cup overflows.
6 Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me
all the days of my life,
and I shall dwell in the house of the LORD
my whole life long.
[Psalm 24]
A liturgy on entering the sanctuary
1 The earth is the LORD's and all that is in it,
the world, and those who live in it;
2 for he has founded it on the seas,
and established it on the rivers.
3 Who shall ascend the hill of the LORD?
And who shall stand in his holy place?
4 Those who have clean hands and pure hearts,
who do not lift up their souls to what is false,
and do not swear deceitfully.

1066

PSALMS 1067

5 They will receive blessing from the LORD,
and vindication from the God of their salvation.
6 Such is the company of those who seek him,
who seek the face of the God of Jacob.
7 Lift up your heads, O gates!
and be lifted up, O ancient doors!
that the King of glory may come in.
8 Who is the King of glory?
The LORD, strong and mighty,
the LORD, mighty in battle.
9 Lift up your heads, O gates!
and be lifted up, O ancient doors!
that the King of glory may come in.
10 Who is this King of glory?
The LORD of hosts,
he is the King of glory.
[Psalm 25]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 To you, O LORD, I lift up my soul.
2 O my God, in you I trust;
do not let me be put to shame;
do not let my enemies exult over me.
3 Do not let those who wait for you be put to shame;
let them be ashamed who are wantonly treacherous.
4 Make me to know your ways, O LORD;
teach me your paths.
5 Lead me in your truth, and teach me,
for you are the God of my salvation;
for you I wait all day long.
6 Be mindful of your mercy, O LORD, and of your steadfast love,
for they have been from of old.

1067

PSALMS 1068

7 Do not remember the sins of my youth or my transgressions;
according to your steadfast love remember me,
for your goodness' sake, O LORD!
8 Good and upright is the LORD;
therefore he instructs sinners in the way.
9 He leads the humble in what is right,
and teaches the humble his way.
10 All the paths of the LORD are steadfast love and faithfulness,
for those who keep his covenant and his decrees.
11 For your name's sake, O LORD,
pardon my guilt, for it is great.
12 Who are they that fear the LORD?
He will teach them the way that they should choose.
13 They will abide in prosperity,
and their children shall possess the land.
14 The friendship of the LORD is for those who fear him,
and he makes his covenant known to them.
15 My eyes are ever toward the LORD,
for he will pluck my feet out of the net.
16 Turn to me and be gracious to me,
for I am lonely and afflicted.
17 Relieve the troubles of my heart,
and bring me out of my distress.
18 Consider my affliction and my trouble,
and forgive all my sins.
19 Consider how many are my foes,
and with what violent hatred they hate me.
20 O guard my life, and deliver me;
do not let me be put to shame, for I take refuge in you.
21 May integrity and uprightness preserve me,
for I wait for you.
22 Redeem Israel, O God,
out of all its troubles.

1068

PSALMS 1069

[Psalm 26]
Prayer for divine justice
1 Vindicate me, O LORD,
for I have walked in my integrity,
and I have trusted in the LORD without wavering.
2 Prove me, O LORD, and try me;
test my heart and mind.
3 For your steadfast love is before my eyes,
and I walk in faithfulness to you.
4 I do not sit with the worthless,
nor do I consort with hypocrites;
5 I hate the company of evildoers,
and will not sit with the wicked.
6 I wash my hands in innocence,
and go around your altar, O LORD,
7 singing aloud a song of thanksgiving,
and telling all your wondrous deeds.
8 O LORD, I love the house in which you dwell,
and the place where your glory abides.
9 Do not sweep me away with sinners,
nor my life with the bloodthirsty,
10 those in whose hands are evil devices,
and whose right hands are full of bribes.
11 But as for me, I walk in my integrity;
redeem me, and be gracious to me.
12 My foot stands on level ground;
in the great congregation I will bless the LORD.

1069

PSALMS 1070

[Psalm 27]
Protection in the Temple of the trustworthy God
1 The LORD is my light and my salvation;
whom shall I fear?
The LORD is the stronghold of my life;
of whom shall I be afraid?
2 When evildoers assail me
to devour my flesh —
my adversaries and foes —
they shall stumble and fall.
3 Though an army encamp against me,
my heart shall not fear;
though war rise up against me,
yet I will be confident.
4 One thing I asked of the LORD,
that will I seek after:
to live in the house of the LORD
all the days of my life,
to behold the beauty of the LORD,
and to inquire in his temple.
5 For he will hide me in his shelter
in the day of trouble;
he will conceal me under the cover of his tent;
he will set me high on a rock.
6 Now my head is lifted up
above my enemies all around me,
and I will offer in his tent
sacrifices with shouts of joy;
I will sing and make melody to the LORD.

1070

PSALMS 1071

7 Hear, O LORD, when I cry aloud,
be gracious to me and answer me!
8 "Come," my heart says, "seek his face!"
Your face, LORD, do I seek.
9
Do not hide your face from me.
Do not turn your servant away in anger,
you who have been my help.
Do not cast me off, do not forsake me,
O God of my salvation!
10 If my father and mother forsake me,
the LORD will take me up.
11 Teach me your way, O LORD,
and lead me on a level path
because of my enemies.
12 Do not give me up to the will of my adversaries,
for false witnesses have risen against me,
and they are breathing out violence.
13 I believe that I shall see the goodness of the LORD
in the land of the living.
14 Wait for the LORD;
be strong, and let your heart take courage;
wait for the LORD!
[Psalm 28]
Royal plea for deliverance from enemies
1 To you, O LORD, I call;
my rock, do not refuse to hear me,
for if you are silent to me,
I shall be like those who go down to the Pit.
2 Hear the voice of my supplication,
as I cry to you for help,
as I lift up my hands
toward your most holy sanctuary.

1071

PSALMS 1072

3 Do not drag me away with the wicked,
with those who are workers of evil,
who speak peace with their neighbors,
while mischief is in their hearts.
4 Repay them according to their work,
and according to the evil of their deeds;
repay them according to the work of their hands;
render them their due reward.
5 Because they do not regard the works of the LORD,
or the work of his hands,
he will break them down and build them up no more.
6 Blessed be the LORD,
for he has heard the sound of my pleadings.
7 The LORD is my strength and my shield;
in him my heart trusts;
so I am helped, and my heart exults,
and with my song I give thanks to him.
8 The LORD is the strength of his people;
he is the saving refuge of his anointed.
9 O save your people, and bless your heritage;
be their shepherd, and carry them forever.
[Psalm 29]
Hymn to the God of the storm
1 Ascribe to the LORD, O heavenly beings,
ascribe to the LORD glory and strength.
2 Ascribe to the LORD the glory of his name;
worship the LORD in holy splendor.
3 The voice of the LORD is over the waters;
the God of glory thunders,
the LORD, over mighty waters.
4 The voice of the LORD is powerful;
the voice of the LORD is full of majesty.

1072

PSALMS 1073

5 The voice of the LORD breaks the cedars;
the LORD breaks the cedars of Lebanon.
6 He makes Lebanon skip like a calf,
and Sirion like a young wild ox.
7 The voice of the LORD flashes forth flames of fire.
8 The voice of the LORD shakes the wilderness;
the LORD shakes the wilderness of Kadesh.
9 The voice of the LORD causes the oaks to whirl,
and strips the forest bare;
and in his temple all say, "Glory!"
10 The LORD sits enthroned over the flood;
the LORD sits enthroned as king forever.
11 May the LORD give strength to his people!
May the LORD bless his people with peace!
[Psalm 30]
Thanksgiving after recovery from illness
1 I will extol you, O LORD, for you have drawn me up,
and did not let my foes rejoice over me.
2 O LORD my God, I cried to you for help,
and you have healed me.
3 O LORD, you brought up my soul from Sheol,
restored me to life from among those gone down to the Pit.
4 Sing praises to the LORD, O you his faithful ones,
and give thanks to his holy name.
5 For his anger is but for a moment;
his favor is for a lifetime.
Weeping may linger for the night,
but joy comes with the morning.
6 As for me, I said in my prosperity,
"I shall never be moved."

1073

PSALMS 1074

7 By your favor, O LORD,
you had established me as a strong mountain;
you hid your face;
I was dismayed.
8 To you, O LORD, I cried,
and to the LORD I made supplication:
9 "What profit is there in my death,
if I go down to the Pit?
Will the dust praise you?
Will it tell of your faithfulness?
10 Hear, O LORD, and be gracious to me!
O LORD, be my helper!"
11 You have turned my mourning into dancing;
you have taken off my sackcloth
and clothed me with joy,
12 so that my soul may praise you and not be silent.
O LORD my God, I will give thanks to you forever.
[Psalm 31]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 In you, O LORD, I seek refuge;
do not let me ever be put to shame;
in your righteousness deliver me.
2 Incline your ear to me;
rescue me speedily.
Be a rock of refuge for me,
a strong fortress to save me.
3 You are indeed my rock and my fortress;
for your name's sake lead me and guide me,
4 take me out of the net that is hidden for me,
for you are my refuge.
5 Into your hand I commit my spirit;
you have redeemed me, O LORD, faithful God.

1074

PSALMS 1075

6 You hate those who pay regard to worthless idols,
but I trust in the LORD.
7 I will exult and rejoice in your steadfast love,
because you have seen my affliction;
you have taken heed of my adversities,
8 and have not delivered me into the hand of the enemy;
you have set my feet in a broad place.
9 Be gracious to me, O LORD, for I am in distress;
my eye wastes away from grief,
my soul and body also.
10 For my life is spent with sorrow,
and my years with sighing;
my strength fails because of my misery,
and my bones waste away.
11 I am the scorn of all my adversaries,
a horror to my neighbors,
an object of dread to my acquaintances;
those who see me in the street flee from me.
12 I have passed out of mind like one who is dead;
I have become like a broken vessel.
13 For I hear the whispering of many —
terror all around! —
as they scheme together against me,
as they plot to take my life.
14 But I trust in you, O LORD;
I say, "You are my God."
15 My times are in your hand;
deliver me from the hand of my enemies and persecutors.
16 Let your face shine upon your servant;
save me in your steadfast love.
17 Do not let me be put to shame, O LORD,
for I call on you;
let the wicked be put to shame;
let them go dumbfounded to Sheol.

1075

PSALMS 1076

18 Let the lying lips be stilled
that speak insolently against the righteous
with pride and contempt.
19 O how abundant is your goodness
that you have laid up for those who fear you,
and accomplished for those who take refuge in you,
in the sight of everyone!
20 In the shelter of your presence you hide them
from human plots;
you hold them safe under your shelter
from contentious tongues.
21 Blessed be the LORD,
for he has wondrously shown his steadfast love to me
when I was beset as a city under siege.
22 I had said in my alarm,
"I am driven far from your sight."
But you heard my supplications
when I cried out to you for help.
23 Love the LORD, all you his saints.
The LORD preserves the faithful,
but abundantly repays the one who acts haughtily.
24 Be strong, and let your heart take courage,
all you who wait for the LORD.
[Psalm 32]
The happiness of the penitent and forgiven
1 Happy are those whose transgression is forgiven,
whose sin is covered.
2 Happy are those to whom the LORD imputes no iniquity,
and in whose spirit there is no deceit.

1076

PSALMS 1077

3 While I kept silence, my body wasted away
through my groaning all day long.
4 For day and night your hand was heavy upon me;
my strength was dried up as by the heat of summer.
5 Then I acknowledged my sin to you,
and I did not hide my iniquity;
I said, "I will confess my transgressions to the LORD,"
and you forgave the guilt of my sin.
6 Therefore let all who are faithful
offer prayer to you;
at a time of distress, the rush of mighty waters
shall not reach them.
7 You are a hiding place for me;
you preserve me from trouble;
you surround me with glad cries of deliverance.
8 I will instruct you and teach you the way you should go;
I will counsel you with my eye upon you.
9 Do not be like a horse or a mule, without understanding,
whose temper must be curbed with bit and bridle,
else it will not stay near you.
10 Many are the torments of the wicked,
but steadfast love surrounds those who trust in the LORD.
11 Be glad in the LORD and rejoice, O righteous,
and shout for joy, all you upright in heart.
[Psalm 33]
Praise of God, creator and redeemer
1 Rejoice in the LORD, O you righteous.
Praise befits the upright.
2 Praise the LORD with the lyre;
make melody to him with the harp of ten strings.
3 Sing to him a new song;
play skillfully on the strings, with loud shouts.

1077

PSALMS 1078

4 For the word of the LORD is upright,
and all his work is done in faithfulness.
5 He loves righteousness and justice;
the earth is full of the steadfast love of the LORD.
6 By the word of the LORD the heavens were made,
and all their host by the breath of his mouth.
7 He gathered the waters of the sea as in a bottle;
he put the deeps in storehouses.
8 Let all the earth fear the LORD;
let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him.
9 For he spoke, and it came to be;
he commanded, and it stood firm.
10 The LORD brings the counsel of the nations to nothing;
he frustrates the plans of the peoples.
11 The counsel of the LORD stands forever,
the thoughts of his heart to all generations.
12 Happy is the nation whose God is the LORD,
the people whom he has chosen as his heritage.
13 The LORD looks down from heaven;
he sees all humankind.
14 From where he sits enthroned he watches
all the inhabitants of the earth —
15 he who fashions the hearts of them all,
and observes all their deeds.
16 A king is not saved by his great army;
a warrior is not delivered by his great strength.
17 The war horse is a vain hope for victory,
and by its great might it cannot save.
18 Truly the eye of the LORD is on those who fear him,
on those who hope in his steadfast love,
19 to deliver their soul from death,
and to keep them alive in famine.

1078

PSALMS 1079

20 Our soul waits for the LORD;
he is our help and shield.
21 Our heart is glad in him,
because we trust in his holy name.
22 Let your steadfast love, O LORD, be upon us,
even as we hope in you.
[Psalm 34]
Prayer for deliverance from trouble
1 I will bless the LORD at all times;
his praise shall continually be in my mouth.
2 My soul makes its boast in the LORD;
let the humble hear and be glad.
3 O magnify the LORD with me,
and let us exalt his name together.
4 I sought the LORD, and he answered me,
and delivered me from all my fears.
5 Look to him, and be radiant;
so your faces shall never be ashamed.
6 This poor soul cried, and was heard by the LORD,
and was saved from every trouble.
7 The angel of the LORD encamps
around those who fear him, and delivers them.
8 O taste and see that the LORD is good;
happy are those who take refuge in him.
9 O fear the LORD, you his holy ones,
for those who fear him have no want.
10 The young lions suffer want and hunger,
but those who seek the LORD lack no good thing.
11 Come, O children, listen to me;
I will teach you the fear of the LORD.
12 Which of you desires life,
and covets many days to enjoy good?
13 Keep your tongue from evil,
and your lips from speaking deceit.

1079

PSALMS 1080

14 Depart from evil, and do good;
seek peace, and pursue it.
15 The eyes of the LORD are on the righteous,
and his ears are open to their cry.
16 The face of the LORD is against evildoers,
to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.
17 When the righteous cry for help, the LORD hears,
and rescues them from all their troubles.
18 The LORD is near to the brokenhearted,
and saves the crushed in spirit.
19 Many are the afflictions of the righteous,
but the LORD rescues them from them all.
20 He keeps all their bones;
not one of them will be broken.
21 Evil brings death to the wicked,
and those who hate the righteous will be condemned.
22 The LORD redeems the life of his servants;
none of those who take refuge in him will be condemned.
[Psalm 35]
Royal prayer for deliverance
1 Contend, O LORD, with those who contend with me;
fight against those who fight against me!
2 Take hold of shield and buckler,
and rise up to help me!
3 Draw the spear and javelin
against my pursuers;
say to my soul,
"I am your salvation."
4 Let them be put to shame and dishonor
who seek after my life.
Let them be turned back and confounded
who devise evil against me.
5 Let them be like chaff before the wind,
with the angel of the LORD driving them on.

1080

PSALMS 1081

6 Let their way be dark and slippery,
with the angel of the LORD pursuing them.
7 For without cause they hid their net for me;
without cause they dug a pit for my life.
8 Let ruin come on them unawares.
And let the net that they hid ensnare them;
let them fall in it — to their ruin.
9 Then my soul shall rejoice in the LORD,
exulting in his deliverance.
10 All my bones shall say,
"O LORD, who is like you?
You deliver the weak
from those too strong for them,
the weak and needy from those who despoil them."
11 Malicious witnesses rise up;
they ask me about things I do not know.
12 They repay me evil for good;
my soul is forlorn.
13 But as for me, when they were sick,
I wore sackcloth;
I afflicted myself with fasting.
I prayed with head bowed on my bosom,
14
as though I grieved for a friend or a brother;
I went about as one who laments for a mother,
bowed down and in mourning.
15 But at my stumbling they gathered in glee,
they gathered together against me;
ruffians whom I did not know
tore at me without ceasing;
16 they impiously mocked more and more,
gnashing at me with their teeth.

1081

PSALMS 1082

17 How long, O LORD, will you look on?
Rescue me from their ravages,
my life from the lions!
18 Then I will thank you in the great congregation;
in the mighty throng I will praise you.
19 Do not let my treacherous enemies rejoice over me,
or those who hate me without cause wink the eye.
20 For they do not speak peace,
but they conceive deceitful words
against those who are quiet in the land.
21 They open wide their mouths against me;
they say, "Aha, Aha,
our eyes have seen it."
22 You have seen, O LORD; do not be silent!
O Lord, do not be far from me!
23 Wake up! Bestir yourself for my defense,
for my cause, my God and my Lord!
24 Vindicate me, O LORD, my God,
according to your righteousness,
and do not let them rejoice over me.
25 Do not let them say to themselves,
"Aha, we have our heart's desire."
Do not let them say, "We have swallowed you up."
26 Let all those who rejoice at my calamity
be put to shame and confusion;
let those who exalt themselves against me
be clothed with shame and dishonor.
27 Let those who desire my vindication
shout for joy and be glad,
and say evermore,
"Great is the LORD,
who delights in the welfare of his servant."
28 Then my tongue shall tell of your righteousness
and of your praise all day long.

1082

PSALMS 1083

[Psalm 36]
Hymn of rejoicing in the Temple
1 Transgression speaks to the wicked
deep in their hearts;
there is no fear of God
before their eyes.
2 For they flatter themselves in their own eyes
that their iniquity cannot be found out and hated.
3 The words of their mouths are mischief and deceit;
they have ceased to act wisely and do good.
4 They plot mischief while on their beds;
they are set on a way that is not good;
they do not reject evil.
5 Your steadfast love, O LORD, extends to the heavens,
your faithfulness to the clouds.
6 Your righteousness is like the mighty mountains,
your judgments are like the great deep;
you save humans and animals alike, O LORD.
7 How precious is your steadfast love, O God!
All people may take refuge in the shadow of your wings.
8 They feast on the abundance of your house,
and you give them drink from the river of your delights.
9 For with you is the fountain of life;
in your light we see light.
10 O continue your steadfast love to those who know you,
and your salvation to the upright of heart!
11 Do not let the foot of the arrogant tread on me,
or the hand of the wicked drive me away.
12 There the evildoers lie prostrate;
they are thrust down, unable to rise.

1083

PSALMS 1084

[Psalm 37]
The certainty of retribution
1 Do not fret because of the wicked;
do not be envious of wrongdoers,
2 for they will soon fade like the grass,
and wither like the green herb.
3 Trust in the LORD, and do good;
so you will live in the land, and enjoy security.
4 Take delight in the LORD,
and he will give you the desires of your heart.
5 Commit your way to the LORD;
trust in him, and he will act.
6 He will make your vindication shine like the light,
and the justice of your cause like the noonday.
7 Be still before the LORD, and wait patiently for him;
do not fret over those who prosper in their way,
over those who carry out evil devices.
8 Refrain from anger, and forsake wrath.
Do not fret — it leads only to evil.
9 For the wicked shall be cut off,
but those who wait for the LORD shall inherit the land.
10 Yet a little while, and the wicked will be no more;
though you look diligently for their place, they will not be there.
11 But the meek shall inherit the land,
and delight themselves in abundant prosperity.
12 The wicked plot against the righteous,
and gnash their teeth at them;
13 but the LORD laughs at the wicked,
for he sees that their day is coming.

1084

PSALMS 1085

14 The wicked draw the sword and bend their bows
to bring down the poor and needy,
to kill those who walk uprightly;
15 their sword shall enter their own heart,
and their bows shall be broken.
16 Better is a little that the righteous person has
than the abundance of many wicked.
17 For the arms of the wicked shall be broken,
but the LORD upholds the righteous.
18 The LORD knows the days of the blameless,
and their heritage will abide forever;
19 they are not put to shame in evil times,
in the days of famine they have abundance.
20 But the wicked perish,
and the enemies of the LORD are like the glory of the pastures;
they vanish — like smoke they vanish away.
21 The wicked borrow, and do not pay back,
but the righteous are generous and keep giving;
22 for those blessed by the LORD shall inherit the land,
but those cursed by him shall be cut off.
23 Our steps are made firm by the LORD,
when he delights in our way;
24 though we stumble, we shall not fall headlong,
for the LORD holds us by the hand.
25 I have been young, and now am old,
yet I have not seen the righteous forsaken
or their children begging bread.
26 They are ever giving liberally and lending,
and their children become a blessing.

1085

PSALMS 1086

27 Depart from evil, and do good;
so you shall abide forever.
28 For the LORD loves justice;
he will not forsake his faithful ones.
The righteous shall be kept safe forever,
but the children of the wicked shall be cut off.
29 The righteous shall inherit the land,
and live in it forever.
30 The mouths of the righteous utter wisdom,
and their tongues speak justice.
31 The law of their God is in their hearts;
their steps do not slip.
32 The wicked watch for the righteous,
and seek to kill them.
33 The LORD will not abandon them to their power,
or let them be condemned when they are brought to trial.
34 Wait for the LORD, and keep to his way,
and he will exalt you to inherit the land;
you will look on the destruction of the wicked.
35 I have seen the wicked oppressing,
and towering like a cedar of Lebanon.
36 Again I passed by, and they were no more;
though I sought them, they could not be found.
37 Mark the blameless, and behold the upright,
for there is posterity for the peaceable.
38 But transgressors shall be altogether destroyed;
the posterity of the wicked shall be cut off.
39 The salvation of the righteous is from the LORD;
he is their refuge in the time of trouble.
40 The LORD helps them and rescues them;
he rescues them from the wicked, and saves them,
because they take refuge in him.

1086

PSALMS 1087

[Psalm 38]
Prayer for healing
1 O LORD, do not rebuke me in your anger,
or discipline me in your wrath.
2 For your arrows have sunk into me,
and your hand has come down on me.
3 There is no soundness in my flesh
because of your indignation;
there is no health in my bones
because of my sin.
4 For my iniquities have gone over my head;
they weigh like a burden too heavy for me.
5 My wounds grow foul and fester
because of my foolishness;
6 I am utterly bowed down and prostrate;
all day long I go around mourning.
7 For my loins are filled with burning,
and there is no soundness in my flesh.
8 I am utterly spent and crushed;
I groan because of the tumult of my heart.
9 O Lord, all my longing is known to you;
my sighing is not hidden from you.
10 My heart throbs, my strength fails me;
as for the light of my eyes — it also has gone from me.
11 My friends and companions stand aloof from my affliction,
and my neighbors stand far off.
12 Those who seek my life lay their snares;
those who seek to hurt me speak of ruin,
and meditate treachery all day long.

1087

PSALMS 1088

13 But I am like the deaf, I do not hear;
like the mute, who cannot speak.
14 Truly, I am like one who does not hear,
and in whose mouth is no retort.
15 But it is for you, O LORD, that I wait;
it is you, O Lord my God, who will answer.
16 For I pray, "Only do not let them rejoice over me,
those who boast against me when my foot slips."
17 For I am ready to fall,
and my pain is ever with me.
18 I confess my iniquity;
I am sorry for my sin.
19 Those who are my foes without cause are mighty,
and many are those who hate me wrongfully.
20 Those who render me evil for good
are my adversaries because I follow after good.
21 Do not forsake me, O LORD;
O my God, do not be far from me;
22 make haste to help me,
O Lord, my salvation.
[Psalm 39]
The brevity of human life
1 I said, "I will guard my ways
that I may not sin with my tongue;
I will keep a muzzle on my mouth
as long as the wicked are in my presence."
2 I was silent and still;
I held my peace to no avail;
my distress grew worse,
3
my heart became hot within me.
While I mused, the fire burned;
then I spoke with my tongue:

1088

PSALMS 1089

4 "LORD, let me know my end,
and what is the measure of my days;
let me know how fleeting my life is.
5 You have made my days a few handbreadths,
and my lifetime is as nothing in your sight.
Surely everyone stands as a mere breath.
6
Surely everyone goes about like a shadow.
Surely for nothing they are in turmoil;
they heap up, and do not know who will gather.
7 "And now, O Lord, what do I wait for?
My hope is in you.
8 Deliver me from all my transgressions.
Do not make me the scorn of the fool.
9 I am silent; I do not open my mouth,
for it is you who have done it.
10 Remove your stroke from me;
I am worn down by the blows of your hand.
11 "You chastise mortals
in punishment for sin,
consuming like a moth what is dear to them;
surely everyone is a mere breath.
12 "Hear my prayer, O LORD,
and give ear to my cry;
do not hold your peace at my tears.
For I am your passing guest,
an alien, like all my forebears.
13 Turn your gaze away from me, that I may smile again,
before I depart and am no more."

1089

PSALMS 1090

[Psalm 40]
Thanksgiving for deliverance and prayer for help
1 I waited patiently for the LORD;
he inclined to me and heard my cry.
2 He drew me up from the desolate pit,
out of the miry bog,
and set my feet upon a rock,
making my steps secure.
3 He put a new song in my mouth,
a song of praise to our God.
Many will see and fear,
and put their trust in the LORD.
4 Happy are those who make
the LORD their trust,
who do not turn to the proud,
to those who go astray after false gods.
5 You have multiplied, O LORD my God,
your wondrous deeds and your thoughts toward us;
none can compare with you.
Were I to proclaim and tell of them,
they would be more than can be counted.
6 Sacrifice and offering you do not desire,
but you have given me an open ear.
Burnt offering and sin offering
you have not required.
7 Then I said, "Here I am;
in the scroll of the book it is written of me.
8 I delight to do your will, O my God;
your law is within my heart."
9 I have told the glad news of deliverance
in the great congregation;
see, I have not restrained my lips,
as you know, O LORD.

1090

PSALMS 1091

10 I have not hidden your saving help within my heart,
I have spoken of your faithfulness and your salvation;
I have not concealed your steadfast love and your faithfulness
from the great congregation.
11 Do not, O LORD, withhold
your mercy from me;
let your steadfast love and your faithfulness
keep me safe forever.
12 For evils have encompassed me
without number;
my iniquities have overtaken me,
until I cannot see;
they are more than the hairs of my head,
and my heart fails me.
13 Be pleased, O LORD, to deliver me;
O LORD, make haste to help me.
14 Let all those be put to shame and confusion
who seek to snatch away my life;
let those be turned back and brought to dishonor
who desire my hurt.
15 Let those be appalled because of their shame
who say to me, "Aha, Aha!"
16 But may all who seek you
rejoice and be glad in you;
may those who love your salvation
say continually, "Great is the LORD!"
17 As for me, I am poor and needy,
but the Lord takes thought for me.
You are my help and my deliverer;
do not delay, O my God.

1091

PSALMS 1092

[Psalm 41]
Prayer for healing
1 Happy are those who consider the poor;
the LORD delivers them in the day of trouble.
2 The LORD protects them and keeps them alive;
they are called happy in the land.
You do not give them up to the will of their enemies.
3 The LORD sustains them on their sickbed;
in their illness you heal all their infirmities.
4 As for me, I said, "O LORD, be gracious to me;
heal me, for I have sinned against you."
5 My enemies wonder in malice
when I will die, and my name perish.
6 And when they come to see me, they utter empty words,
while their hearts gather mischief;
when they go out, they tell it abroad.
7 All who hate me whisper together about me;
they imagine the worst for me.
8 They think that a deadly thing has fastened on me,
that I will not rise again from where I lie.
9 Even my bosom friend in whom I trusted,
who ate of my bread, has lifted the heel against me.
10 But you, O LORD, be gracious to me,
and raise me up, that I may repay them.
11 By this I know that you are pleased with me;
because my enemy has not triumphed over me.
12 But you have upheld me because of my integrity,
and set me in your presence forever.
13 Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel,
from everlasting to everlasting.
Amen and Amen.

1092

PSALMS 1093

BOOK II (PSALMS 42–72)
[Psalm 42]
Thirst for the living God
1 As a deer longs for flowing streams,
so my soul longs for you, O God.
2 My soul thirsts for God,
for the living God.
When shall I come and behold
the face of God?
3 My tears have been my food
day and night,
while people say to me continually,
"Where is your God?"
4 These things I remember,
as I pour out my soul:
how I went with the throng,
and led them in procession to the house of God,
with glad shouts and songs of thanksgiving,
a multitude keeping festival.
5 Why are you cast down, O my soul,
and why are you disquieted within me?
Hope in God; for I shall again praise him,
my help 6 and my God.
My soul is cast down within me;
therefore I remember you
from the land of Jordan and of Hermon,
from Mount Mizar.
7 Deep calls to deep
at the thunder of your cataracts;
all your waves and your billows
have gone over me.
8 By day the LORD commands his steadfast love,
and at night his song is with me,
a prayer to the God of my life.

1093

PSALMS 1094

9 I say to God, my rock,
"Why have you forgotten me?
Why must I walk about mournfully
because the enemy oppresses me?"
10 As with a deadly wound in my body,
my adversaries taunt me,
while they say to me continually,
"Where is your God?"
11 Why are you cast down, O my soul,
and why are you disquieted within me?
Hope in God; for I shall again praise him,
my help and my God.
[Psalm 43]
Thirst for the living God
1 Vindicate me, O God, and defend my cause
against an ungodly people;
from those who are deceitful and unjust
deliver me!
2 For you are the God in whom I take refuge;
why have you cast me off?
Why must I walk about mournfully
because of the oppression of the enemy?
3 O send out your light and your truth;
let them lead me;
let them bring me to your holy hill
and to your dwelling.
4 Then I will go to the altar of God,
to God my exceeding joy;
and I will praise you with the harp,
O God, my God.

1094

PSALMS 1095

5 Why are you cast down, O my soul,
and why are you disquieted within me?
Hope in God; for I shall again praise him,
my help and my God.
[Psalm 44]
Prayer for divine help after a national defeat
1 We have heard with our ears, O God,
our ancestors have told us,
what deeds you performed in their days,
in the days of old:
2 you with your own hand drove out the nations,
but them you planted;
you afflicted the peoples,
but them you set free;
3 for not by their own sword did they win the land,
nor did their own arm give them victory;
but your right hand, and your arm,
and the light of your countenance,
for you delighted in them.
4 You are my King and my God;
you command victories for Jacob.
5 Through you we push down our foes;
through your name we tread down our assailants.
6 For not in my bow do I trust,
nor can my sword save me.
7 But you have saved us from our foes,
and have put to confusion those who hate us.
8 In God we have boasted continually,
and we will give thanks to your name forever.
9 Yet you have rejected us and abased us,
and have not gone out with our armies.
10 You made us turn back from the foe,
and our enemies have gotten spoil.

1095

PSALMS 1096

11 You have made us like sheep for slaughter,
and have scattered us among the nations.
12 You have sold your people for a trifle,
demanding no high price for them.
13 You have made us the taunt of our neighbors,
the derision and scorn of those around us.
14 You have made us a byword among the nations,
a laughingstock among the peoples.
15 All day long my disgrace is before me,
and shame has covered my face
16 at the words of the taunters and revilers,
at the sight of the enemy and the avenger.
17 All this has come upon us,
yet we have not forgotten you,
or been false to your covenant.
18 Our heart has not turned back,
nor have our steps departed from your way,
19 yet you have broken us in the haunt of jackals,
and covered us with deep darkness.
20 If we had forgotten the name of our God,
or spread out our hands to a strange god,
21 would not God discover this?
For he knows the secrets of the heart.
22 Because of you we are being killed all day long,
and accounted as sheep for the slaughter.
23 Rouse yourself! Why do you sleep, O Lord?
Awake, do not cast us off forever!
24 Why do you hide your face?
Why do you forget our affliction and oppression?
25 For we sink down to the dust;
our bodies cling to the ground.
26 Rise up, come to our help.
Redeem us for the sake of your steadfast love.

1096

PSALMS 1097

[Psalm 45]
A royal wedding song
1 My heart overflows with a goodly theme;
I address my verses to the king;
my tongue is like the pen of a ready scribe.
2 You are the most handsome of men;
grace is poured upon your lips;
therefore God has blessed you forever.
3 Gird your sword on your thigh, O mighty one,
in your glory and majesty.
4 In your majesty ride on victoriously
for the cause of truth and to defend the right;
let your right hand teach you dread deeds.
5 Your arrows are sharp
in the heart of the king's enemies;
the peoples fall under you.
6 Your throne, O God, endures forever and ever.
Your royal scepter is a scepter of equity;
7
you love righteousness and hate wickedness.
Therefore God, your God, has anointed you
with the oil of gladness beyond your companions;
8
your robes are all fragrant with myrrh and aloes and cassia.
From ivory palaces stringed instruments make you glad;
9
daughters of kings are among your ladies of honor;
at your right hand stands the queen in gold of Ophir.
10 Hear, O daughter, consider and incline your ear;
forget your people and your father's house,
11
and the king will desire your beauty.
Since he is your lord, bow to him;
12
the people of Tyre will seek your favor with gifts,
the richest of the people 13 with all kinds of wealth.

1097

PSALMS 1098

The princess is decked in her chamber with gold-woven robes;
14
in many-colored robes she is led to the king;
behind her the virgins, her companions, follow.
15 With joy and gladness they are led along
as they enter the palace of the king.
16 In the place of ancestors you, O king, shall have sons;
you will make them princes in all the earth.
17 I will cause your name to be celebrated in all generations;
therefore the peoples will praise you forever and ever.
[Psalm 46]
Praise of Zion and its victorious king
1 God is our refuge and strength,
a very present help in trouble.
2 Therefore we will not fear, though the earth should change,
though the mountains shake in the heart of the sea;
3 though its waters roar and foam,
though the mountains tremble with its tumult.
4 There is a river whose streams make glad the city of God,
the holy habitation of the Most High.
5 God is in the midst of the city; it shall not be moved;
God will help it when the morning dawns.
6 The nations are in an uproar, the kingdoms totter;
he utters his voice, the earth melts.
7 The LORD of hosts is with us;
the God of Jacob is our refuge.
8 Come, behold the works of the LORD;
see what desolations he has brought on the earth.
9 He makes wars cease to the end of the earth;
he breaks the bow, and shatters the spear;
he burns the shields with fire.
10 "Be still, and know that I am God!
I am exalted among the nations,
I am exalted in the earth."

1098

PSALMS 1099

11 The LORD of hosts is with us;
the God of Jacob is our refuge.
[Psalm 47]
God's enthronement
1 Clap your hands, all you peoples;
shout to God with loud songs of joy.
2 For the LORD, the Most High, is awesome,
a great king over all the earth.
3 He subdued peoples under us,
and nations under our feet.
4 He chose our heritage for us,
the pride of Jacob whom he loves.
5 God has gone up with a shout,
the LORD with the sound of a trumpet.
6 Sing praises to God, sing praises;
sing praises to our King, sing praises.
7 For God is the king of all the earth;
sing praises with a psalm.
8 God is king over the nations;
God sits on his holy throne.
9 The princes of the peoples gather
as the people of the God of Abraham.
For the shields of the earth belong to God;
he is highly exalted.
[Psalm 48]
Praise of Zion
1 Great is the LORD and greatly to be praised
in the city of our God.
His holy mountain, 2 beautiful in elevation,
is the joy of all the earth,
Mount Zion, in the far north,
the city of the great King.

1099

PSALMS 1100

3 Within its citadels God
has shown himself a sure defense.
4 Then the kings assembled,
they came on together.
5 As soon as they saw it, they were astounded;
they were in panic, they took to flight;
6 trembling took hold of them there,
pains as of a woman in labor,
7 as when an east wind shatters
the ships of Tarshish.
8 As we have heard, so have we seen
in the city of the LORD of hosts,
in the city of our God,
which God establishes forever.
9 We ponder your steadfast love, O God,
in the midst of your temple.
10 Your name, O God, like your praise,
reaches to the ends of the earth.
Your right hand is filled with victory.
11
Let Mount Zion be glad,
let the towns of Judah rejoice
because of your judgments.
12 Walk about Zion, go all around it,
count its towers,
13 consider well its ramparts;
go through its citadels,
that you may tell the next generation
14
that this is God,
our God forever and ever.
He will be our guide forever.

1100

PSALMS 1101

[Psalm 49]
Transcience of life and wealth
1 Hear this, all you peoples;
give ear, all inhabitants of the world,
2 both low and high,
rich and poor together.
3 My mouth shall speak wisdom;
the meditation of my heart shall be understanding.
4 I will incline my ear to a proverb;
I will solve my riddle to the music of the harp.
5 Why should I fear in times of trouble,
when the iniquity of my persecutors surrounds me,
6 those who trust in their wealth
and boast of the abundance of their riches?
7 Truly, no ransom avails for one's life,
there is no price one can give to God for it.
8 For the ransom of life is costly,
and can never suffice,
9 that one should live on forever
and never see the grave.
10 When we look at the wise, they die;
fool and dolt perish together
and leave their wealth to others.
11 Their graves are their homes forever,
their dwelling places to all generations,
though they named lands their own.
12 Mortals cannot abide in their pomp;
they are like the animals that perish.

1101

PSALMS 1102

13 Such is the fate of the foolhardy,
the end of those who are pleased with their lot.
14 Like sheep they are appointed for Sheol;
Death shall be their shepherd;
straight to the grave they descend,
and their form shall waste away;
Sheol shall be their home.
15 But God will ransom my soul from the power of Sheol,
for he will receive me.
16 Do not be afraid when some become rich,
when the wealth of their houses increases.
17 For when they die they will carry nothing away;
their wealth will not go down after them.
18 Though in their lifetime they count themselves happy
— for you are praised when you do well for yourself —
19 they will go to the company of their ancestors,
who will never again see the light.
20 Mortals cannot abide in their pomp;
they are like the animals that perish.
[Psalm 50]
Theophany of the divine judge
1 The mighty one, God the LORD,
speaks and summons the earth
from the rising of the sun to its setting.
2 Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty,
God shines forth.
3 Our God comes and does not keep silence,
before him is a devouring fire,
and a mighty tempest all around him.
4 He calls to the heavens above
and to the earth, that he may judge his people:
5 "Gather to me my faithful ones,
who made a covenant with me by sacrifice!"

1102

PSALMS 1103

6 The heavens declare his righteousness,
for God himself is judge.
7 "Hear, O my people, and I will speak,
O Israel, I will testify against you.
I am God, your God.
8 Not for your sacrifices do I rebuke you;
your burnt offerings are continually before me.
9 I will not accept a bull from your house,
or goats from your folds.
10 For every wild animal of the forest is mine,
the cattle on a thousand hills.
11 I know all the birds of the air,
and all that moves in the field is mine.
12 "If I were hungry, I would not tell you,
for the world and all that is in it is mine.
13 Do I eat the flesh of bulls,
or drink the blood of goats?
14 Offer to God a sacrifice of thanksgiving,
and pay your vows to the Most High.
15 Call on me in the day of trouble;
I will deliver you, and you shall glorify me."
16 But to the wicked God says:
"What right have you to recite my statutes,
or take my covenant on your lips?
17 For you hate discipline,
and you cast my words behind you.
18 You make friends with a thief when you see one,
and you keep company with adulterers.
19 "You give your mouth free rein for evil,
and your tongue frames deceit.
20 You sit and speak against your kin;
you slander your own mother's child.
21 These things you have done and I have been silent;
you thought that I was one just like yourself.
But now I rebuke you, and lay the charge before you.

1103

PSALMS 1104

22 "Mark this, then, you who forget God,
or I will tear you apart, and there will be no one to deliver.
23 Those who bring thanksgiving as their sacrifice honor me;
to those who go the right way
I will show the salvation of God."
[Psalm 51]
Prayer for forgiveness
1 Have mercy on me, O God,
according to your steadfast love;
according to your abundant mercy
blot out my transgressions.
2 Wash me thoroughly from my iniquity,
and cleanse me from my sin.
3 For I know my transgressions,
and my sin is ever before me.
4 Against you, you alone, have I sinned,
and done what is evil in your sight,
so that you are justified in your sentence
and blameless when you pass judgment.
5 Indeed, I was born guilty,
a sinner when my mother conceived me.
6 You desire truth in the inward being;
therefore teach me wisdom in my secret heart.
7 Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean;
wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
8 Let me hear joy and gladness;
let the bones that you have crushed rejoice.
9 Hide your face from my sins,
and blot out all my iniquities.
10 Create in me a clean heart, O God,
and put a new and right spirit within me.
11 Do not cast me away from your presence,
and do not take your holy spirit from me.

1104

PSALMS 1105

12 Restore to me the joy of your salvation,
and sustain in me a willing spirit.
13 Then I will teach transgressors your ways,
and sinners will return to you.
14 Deliver me from bloodshed, O God,
O God of my salvation,
and my tongue will sing aloud of your deliverance.
15 O Lord, open my lips,
and my mouth will declare your praise.
16 For you have no delight in sacrifice;
if I were to give a burnt offering, you would not be pleased.
17 The sacrifice acceptable to God is a broken spirit;
a broken and contrite heart, O God, you will not despise.
18 Do good to Zion in your good pleasure;
rebuild the walls of Jerusalem,
19 then you will delight in right sacrifices,
in burnt offerings and whole burnt offerings;
then bulls will be offered on your altar.
[Psalm 52]
Divine judgment against an oppressor
1 Why do you boast, O mighty one,
of mischief done against the godly?
All day long 2 you are plotting destruction.
Your tongue is like a sharp razor,
you worker of treachery.
3 You love evil more than good,
and lying more than speaking the truth.
4 You love all words that devour,
O deceitful tongue.
5 But God will break you down forever;
he will snatch and tear you from your tent;
he will uproot you from the land of the living.

1105

PSALMS 1106

6 The righteous will see, and fear,
and will laugh at the evildoer, saying,
7 "See the one who would not take
refuge in God,
but trusted in abundant riches,
and sought refuge in wealth!"
8 But I am like a green olive tree
in the house of God.
I trust in the steadfast love of God
forever and ever.
9 I will thank you forever,
because of what you have done.
In the presence of the faithful
I will proclaim your name, for it is good.
[Psalm 53]
Condemnation of foolish evildoers
1 Fools say in their hearts, "There is no God."
They are corrupt, they commit abominable acts;
there is no one who does good.
2 God looks down from heaven on humankind
to see if there are any who are wise,
who seek after God.
3 They have all fallen away, they are all alike perverse;
there is no one who does good,
no, not one.
4 Have they no knowledge, those evildoers,
who eat up my people as they eat bread,
and do not call upon God?

1106

PSALMS 1107

5 There they shall be in great terror,
in terror such as has not been.
For God will scatter the bones of the ungodly;
they will be put to shame, for God has rejected them.
6 O that deliverance for Israel would come from Zion!
When God restores the fortunes of his people,
Jacob will rejoice; Israel will be glad.
[Psalm 54]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 Save me, O God, by your name,
and vindicate me by your might.
2 Hear my prayer, O God;
give ear to the words of my mouth.
3 For the insolent have risen against me,
the ruthless seek my life;
they do not set God before them.
4 But surely, God is my helper;
the Lord is the upholder of my life.
5 He will repay my enemies for their evil.
In your faithfulness, put an end to them.
6 With a freewill offering I will sacrifice to you;
I will give thanks to your name, O LORD, for it is good.
7 For he has delivered me from every trouble,
and my eye has looked in triumph on my enemies.

1107

PSALMS 1108

[Psalm 55]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 Give ear to my prayer, O God;
do not hide yourself from my supplication.
2 Attend to me, and answer me;
I am troubled in my complaint.
I am distraught 3 by the noise of the enemy,
because of the clamor of the wicked.
For they bring trouble upon me,
and in anger they cherish enmity against me.
4 My heart is in anguish within me,
the terrors of death have fallen upon me.
5 Fear and trembling come upon me,
and horror overwhelms me.
6 And I say, "O that I had wings like a dove!
I would fly away and be at rest;
7 truly, I would flee far away;
I would lodge in the wilderness;
8 I would hurry to find a shelter for myself
from the raging wind and tempest."
9 Confuse, O Lord, confound their speech;
for I see violence and strife in the city.
10 Day and night they go around it
on its walls,
and iniquity and trouble are within it;
11 ruin is in its midst;
oppression and fraud
do not depart from its marketplace.
12 It is not enemies who taunt me —
I could bear that;
it is not adversaries who deal insolently with me —
I could hide from them.

1108

PSALMS 1109

13 But it is you, my equal,
my companion, my familiar friend,
14 with whom I kept pleasant company;
we walked in the house of God with the throng.
15 Let death come upon them;
let them go down alive to Sheol;
for evil is in their homes and in their hearts.
16 But I call upon God,
and the LORD will save me.
17 Evening and morning and at noon
I utter my complaint and moan,
and he will hear my voice.
18 He will redeem me unharmed
from the battle that I wage,
for many are arrayed against me.
19 God, who is enthroned from of old,
will hear, and will humble them —
because they do not change,
and do not fear God.
20 My companion laid hands on a friend
and violated a covenant with me
21 with speech smoother than butter,
but with a heart set on war;
with words that were softer than oil,
but in fact were drawn swords.
22 Cast your burden on the LORD,
and he will sustain you;
he will never permit
the righteous to be moved.
23 But you, O God, will cast them down
into the lowest pit;
the bloodthirsty and treacherous
shall not live out half their days.
But I will trust in you.

1109

PSALMS 1110

[Psalm 56]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 Be gracious to me, O God, for people trample on me;
all day long foes oppress me;
2 my enemies trample on me all day long,
for many fight against me.
O Most High, 3 when I am afraid,
I put my trust in you.
4 In God, whose word I praise,
in God I trust; I am not afraid;
what can flesh do to me?
5 All day long they seek to injure my cause;
all their thoughts are against me for evil.
6 They stir up strife, they lurk,
they watch my steps.
As they hoped to have my life,
7 so repay them for their crime;
in wrath cast down the peoples, O God!
8 You have kept count of my tossings;
put my tears in your bottle.
Are they not in your record?
9 Then my enemies will retreat
in the day when I call.
This I know, that God is for me.
10 In God, whose word I praise,
in the LORD, whose word I praise,
11 in God I trust; I am not afraid.
What can a mere mortal do to me?
12 My vows to you I must perform, O God;
I will render thank offerings to you.
13 For you have delivered my soul from death,
and my feet from falling,
so that I may walk before God
in the light of life.

1110

PSALMS 1111

[Psalm 57]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 Be merciful to me, O God, be merciful to me,
for in you my soul takes refuge;
in the shadow of your wings I will take refuge,
until the destroying storms pass by.
2 I cry to God Most High,
to God who fulfills his purpose for me.
3 He will send from heaven and save me,
he will put to shame those who trample on me.
God will send forth his steadfast love and his faithfulness.
4 I lie down among lions
that greedily devour human prey;
their teeth are spears and arrows,
their tongues sharp swords.
5 Be exalted, O God, above the heavens.
Let your glory be over all the earth.
6 They set a net for my steps;
my soul was bowed down.
They dug a pit in my path,
but they have fallen into it themselves.
7 My heart is steadfast, O God,
my heart is steadfast.
I will sing and make melody.
8
Awake, my soul!
Awake, O harp and lyre!
I will awake the dawn.
9 I will give thanks to you, O Lord, among the peoples;
I will sing praises to you among the nations.
10 For your steadfast love is as high as the heavens;
your faithfulness extends to the clouds.
11 Be exalted, O God, above the heavens.
Let your glory be over all the earth.

1111

PSALMS 1112

[Psalm 58]
A curse upon enemies
1 Do you indeed decree what is right, you gods?
Do you judge people fairly?
2 No, in your hearts you devise wrongs;
your hands deal out violence on earth.
3 The wicked go astray from the womb;
they err from their birth, speaking lies.
4 They have venom like the venom of a serpent,
like the deaf adder that stops its ear,
5 so that it does not hear the voice of charmers
or of the cunning enchanter.
6 O God, break the teeth in their mouths;
tear out the fangs of the young lions, O LORD!
7 Let them vanish like water that runs away;
like grass let them be trodden down and wither.
8 Let them be like the snail that dissolves into slime;
like the untimely birth that never sees the sun.
9 Sooner than your pots can feel the heat of thorns,
whether green or ablaze, may he sweep them away!
10 The righteous will rejoice when they see vengeance done;
they will bathe their feet in the blood of the wicked.
11 People will say, "Surely there is a reward for the righteous;
surely there is a God who judges on earth."
[Psalm 59]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 Deliver me from my enemies, O my God;
protect me from those who rise up against me.
2 Deliver me from those who work evil;
from the bloodthirsty save me.

1112

PSALMS 1113

3 Even now they lie in wait for my life;
the mighty stir up strife against me.
For no transgression or sin of mine, O LORD,
4 for no fault of mine, they run and make ready.
Rouse yourself, come to my help and see!
5
You, LORD God of hosts, are God of Israel.
Awake to punish all the nations;
spare none of those who treacherously plot evil.
6 Each evening they come back,
howling like dogs
and prowling about the city.
7 There they are, bellowing with their mouths,
with sharp words on their lips —
for "Who," they think, "will hear us?"
8 But you laugh at them, O LORD;
you hold all the nations in derision.
9 O my strength, I will watch for you;
for you, O God, are my fortress.
10 My God in his steadfast love will meet me;
my God will let me look in triumph on my enemies.
11 Do not kill them, or my people may forget;
make them totter by your power, and bring them down,
O Lord, our shield.
12 For the sin of their mouths, the words of their lips,
let them be trapped in their pride.
For the cursing and lies that they utter,
13
consume them in wrath;
consume them until they are no more.
Then it will be known to the ends of the earth
that God rules over Jacob.
14 Each evening they come back,
howling like dogs
and prowling about the city.

1113

PSALMS 1114

15 They roam about for food,
and growl if they do not get their fill.
16 But I will sing of your might;
I will sing aloud of your steadfast love in the morning.
For you have been a fortress for me
and a refuge in the day of my distress.
17 O my strength, I will sing praises to you,
for you, O God, are my fortress,
the God who shows me steadfast love.
[Psalm 60]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 O God, you have rejected us, broken our defenses;
you have been angry; now restore us!
2 You have caused the land to quake; you have torn it open;
repair the cracks in it, for it is tottering.
3 You have made your people suffer hard things;
you have given us wine to drink that made us reel.
4 You have set up a banner for those who fear you,
to rally to it out of bowshot.
5 Give victory with your right hand, and answer us,
so that those whom you love may be rescued.
6 God has promised in his sanctuary:
"With exultation I will divide up Shechem,
and portion out the Vale of Succoth.
7 Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine;
Ephraim is my helmet;
Judah is my scepter.
8 Moab is my washbasin;
on Edom I hurl my shoe;
over Philistia I shout in triumph."

1114

PSALMS 1115

9 Who will bring me to the fortified city?
Who will lead me to Edom?
10 Have you not rejected us, O God?
You do not go out, O God, with our armies.
11 O grant us help against the foe,
for human help is worthless.
12 With God we shall do valiantly;
it is he who will tread down our foes.
[Psalm 61]
Protection in the Temple
1 Hear my cry, O God;
listen to my prayer.
2 From the end of the earth I call to you,
when my heart is faint.
Lead me to the rock
that is higher than I;
3 for you are my refuge,
a strong tower against the enemy.
4 Let me abide in your tent forever,
find refuge under the shelter of your wings.
5 For you, O God, have heard my vows;
you have given me the heritage of those who fear your name.
6 Prolong the life of the king;
may his years endure to all generations!
7 May he be enthroned forever before God;
appoint steadfast love and faithfulness to watch over him!
8 So I will always sing praises to your name,
as I pay my vows day after day.

1115

PSALMS 1116

[Psalm 62]
Trust in God
1 For God alone my soul waits in silence;
from him comes my salvation.
2 He alone is my rock and my salvation,
my fortress; I shall never be shaken.
3 How long will you assail a person,
will you batter your victim, all of you,
as you would a leaning wall, a tottering fence?
4 Their only plan is to bring down a person of prominence.
They take pleasure in falsehood;
they bless with their mouths,
but inwardly they curse.
5 For God alone my soul waits in silence,
for my hope is from him.
6 He alone is my rock and my salvation,
my fortress; I shall not be shaken.
7 On God rests my deliverance and my honor;
my mighty rock, my refuge is in God.
8 Trust in him at all times, O people;
pour out your heart before him;
God is a refuge for us.
9 Those of low estate are but a breath,
those of high estate are a delusion;
in the balances they go up;
they are together lighter than a breath.
10 Put no confidence in extortion,
and set no vain hopes on robbery;
if riches increase, do not set your heart on them.

1116

PSALMS 1117

11 Once God has spoken;
twice have I heard this:
that power belongs to God,
12
and steadfast love belongs to you, O Lord.
For you repay to all
according to their work.
[Psalm 63]
Thirsting for God
1 O God, you are my God, I seek you,
my soul thirsts for you;
my flesh faints for you,
as in a dry and weary land where there is no water.
2 So I have looked upon you in the sanctuary,
beholding your power and glory.
3 Because your steadfast love is better than life,
my lips will praise you.
4 So I will bless you as long as I live;
I will lift up my hands and call on your name.
5 My soul is satisfied as with a rich feast,
and my mouth praises you with joyful lips
6 when I think of you on my bed,
and meditate on you in the watches of the night;
7 for you have been my help,
and in the shadow of your wings I sing for joy.
8 My soul clings to you;
your right hand upholds me.
9 But those who seek to destroy my life
shall go down into the depths of the earth;
10 they shall be given over to the power of the sword,
they shall be prey for jackals.
11 But the king shall rejoice in God;
all who swear by him shall exult,
for the mouths of liars will be stopped.

1117

PSALMS 1118

[Psalm 64]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 Hear my voice, O God, in my complaint;
preserve my life from the dread enemy.
2 Hide me from the secret plots of the wicked,
from the scheming of evildoers,
3 who whet their tongues like swords,
who aim bitter words like arrows,
4 shooting from ambush at the blameless;
they shoot suddenly and without fear.
5 They hold fast to their evil purpose;
they talk of laying snares secretly,
thinking, "Who can see us?
6
Who can search out our crimes?
We have thought out a cunningly conceived plot."
For the human heart and mind are deep.
7 But God will shoot his arrow at them;
they will be wounded suddenly.
8 Because of their tongue he will bring them to ruin;
all who see them will shake with horror.
9 Then everyone will fear;
they will tell what God has brought about,
and ponder what he has done.
10 Let the righteous rejoice in the LORD
and take refuge in him.
Let all the upright in heart glory.

1118

PSALMS 1119

[Psalm 65]
Thanksgiving for agricultural bounty
1 Praise is due to you,
O God, in Zion;
and to you shall vows be performed,
2
O you who answer prayer!
To you all flesh shall come.
3 When deeds of iniquity overwhelm us,
you forgive our transgressions.
4 Happy are those whom you choose and bring near
to live in your courts.
We shall be satisfied with the goodness of your house,
your holy temple.
5 By awesome deeds you answer us with deliverance,
O God of our salvation;
you are the hope of all the ends of the earth
and of the farthest seas.
6 By your strength you established the mountains;
you are girded with might.
7 You silence the roaring of the seas,
the roaring of their waves,
the tumult of the peoples.
8 Those who live at earth's farthest
bounds are awed by your signs;
you make the gateways of the
morning and the evening shout for joy.
9 You visit the earth and water it,
you greatly enrich it;
the river of God is full of water;
you provide the people with grain,
for so you have prepared it.
10 You water its furrows abundantly,
settling its ridges,
softening it with showers,
and blessing its growth.

1119

PSALMS 1120

11 You crown the year with your bounty;
your wagon tracks overflow with richness.
12 The pastures of the wilderness overflow,
the hills gird themselves with joy,
13 the meadows clothe themselves with flocks,
the valleys deck themselves with grain,
they shout and sing together for joy.
[Psalm 66]
Praise of God the savior
1 Make a joyful noise to God, all the earth;
2
sing the glory of his name;
give to him glorious praise.
3 Say to God, "How awesome are your deeds!
Because of your great power, your enemies cringe before you.
4 All the earth worships you;
they sing praises to you,
sing praises to your name."
5 Come and see what God has done:
he is awesome in his deeds among mortals.
6 He turned the sea into dry land;
they passed through the river on foot.
There we rejoiced in him,
7
who rules by his might forever,
whose eyes keep watch on the nations —
let the rebellious not exalt themselves.
8 Bless our God, O peoples,
let the sound of his praise be heard,
9 who has kept us among the living,
and has not let our feet slip.
10 For you, O God, have tested us;
you have tried us as silver is tried.
11 You brought us into the net;
you laid burdens on our backs;

1120

PSALMS 1121

12 you let people ride over our heads;
we went through fire and through water;
yet you have brought us out to a spacious place.
13 I will come into your house with burnt offerings;
I will pay you my vows,
14 those that my lips uttered
and my mouth promised when I was in trouble.
15 I will offer to you burnt offerings of fatlings,
with the smoke of the sacrifice of rams;
I will make an offering of bulls and goats.
16 Come and hear, all you who fear God,
and I will tell what he has done for me.
17 I cried aloud to him,
and he was extolled with my tongue.
18 If I had cherished iniquity in my heart,
the Lord would not have listened.
19 But truly God has listened;
he has given heed to the words of my prayer.
20 Blessed be God,
because he has not rejected my prayer
or removed his steadfast love from me.
[Psalm 67]
Thanksgiving for agricultural bounty
1 May God be gracious to us and bless us
and make his face to shine upon us,
2 that your way may be known upon earth,
your saving power among all nations.
3 Let the peoples praise you, O God;
let all the peoples praise you.

1121

PSALMS 1122

4 Let the nations be glad and sing for joy,
for you judge the peoples with equity
and guide the nations upon earth.
5 Let the peoples praise you, O God;
let all the peoples praise you.
6 The earth has yielded its increase;
God, our God, has blessed us.
7 May God continue to bless us;
let all the ends of the earth revere him.
[Psalm 68]
A victory hymn
1 Let God rise up, let his enemies be scattered;
let those who hate him flee before him.
2 As smoke is driven away, so drive them away;
as wax melts before the fire,
let the wicked perish before God.
3 But let the righteous be joyful;
let them exult before God;
let them be jubilant with joy.
4 Sing to God, sing praises to his name;
lift up a song to him who rides upon the clouds —
his name is the LORD —
be exultant before him.
5 Father of orphans and protector of widows
is God in his holy habitation.
6 God gives the desolate a home to live in;
he leads out the prisoners to prosperity,
but the rebellious live in a parched land.
7 O God, when you went out before your people,
when you marched through the wilderness,

1122

PSALMS 1123

8 the earth quaked, the heavens poured down rain
at the presence of God, the God of Sinai,
at the presence of God, the God of Israel.
9 Rain in abundance, O God, you showered abroad;
you restored your heritage when it languished;
10 your flock found a dwelling in it;
in your goodness, O God, you provided for the needy.
11 The Lord gives the command;
great is the company of those who bore the tidings:
12
"The kings of the armies, they flee, they flee!"
The women at home divide the spoil,
13
though they stay among the sheepfolds —
the wings of a dove covered with silver,
its pinions with green gold.
14 When the Almighty scattered kings there,
snow fell on Zalmon.
15 O mighty mountain, mountain of Bashan;
O many-peaked mountain, mountain of Bashan!
16 Why do you look with envy, O many-peaked mountain,
at the mount that God desired for his abode,
where the LORD will reside forever?
17 With mighty chariotry, twice ten thousand,
thousands upon thousands,
the Lord came from Sinai into the holy place.
18 You ascended the high mount,
leading captives in your train
and receiving gifts from people,
even from those who rebel against the LORD God's abiding there.
19 Blessed be the Lord,
who daily bears us up;
God is our salvation.
20 Our God is a God of salvation,
and to GOD, the Lord, belongs escape from death.

1123

PSALMS 1124

21 But God will shatter the heads of his enemies,
the hairy crown of those who walk in their guilty ways.
22 The Lord said,
"I will bring them back from Bashan,
I will bring them back from the depths of the sea,
23 so that you may bathe your feet in blood,
so that the tongues of your dogs may have their share
from the foe."
24 Your solemn processions are seen, O God,
the processions of my God, my King, into the sanctuary —
25 the singers in front, the musicians last,
between them girls playing tambourines:
26 "Bless God in the great congregation,
the LORD, O you who are of Israel's fountain!"
27 There is Benjamin, the least of them, in the lead,
the princes of Judah in a body,
the princes of Zebulun, the princes of Naphtali.
28 Summon your might, O God;
show your strength, O God, as you have done for us before.
29 Because of your temple at Jerusalem
kings bear gifts to you.
30 Rebuke the wild animals that live among the reeds,
the herd of bulls with the calves of the peoples.
Trample under foot those who lust after tribute;
scatter the peoples who delight in war.
31 Let bronze be brought from Egypt;
let Ethiopia hasten to stretch out its hands to God.
32 Sing to God, O kingdoms of the earth;
sing praises to the Lord,
33 O rider in the heavens, the ancient heavens;
listen, he sends out his voice, his mighty voice.
34 Ascribe power to God,
whose majesty is over Israel;
and whose power is in the skies.

1124

PSALMS 1125

35 Awesome is God in his sanctuary,
the God of Israel;
he gives power and strength to his people.
Blessed be God!
[Psalm 69]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 Save me, O God,
for the waters have come up to my neck.
2 I sink in deep mire,
where there is no foothold;
I have come into deep waters,
and the flood sweeps over me.
3 I am weary with my crying;
my throat is parched.
My eyes grow dim
with waiting for my God.
4 More in number than the hairs of my head
are those who hate me without cause;
many are those who would destroy me,
my enemies who accuse me falsely.
What I did not steal
must I now restore?
5 O God, you know my folly;
the wrongs I have done are not hidden from you.
6 Do not let those who hope in you be put to shame because of me,
O Lord GOD of hosts;
do not let those who seek you be dishonored because of me,
O God of Israel.
7 It is for your sake that I have borne reproach,
that shame has covered my face.
8 I have become a stranger to my kindred,
an alien to my mother's children.

1125

PSALMS 1126

9 It is zeal for your house that has consumed me;
the insults of those who insult you have fallen on me.
10 When I humbled my soul with fasting,
they insulted me for doing so.
11 When I made sackcloth my clothing,
I became a byword to them.
12 I am the subject of gossip for those who sit in the gate,
and the drunkards make songs about me.
13 But as for me, my prayer is to you, O LORD.
At an acceptable time, O God,
in the abundance of your steadfast love, answer me.
With your faithful help 14 rescue me
from sinking in the mire;
let me be delivered from my enemies
and from the deep waters.
15 Do not let the flood sweep over me,
or the deep swallow me up,
or the Pit close its mouth over me.
16 Answer me, O LORD, for your steadfast love is good;
according to your abundant mercy, turn to me.
17 Do not hide your face from your servant,
for I am in distress — make haste to answer me.
18 Draw near to me, redeem me,
set me free because of my enemies.
19 You know the insults I receive,
and my shame and dishonor;
my foes are all known to you.
20 Insults have broken my heart,
so that I am in despair.
I looked for pity, but there was none;
and for comforters, but I found none.
21 They gave me poison for food,
and for my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.

1126

PSALMS 1127

22 Let their table be a trap for them,
a snare for their allies.
23 Let their eyes be darkened so that they cannot see,
and make their loins tremble continually.
24 Pour out your indignation upon them,
and let your burning anger overtake them.
25 May their camp be a desolation;
let no one live in their tents.
26 For they persecute those whom you have struck down,
and those whom you have wounded, they attack still more.
27 Add guilt to their guilt;
may they have no acquittal from you.
28 Let them be blotted out of the book of the living;
let them not be enrolled among the righteous.
29 But I am lowly and in pain;
let your salvation, O God, protect me.
30 I will praise the name of God with a song;
I will magnify him with thanksgiving.
31 This will please the LORD more than an ox
or a bull with horns and hoofs.
32 Let the oppressed see it and be glad;
you who seek God, let your hearts revive.
33 For the LORD hears the needy,
and does not despise his own that are in bonds.
34 Let heaven and earth praise him,
the seas and everything that moves in them.
35 For God will save Zion
and rebuild the cities of Judah;
and his servants shall live there and possess it;
36 the children of his servants shall inherit it,
and those who love his name shall live in it.

1127

PSALMS 1128

[Psalm 70]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 Be pleased, O God, to deliver me.
O LORD, make haste to help me!
2 Let those be put to shame and confusion
who seek my life.
Let those be turned back and brought to dishonor
who desire to hurt me.
3 Let those who say, "Aha, Aha!"
turn back because of their shame.
4 Let all who seek you
rejoice and be glad in you.
Let those who love your salvation
say evermore, "God is great!"
5 But I am poor and needy;
hasten to me, O God!
You are my help and my deliverer;
O LORD, do not delay!
[Psalm 71]
Prayer in old age
1 In you, O LORD, I take refuge;
let me never be put to shame.
2 In your righteousness deliver me and rescue me;
incline your ear to me and save me.
3 Be to me a rock of refuge,
a strong fortress, to save me,
for you are my rock and my fortress.
4 Rescue me, O my God, from the hand of the wicked,
from the grasp of the unjust and cruel.
5 For you, O Lord, are my hope,
my trust, O LORD, from my youth.

1128

PSALMS 1129

6 Upon you I have leaned from my birth;
it was you who took me from my mother's womb.
My praise is continually of you.
7 I have been like a portent to many,
but you are my strong refuge.
8 My mouth is filled with your praise,
and with your glory all day long.
9 Do not cast me off in the time of old age;
do not forsake me when my strength is spent.
10 For my enemies speak concerning me,
and those who watch for my life consult together.
11 They say, "Pursue and seize that person
whom God has forsaken,
for there is no one to deliver."
12 O God, do not be far from me;
O my God, make haste to help me!
13 Let my accusers be put to shame and consumed;
let those who seek to hurt me
be covered with scorn and disgrace.
14 But I will hope continually,
and will praise you yet more and more.
15 My mouth will tell of your righteous acts,
of your deeds of salvation all day long,
though their number is past my knowledge.
16 I will come praising the mighty deeds of the Lord GOD,
I will praise your righteousness, yours alone.
17 O God, from my youth you have taught me,
and I still proclaim your wondrous deeds.
18 So even to old age and gray hairs,
O God, do not forsake me,
until I proclaim your might
to all the generations to come.
Your power 19 and your righteousness, O God,
reach the high heavens.

1129

PSALMS 1130

You who have done great things,
O God, who is like you?
20 You who have made me see many troubles and calamities
will revive me again;
from the depths of the earth
you will bring me up again.
21 You will increase my honor,
and comfort me once again.
22 I will also praise you with the harp
for your faithfulness, O my God;
I will sing praises to you with the lyre,
O Holy One of Israel.
23 My lips will shout for joy
when I sing praises to you;
my soul also, which you have rescued.
24 All day long my tongue will talk of your righteous help,
for those who tried to do me harm
have been put to shame, and disgraced.
[Psalm 72]
The Davidic king and the dynasty
1 Give the king your justice, O God,
and your righteousness to a king's son.
2 May he judge your people with righteousness,
and your poor with justice.
3 May the mountains yield prosperity for the people,
and the hills, in righteousness.
4 May he defend the cause of the poor of the people,
give deliverance to the needy,
and crush the oppressor.
5 May he live while the sun endures,
and as long as the moon, throughout all generations.
6 May he be like rain that falls on the mown grass,
like showers that water the earth.

1130

PSALMS 1131

7 In his days may righteousness flourish
and peace abound, until the moon is no more.
8 May he have dominion from sea to sea,
and from the River to the ends of the earth.
9 May his foes bow down before him,
and his enemies lick the dust.
10 May the kings of Tarshish and of the isles
render him tribute,
may the kings of Sheba and Seba
bring gifts.
11 May all kings fall down before him,
all nations give him service.
12 For he delivers the needy when they call,
the poor and those who have no helper.
13 He has pity on the weak and the needy,
and saves the lives of the needy.
14 From oppression and violence he redeems their life;
and precious is their blood in his sight.
15 Long may he live!
May gold of Sheba be given to him.
May prayer be made for him continually,
and blessings invoked for him all day long.
16 May there be abundance of grain in the land;
may it wave on the tops of the mountains;
may its fruit be like Lebanon;
and may people blossom in the cities
like the grass of the field.
17 May his name endure forever,
his fame continue as long as the sun.
May all nations be blessed in him;
may they pronounce him happy.

1131

PSALMS 1132

18 Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel,
who alone does wondrous things.
19 Blessed be his glorious name forever;
may his glory fill the whole earth.
Amen and Amen.
20 The prayers of David son of Jesse are ended.
BOOK III (PSALMS 73–89)
[Psalm 73]
A meditation on the justice of God
1 Truly God is good to the upright,
to those who are pure in heart.
2 But as for me, my feet had almost stumbled;
my steps had nearly slipped.
3 For I was envious of the arrogant;
I saw the prosperity of the wicked.
4 For they have no pain;
their bodies are sound and sleek.
5 They are not in trouble as others are;
they are not plagued like other people.
6 Therefore pride is their necklace;
violence covers them like a garment.
7 Their eyes swell out with fatness;
their hearts overflow with follies.
8 They scoff and speak with malice;
loftily they threaten oppression.
9 They set their mouths against heaven,
and their tongues range over the earth.
10 Therefore the people turn and praise them,
and find no fault in them.
11 And they say, "How can God know?
Is there knowledge in the Most High?"

1132

PSALMS 1133

12 Such are the wicked;
always at ease, they increase in riches.
13 All in vain I have kept my heart clean
and washed my hands in innocence.
14 For all day long I have been plagued,
and am punished every morning.
15 If I had said, "I will talk on in this way,"
I would have been untrue to the circle of your children.
16 But when I thought how to understand this,
it seemed to me a wearisome task,
17 until I went into the sanctuary of God;
then I perceived their end.
18 Truly you set them in slippery places;
you make them fall to ruin.
19 How they are destroyed in a moment,
swept away utterly by terrors!
20 They are like a dream when one awakes;
on awaking you despise their phantoms.
21 When my soul was embittered,
when I was pricked in heart,
22 I was stupid and ignorant;
I was like a brute beast toward you.
23 Nevertheless I am continually with you;
you hold my right hand.
24 You guide me with your counsel,
and afterward you will receive me with honor.
25 Whom have I in heaven but you?
And there is nothing on earth that I desire other than you.
26 My flesh and my heart may fail,
but God is the strength of my heart and my portion forever.
27 Indeed, those who are far from you will perish;
you put an end to those who are false to you.
28 But for me it is good to be near God;
I have made the Lord GOD my refuge,
to tell of all your works.

1133

PSALMS 1134

[Psalm 74]
Zion attacked, the Temple destroyed
1 O God, why do you cast us off forever?
Why does your anger smoke against the sheep of your pasture?
2 Remember your congregation, which you acquired long ago,
which you redeemed to be the tribe of your heritage.
Remember Mount Zion, where you came to dwell.
3 Direct your steps to the perpetual ruins;
the enemy has destroyed everything in the sanctuary.
4 Your foes have roared within your holy place;
they set up their emblems there.
5 At the upper entrance they hacked
the wooden trellis with axes.
6 And then, with hatchets and hammers,
they smashed all its carved work.
7 They set your sanctuary on fire;
they desecrated the dwelling place of your name,
bringing it to the ground.
8 They said to themselves, "We will utterly subdue them";
they burned all the meeting places of God in the land.
9 We do not see our emblems;
there is no longer any prophet,
and there is no one among us who knows how long.
10 How long, O God, is the foe to scoff?
Is the enemy to revile your name forever?
11 Why do you hold back your hand;
why do you keep your hand in your bosom?
12 Yet God my King is from of old,
working salvation in the earth.
13 You divided the sea by your might;
you broke the heads of the dragons in the waters.
14 You crushed the heads of Leviathan;
you gave him as food for the creatures of the wilderness.

1134

PSALMS 1135

15 You cut openings for springs and torrents;
you dried up ever-flowing streams.
16 Yours is the day, yours also the night;
you established the luminaries and the sun.
17 You have fixed all the bounds of the earth;
you made summer and winter.
18 Remember this, O LORD, how the enemy scoffs,
and an impious people reviles your name.
19 Do not deliver the soul of your dove to the wild animals;
do not forget the life of your poor forever.
20 Have regard for your covenant,
for the dark places of the land are
full of the haunts of violence.
21 Do not let the downtrodden be put to shame;
let the poor and needy praise your name.
22 Rise up, O God, plead your cause;
remember how the impious scoff at you all day long.
23 Do not forget the clamor of your foes,
the uproar of your adversaries that goes up continually.
[Psalm 75]
Thanksgiving for divine victory over evil
1 We give thanks to you, O God;
we give thanks; your name is near.
People tell of your wondrous deeds.
2 At the set time that I appoint
I will judge with equity.
3 When the earth totters, with all its inhabitants,
it is I who keep its pillars steady.
4 I say to the boastful, "Do not boast,"
and to the wicked, "Do not lift up your horn;
5 do not lift up your horn on high,
or speak with insolent neck."

1135

PSALMS 1136

6 For not from the east or from the west
and not from the wilderness comes lifting up;
7 but it is God who executes judgment,
putting down one and lifting up another.
8 For in the hand of the LORD there is a cup
with foaming wine, well mixed;
he will pour a draught from it,
and all the wicked of the earth
shall drain it down to the dregs.
9 But I will rejoice forever;
I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.
10 All the horns of the wicked I will cut off,
but the horns of the righteous shall be exalted.
[Psalm 76]
Praise of Zion
1 In Judah God is known,
his name is great in Israel.
2 His abode has been established in Salem,
his dwelling place in Zion.
3 There he broke the flashing arrows,
the shield, the sword, and the weapons of war.
4 Glorious are you, more majestic
than the everlasting mountains.
5 The stouthearted were stripped of their spoil;
they sank into sleep;
none of the troops
was able to lift a hand.
6 At your rebuke, O God of Jacob,
both rider and horse lay stunned.

1136

PSALMS 1137

7 But you indeed are awesome!
Who can stand before you
when once your anger is roused?
8 From the heavens you uttered judgment;
the earth feared and was still
9 when God rose up to establish judgment,
to save all the oppressed of the earth.
10 Human wrath serves only to praise you,
when you bind the last bit of your wrath around you.
11 Make vows to the LORD your God, and perform them;
let all who are around him bring gifts
to the one who is awesome,
12 who cuts off the spirit of princes,
who inspires fear in the kings of the earth.
[Psalm 77]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 I cry aloud to God,
aloud to God, that he may hear me.
2 In the day of my trouble I seek the Lord;
in the night my hand is stretched out without wearying;
my soul refuses to be comforted.
3 I think of God, and I moan;
I meditate, and my spirit faints.
4 You keep my eyelids from closing;
I am so troubled that I cannot speak.
5 I consider the days of old,
and remember the years of long ago.
6 I commune with my heart in the night;
I meditate and search my spirit:
7 "Will the Lord spurn forever,
and never again be favorable?
8 Has his steadfast love ceased forever?
Are his promises at an end for all time?

1137

PSALMS 1138

9 Has God forgotten to be gracious?
Has he in anger shut up his compassion?"
10 And I say, "It is my grief
that the right hand of the Most High has changed."
11 I will call to mind the deeds of the LORD;
I will remember your wonders of old.
12 I will meditate on all your work,
and muse on your mighty deeds.
13 Your way, O God, is holy.
What god is so great as our God?
14 You are the God who works wonders;
you have displayed your might among the peoples.
15 With your strong arm you redeemed your people,
the descendants of Jacob and Joseph.
16 When the waters saw you, O God,
when the waters saw you, they were afraid;
the very deep trembled.
17 The clouds poured out water;
the skies thundered;
your arrows flashed on every side.
18 The crash of your thunder was in the whirlwind;
your lightnings lit up the world;
the earth trembled and shook.
19 Your way was through the sea,
your path, through the mighty waters;
yet your footprints were unseen.
20 You led your people like a flock
by the hand of Moses and Aaron.
[Psalm 78]
Israel's rebellion in the wilderness
1 Give ear, O my people, to my teaching;
incline your ears to the words of my mouth.
2 I will open my mouth in a parable;
I will utter dark sayings from of old,

1138

PSALMS 1139

3 things that we have heard and known,
that our ancestors have told us.
4 We will not hide them from their children;
we will tell to the coming generation
the glorious deeds of the LORD, and his might,
and the wonders that he has done.
5 He established a decree in Jacob,
and appointed a law in Israel,
which he commanded our ancestors
to teach to their children;
6 that the next generation might know them,
the children yet unborn,
and rise up and tell them to their children,
7
so that they should set their hope in God,
and not forget the works of God,
but keep his commandments;
8 and that they should not be like their ancestors,
a stubborn and rebellious generation,
a generation whose heart was not steadfast,
whose spirit was not faithful to God.
9 The Ephraimites, armed with the bow,
turned back on the day of battle.
10 They did not keep God's covenant,
but refused to walk according to his law.
11 They forgot what he had done,
and the miracles that he had shown them.
12 In the sight of their ancestors he worked marvels
in the land of Egypt, in the fields of Zoan.
13 He divided the sea and let them pass through it,
and made the waters stand like a heap.
14 In the daytime he led them with a cloud,
and all night long with a fiery light.
15 He split rocks open in the wilderness,
and gave them drink abundantly as from the deep.
16 He made streams come out of the rock,
and caused waters to flow down like rivers.

1139

PSALMS 1140

17 Yet they sinned still more against him,
rebelling against the Most High in the desert.
18 They tested God in their heart
by demanding the food they craved.
19 They spoke against God, saying,
"Can God spread a table in the wilderness?
20 Even though he struck the rock so that water gushed out
and torrents overflowed,
can he also give bread,
or provide meat for his people?"
21 Therefore, when the LORD heard, he was full of rage;
a fire was kindled against Jacob,
his anger mounted against Israel,
22 because they had no faith in God,
and did not trust his saving power.
23 Yet he commanded the skies above,
and opened the doors of heaven;
24 he rained down on them manna to eat,
and gave them the grain of heaven.
25 Mortals ate of the bread of angels;
he sent them food in abundance.
26 He caused the east wind to blow in the heavens,
and by his power he led out the south wind;
27 he rained flesh upon them like dust,
winged birds like the sand of the seas;
28 he let them fall within their camp,
all around their dwellings.
29 And they ate and were well filled,
for he gave them what they craved.
30 But before they had satisfied their craving,
while the food was still in their mouths,
31 the anger of God rose against them
and he killed the strongest of them,
and laid low the flower of Israel.
32 In spite of all this they still sinned;
they did not believe in his wonders.

1140

PSALMS 1141

33 So he made their days vanish like a breath,
and their years in terror.
34 When he killed them, they sought for him;
they repented and sought God earnestly.
35 They remembered that God was their rock,
the Most High God their redeemer.
36 But they flattered him with their mouths;
they lied to him with their tongues.
37 Their heart was not steadfast toward him;
they were not true to his covenant.
38 Yet he, being compassionate,
forgave their iniquity,
and did not destroy them;
often he restrained his anger,
and did not stir up all his wrath.
39 He remembered that they were but flesh,
a wind that passes and does not come again.
40 How often they rebelled against him in the wilderness
and grieved him in the desert!
41 They tested God again and again,
and provoked the Holy One of Israel.
42 They did not keep in mind his power,
or the day when he redeemed them from the foe;
43 when he displayed his signs in Egypt,
and his miracles in the fields of Zoan.
44 He turned their rivers to blood,
so that they could not drink of their streams.
45 He sent among them swarms of flies, which devoured them,
and frogs, which destroyed them.
46 He gave their crops to the caterpillar,
and the fruit of their labor to the locust.
47 He destroyed their vines with hail,
and their sycamores with frost.
48 He gave over their cattle to the hail,
and their flocks to thunderbolts.
49 He let loose on them his fierce anger,
wrath, indignation, and distress,
a company of destroying angels.

1141

PSALMS 1142

50 He made a path for his anger;
he did not spare them from death,
but gave their lives over to the plague.
51 He struck all the firstborn in Egypt,
the first issue of their strength in the tents of Ham.
52 Then he led out his people like sheep,
and guided them in the wilderness like a flock.
53 He led them in safety, so that they were not afraid;
but the sea overwhelmed their enemies.
54 And he brought them to his holy hill,
to the mountain that his right hand had won.
55 He drove out nations before them;
he apportioned them for a possession
and settled the tribes of Israel in their tents.
56 Yet they tested the Most High God,
and rebelled against him.
They did not observe his decrees,
57 but turned away and were faithless like their ancestors;
they twisted like a treacherous bow.
58 For they provoked him to anger with their high places;
they moved him to jealousy with their idols.
59 When God heard, he was full of wrath,
and he utterly rejected Israel.
60 He abandoned his dwelling at Shiloh,
the tent where he dwelt among mortals,
61 and delivered his power to captivity,
his glory to the hand of the foe.
62 He gave his people to the sword,
and vented his wrath on his heritage.
63 Fire devoured their young men,
and their girls had no marriage song.
64 Their priests fell by the sword,
and their widows made no lamentation.
65 Then the Lord awoke as from sleep,
like a warrior shouting because of wine.
66 He put his adversaries to rout;
he put them to everlasting disgrace.

1142

PSALMS 1143

67 He rejected the tent of Joseph,
he did not choose the tribe of Ephraim;
68 but he chose the tribe of Judah,
Mount Zion, which he loves.
69 He built his sanctuary like the high heavens,
like the earth, which he has founded forever.
70 He chose his servant David,
and took him from the sheepfolds;
71 from tending the nursing ewes he brought him
to be the shepherd of his people Jacob,
of Israel, his inheritance.
72 With upright heart he tended them,
and guided them with skillful hand.
[Psalm 79]
The Temple destroyed
1 O God, the nations have come into your inheritance;
they have defiled your holy temple;
they have laid Jerusalem in ruins.
2 They have given the bodies of your servants
to the birds of the air for food,
the flesh of your faithful to the wild animals of the earth.
3 They have poured out their blood like water
all around Jerusalem,
and there was no one to bury them.
4 We have become a taunt to our neighbors,
mocked and derided by those around us.
5 How long, O LORD? Will you be angry forever?
Will your jealous wrath burn like fire?
6 Pour out your anger on the nations
that do not know you,
and on the kingdoms
that do not call on your name.
7 For they have devoured Jacob
and laid waste his habitation.

1143

PSALMS 1144

8 Do not remember against us the iniquities of our ancestors;
let your compassion come speedily to meet us,
for we are brought very low.
9 Help us, O God of our salvation,
for the glory of your name;
deliver us, and forgive our sins,
for your name's sake.
10 Why should the nations say,
"Where is their God?"
Let the avenging of the outpoured blood of your servants
be known among the nations before our eyes.
11 Let the groans of the prisoners come before you;
according to your great power preserve those doomed to die.
12 Return sevenfold into the bosom of our neighbors
the taunts with which they taunted you, O Lord!
13 Then we your people, the flock of your pasture,
will give thanks to you forever;
from generation to generation we will recount your praise.
[Psalm 80]
Prayer for deliverance from national enemies
1 Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel,
you who lead Joseph like a flock!
You who are enthroned upon the cherubim, shine forth
2
before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh.
Stir up your might,
and come to save us!
3 Restore us, O God;
let your face shine, that we may be saved.
4 O LORD God of hosts,
how long will you be angry with your people's prayers?
5 You have fed them with the bread of tears,
and given them tears to drink in full measure.

1144

PSALMS 1145

6 You make us the scorn of our neighbors;
our enemies laugh among themselves.
7 Restore us, O God of hosts;
let your face shine, that we may be saved.
8 You brought a vine out of Egypt;
you drove out the nations and planted it.
9 You cleared the ground for it;
it took deep root and filled the land.
10 The mountains were covered with its shade,
the mighty cedars with its branches;
11 it sent out its branches to the sea,
and its shoots to the River.
12 Why then have you broken down its walls,
so that all who pass along the way pluck its fruit?
13 The boar from the forest ravages it,
and all that move in the field feed on it.
14 Turn again, O God of hosts;
look down from heaven, and see;
have regard for this vine,
15 the stock that your right hand planted.
16 They have burned it with fire, they have cut it down;
may they perish at the rebuke of your countenance.
17 But let your hand be upon the one at your right hand,
the one whom you made strong for yourself.
18 Then we will never turn back from you;
give us life, and we will call on your name.
19 Restore us, O LORD God of hosts;
let your face shine, that we may be saved.

1145

PSALMS 1146

[Psalm 81]
A hymn for the feast of booths
1 Sing aloud to God our strength;
shout for joy to the God of Jacob.
2 Raise a song, sound the tambourine,
the sweet lyre with the harp.
3 Blow the trumpet at the new moon,
at the full moon, on our festal day.
4 For it is a statute for Israel,
an ordinance of the God of Jacob.
5 He made it a decree in Joseph,
when he went out over the land of Egypt.
I hear a voice I had not known:
6 "I relieved your shoulder of the burden;
your hands were freed from the basket.
7 In distress you called, and I rescued you;
I answered you in the secret place of thunder;
I tested you at the waters of Meribah.
8 Hear, O my people, while I admonish you;
O Israel, if you would but listen to me!
9 There shall be no strange god among you;
you shall not bow down to a foreign god.
10 I am the LORD your God,
who brought you up out of the land of Egypt.
Open your mouth wide and I will fill it.
11 "But my people did not listen to my voice;
Israel would not submit to me.
12 So I gave them over to their stubborn hearts,
to follow their own counsels.
13 O that my people would listen to me,
that Israel would walk in my ways!
14 Then I would quickly subdue their enemies,
and turn my hand against their foes.

1146

PSALMS 1147

15 Those who hate the LORD would cringe before him,
and their doom would last forever.
16 I would feed you with the finest of the wheat,
and with honey from the rock I would satisfy you."
[Psalm 82]
A vision of the divine judge
1 God has taken his place in the divine council;
in the midst of the gods he holds judgment:
2 "How long will you judge unjustly
and show partiality to the wicked?
3 Give justice to the weak and the orphan;
maintain the right of the lowly and the destitute.
4 Rescue the weak and the needy;
deliver them from the hand of the wicked."
5 They have neither knowledge nor understanding,
they walk around in darkness;
all the foundations of the earth are shaken.
6 I say, "You are gods,
children of the Most High, all of you;
7 nevertheless, you shall die like mortals,
and fall like any prince."
8 Rise up, O God, judge the earth;
for all the nations belong to you!
[Psalm 83]
Prayer for deliverance from national enemies
1 O God, do not keep silence;
do not hold your peace or be still, O God!
2 Even now your enemies are in tumult;
those who hate you have raised their heads.
3 They lay crafty plans against your people;
they consult together against those you protect.

1147

PSALMS 1148

4 They say, "Come, let us wipe them out as a nation;
let the name of Israel be remembered no more."
5 They conspire with one accord;
against you they make a covenant —
6 the tents of Edom and the Ishmaelites,
Moab and the Hagrites,
7 Gebal and Ammon and Amalek,
Philistia with the inhabitants of Tyre;
8 Assyria also has joined them;
they are the strong arm of the children of Lot.
9 Do to them as you did to Midian,
as to Sisera and Jabin at the Wadi Kishon,
10 who were destroyed at En-dor,
who became dung for the ground.
11 Make their nobles like Oreb and Zeeb,
all their princes like Zebah and Zalmunna,
12 who said, "Let us take the pastures of God
for our own possession."
13 O my God, make them like whirling dust,
like chaff before the wind.
14 As fire consumes the forest,
as the flame sets the mountains ablaze,
15 so pursue them with your tempest
and terrify them with your hurricane.
16 Fill their faces with shame,
so that they may seek your name, O LORD.
17 Let them be put to shame and dismayed forever;
let them perish in disgrace.
18 Let them know that you alone,
whose name is the LORD,
are the Most High over all the earth.

1148

PSALMS 1149

[Psalm 84]
Pilgrimage to Zion
1 How lovely is your dwelling place,
O LORD of hosts!
2 My soul longs, indeed it faints
for the courts of the LORD;
my heart and my flesh sing for joy
to the living God.
3 Even the sparrow finds a home,
and the swallow a nest for herself,
where she may lay her young,
at your altars, O LORD of hosts,
my King and my God.
4 Happy are those who live in your house,
ever singing your praise.
5 Happy are those whose strength is in you,
in whose heart are the highways to Zion.
6 As they go through the valley of Baca
they make it a place of springs;
the early rain also covers it with pools.
7 They go from strength to strength;
the God of gods will be seen in Zion.
8 O LORD God of hosts, hear my prayer;
give ear, O God of Jacob!
9 Behold our shield, O God;
look on the face of your anointed.
10 For a day in your courts is better
than a thousand elsewhere.
I would rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God
than live in the tents of wickedness.

1149

PSALMS 1150

11 For the LORD God is a sun and shield;
he bestows favor and honor.
No good thing does the LORD withhold
from those who walk uprightly.
12 O LORD of hosts,
happy is everyone who trusts in you.
[Psalm 85]
Prayer for divine favor and blessing
1 LORD, you were favorable to your land;
you restored the fortunes of Jacob.
2 You forgave the iniquity of your people;
you pardoned all their sin.
3 You withdrew all your wrath;
you turned from your hot anger.
4 Restore us again, O God of our salvation,
and put away your indignation toward us.
5 Will you be angry with us forever?
Will you prolong your anger to all generations?
6 Will you not revive us again,
so that your people may rejoice in you?
7 Show us your steadfast love, O LORD,
and grant us your salvation.
8 Let me hear what God the LORD will speak,
for he will speak peace to his people,
to his faithful, to those who turn to him in their hearts.
9 Surely his salvation is at hand for those who fear him,
that his glory may dwell in our land.
10 Steadfast love and faithfulness will meet;
righteousness and peace will kiss each other.
11 Faithfulness will spring up from the ground,
and righteousness will look down from the sky.

1150

PSALMS 1151

12 The LORD will give what is good,
and our land will yield its increase.
13 Righteousness will go before him,
and will make a path for his steps.
[Psalm 86]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 Incline your ear, O LORD, and answer me,
for I am poor and needy.
2 Preserve my life, for I am devoted to you;
save your servant who trusts in you.
You are my God; 3 be gracious to me, O Lord,
for to you do I cry all day long.
4 Gladden the soul of your servant,
for to you, O Lord, I lift up my soul.
5 For you, O Lord, are good and forgiving,
abounding in steadfast love to all who call on you.
6 Give ear, O LORD, to my prayer;
listen to my cry of supplication.
7 In the day of my trouble I call on you,
for you will answer me.
8 There is none like you among the gods, O Lord,
nor are there any works like yours.
9 All the nations you have made shall come
and bow down before you, O Lord,
and shall glorify your name.
10 For you are great and do wondrous things;
you alone are God.
11 Teach me your way, O LORD,
that I may walk in your truth;
give me an undivided heart to revere your name.
12 I give thanks to you, O Lord my God, with my whole heart,
and I will glorify your name forever.
13 For great is your steadfast love toward me;
you have delivered my soul from the depths of Sheol.

1151

PSALMS 1152

14 O God, the insolent rise up against me;
a band of ruffians seeks my life,
and they do not set you before them.
15 But you, O Lord, are a God merciful and gracious,
slow to anger and abounding in steadfast love and faithfulness.
16 Turn to me and be gracious to me;
give your strength to your servant;
save the child of your serving girl.
17 Show me a sign of your favor,
so that those who hate me may see it and be put to shame,
because you, LORD, have helped me and comforted me.
[Psalm 87]
Praise of Zion
1 On the holy mount stands the city he founded;
2
the LORD loves the gates of Zion
more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
3 Glorious things are spoken of you,
O city of God.
4 Among those who know me I mention Rahab and Babylon;
Philistia too, and Tyre, with Ethiopia —
"This one was born there," they say.
5 And of Zion it shall be said,
"This one and that one were born in it";
for the Most High himself will establish it.
6 The LORD records, as he registers the peoples,
"This one was born there."
7 Singers and dancers alike say,
"All my springs are in you."

1152

PSALMS 1153

[Psalm 88]
A Job-like lament
1 O LORD, God of my salvation,
when, at night, I cry out in your presence,
2 let my prayer come before you;
incline your ear to my cry.
3 For my soul is full of troubles,
and my life draws near to Sheol.
4 I am counted among those who go down to the Pit;
I am like those who have no help,
5 like those forsaken among the dead,
like the slain that lie in the grave,
like those whom you remember no more,
for they are cut off from your hand.
6 You have put me in the depths of the Pit,
in the regions dark and deep.
7 Your wrath lies heavy upon me,
and you overwhelm me with all your waves.
8 You have caused my companions to shun me;
you have made me a thing of horror to them.
I am shut in so that I cannot escape;
9
my eye grows dim through sorrow.
Every day I call on you, O LORD;
I spread out my hands to you.
10 Do you work wonders for the dead?
Do the shades rise up to praise you?
11 Is your steadfast love declared in the grave,
or your faithfulness in Abaddon?
12 Are your wonders known in the darkness,
or your saving help in the land of forgetfulness?
13 But I, O LORD, cry out to you;
in the morning my prayer comes before you.
14 O LORD, why do you cast me off?
Why do you hide your face from me?

1153

PSALMS 1154

15 Wretched and close to death from my youth up,
I suffer your terrors; I am desperate.
16 Your wrath has swept over me;
your dread assaults destroy me.
17 They surround me like a flood all day long;
from all sides they close in on me.
18 You have caused friend and neighbor to shun me;
my companions are in darkness.
[Psalm 89]
The king defeated, the dynasty at an end
1 I will sing of your steadfast love, O LORD, forever;
with my mouth I will proclaim your faithfulness
to all generations.
2 I declare that your steadfast love is established forever;
your faithfulness is as firm as the heavens.
3 You said, "I have made a covenant with my chosen one,
I have sworn to my servant David:
4 'I will establish your descendants forever,
and build your throne for all generations.'"
5 Let the heavens praise your wonders, O LORD,
your faithfulness in the assembly of the holy ones.
6 For who in the skies can be compared to the LORD?
Who among the heavenly beings is like the LORD,
7 a God feared in the council of the holy ones,
great and awesome above all that are around him?
8 O LORD God of hosts,
who is as mighty as you, O LORD?
Your faithfulness surrounds you.
9 You rule the raging of the sea;
when its waves rise, you still them.
10 You crushed Rahab like a carcass;
you scattered your enemies with your mighty arm.
11 The heavens are yours, the earth also is yours;
the world and all that is in it — you have founded them.

1154

PSALMS 1155

12 The north and the south — you created them;
Tabor and Hermon joyously praise your name.
13 You have a mighty arm;
strong is your hand, high your right hand.
14 Righteousness and justice are the foundation of your throne;
steadfast love and faithfulness go before you.
15 Happy are the people who know the festal shout,
who walk, O LORD, in the light of your countenance;
16 they exult in your name all day long,
and extol your righteousness.
17 For you are the glory of their strength;
by your favor our horn is exalted.
18 For our shield belongs to the LORD,
our king to the Holy One of Israel.
19 Then you spoke in a vision to your faithful one, and said:
"I have set the crown on one who is mighty,
I have exalted one chosen from the people.
20 I have found my servant David;
with my holy oil I have anointed him;
21 my hand shall always remain with him;
my arm also shall strengthen him.
22 The enemy shall not outwit him,
the wicked shall not humble him.
23 I will crush his foes before him
and strike down those who hate him.
24 My faithfulness and steadfast love shall be with him;
and in my name his horn shall be exalted.
25 I will set his hand on the sea
and his right hand on the rivers.
26 He shall cry to me, 'You are my Father,
my God, and the Rock of my salvation!'
27 I will make him the firstborn,
the highest of the kings of the earth.
28 Forever I will keep my steadfast love for him,
and my covenant with him will stand firm.
29 I will establish his line forever,
and his throne as long as the heavens endure.

1155

PSALMS 1156

30 If his children forsake my law
and do not walk according to my ordinances,
31 if they violate my statutes
and do not keep my commandments,
32 then I will punish their transgression with the rod
and their iniquity with scourges;
33 but I will not remove from him my steadfast love,
or be false to my faithfulness.
34 I will not violate my covenant,
or alter the word that went forth from my lips.
35 Once and for all I have sworn by my holiness;
I will not lie to David.
36 His line shall continue forever,
and his throne endure before me like the sun.
37 It shall be established forever like the moon,
an enduring witness in the skies."
38 But now you have spurned and rejected him;
you are full of wrath against your anointed.
39 You have renounced the covenant with your servant;
you have defiled his crown in the dust.
40 You have broken through all his walls;
you have laid his strongholds in ruins.
41 All who pass by plunder him;
he has become the scorn of his neighbors.
42 You have exalted the right hand of his foes;
you have made all his enemies rejoice.
43 Moreover, you have turned back the edge of his sword,
and you have not supported him in battle.
44 You have removed the scepter from his hand,
and hurled his throne to the ground.
45 You have cut short the days of his youth;
you have covered him with shame.
46 How long, O LORD? Will you hide yourself forever?
How long will your wrath burn like fire?
47 Remember how short my time is —
for what vanity you have created all mortals!

1156

PSALMS 1157

48 Who can live and never see death?
Who can escape the power of Sheol?
49 Lord, where is your steadfast love of old,
which by your faithfulness you swore to David?
50 Remember, O Lord, how your servant is taunted;
how I bear in my bosom the insults of the peoples,
51 with which your enemies taunt, O LORD,
with which they taunted the footsteps of your anointed.
52 Blessed be the LORD forever.
Amen and Amen.

BOOK IV (PSALMS 90–106)
[Psalm 90]
The eternity of God and the brevity of human life
1 Lord, you have been our dwelling place
in all generations.
2 Before the mountains were brought forth,
or ever you had formed the earth and the world,
from everlasting to everlasting you are God.
3 You turn us back to dust,
and say, "Turn back, you mortals."
4 For a thousand years in your sight
are like yesterday when it is past,
or like a watch in the night.
5 You sweep them away; they are like a dream,
like grass that is renewed in the morning;
6 in the morning it flourishes and is renewed;
in the evening it fades and withers.
7 For we are consumed by your anger;
by your wrath we are overwhelmed.

1157

PSALMS 1158

8 You have set our iniquities before you,
our secret sins in the light of your countenance.
9 For all our days pass away under your wrath;
our years come to an end like a sigh.
10 The days of our life are seventy years,
or perhaps eighty, if we are strong;
even then their span is only toil and trouble;
they are soon gone, and we fly away.
11 Who considers the power of your anger?
Your wrath is as great as the fear that is due you.
12 So teach us to count our days
that we may gain a wise heart.
13 Turn, O LORD! How long?
Have compassion on your servants!
14 Satisfy us in the morning with your steadfast love,
so that we may rejoice and be glad all our days.
15 Make us glad as many days as you have afflicted us,
and as many years as we have seen evil.
16 Let your work be manifest to your servants,
and your glorious power to their children.
17 Let the favor of the Lord our God be upon us,
and prosper for us the work of our hands —
O prosper the work of our hands!
[Psalm 91]
God the protector from demonic foes
1 You who live in the shelter of the Most High,
who abide in the shadow of the Almighty,
2 will say to the LORD, "My refuge and my fortress;
my God, in whom I trust."
3 For he will deliver you from the snare of the fowler
and from the deadly pestilence;

1158

PSALMS 1159

4 he will cover you with his pinions,
and under his wings you will find refuge;
his faithfulness is a shield and buckler.
5 You will not fear the terror of the night,
or the arrow that flies by day,
6 or the pestilence that stalks in darkness,
or the destruction that wastes at noonday.
7 A thousand may fall at your side,
ten thousand at your right hand,
but it will not come near you.
8 You will only look with your eyes
and see the punishment of the wicked.
9 Because you have made the LORD your refuge,
the Most High your dwelling place,
10 no evil shall befall you,
no scourge come near your tent.
11 For he will command his angels concerning you
to guard you in all your ways.
12 On their hands they will bear you up,
so that you will not dash your foot against a stone.
13 You will tread on the lion and the adder,
the young lion and the serpent you will trample under foot.
14 Those who love me, I will deliver;
I will protect those who know my name.
15 When they call to me, I will answer them;
I will be with them in trouble,
I will rescue them and honor them.
16 With long life I will satisfy them,
and show them my salvation.

1159

PSALMS 1160

[Psalm 92]
Thanksgiving for deliverance from enemies
1 It is good to give thanks to the LORD,
to sing praises to your name, O Most High;
2 to declare your steadfast love in the morning,
and your faithfulness by night,
3 to the music of the lute and the harp,
to the melody of the lyre.
4 For you, O LORD, have made me glad by your work;
at the works of your hands I sing for joy.
5 How great are your works, O LORD!
Your thoughts are very deep!
6 The dullard cannot know,
the stupid cannot understand this:
7 though the wicked sprout like grass
and all evildoers flourish,
they are doomed to destruction forever,
8
but you, O LORD, are on high forever.
9 For your enemies, O LORD,
for your enemies shall perish;
all evildoers shall be scattered.
10 But you have exalted my horn like that of the wild ox;
you have poured over me fresh oil.
11 My eyes have seen the downfall of my enemies;
my ears have heard the doom of my evil assailants.
12 The righteous flourish like the palm tree,
and grow like a cedar in Lebanon.
13 They are planted in the house of the LORD;
they flourish in the courts of our God.
14 In old age they still produce fruit;
they are always green and full of sap,
15 showing that the LORD is upright;
he is my rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him.

1160

PSALMS 1161

[Psalm 93]
The LORD's Enthronement
1 The LORD is king, he is robed in majesty;
the LORD is robed, he is girded with strength.
He has established the world; it shall never be moved;
2
your throne is established from of old;
you are from everlasting.
3 The floods have lifted up, O LORD,
the floods have lifted up their voice;
the floods lift up their roaring.
4 More majestic than the thunders of mighty waters,
more majestic than the waves of the sea,
majestic on high is the LORD!
5 Your decrees are very sure;
holiness befits your house,
O LORD, forevermore.
[Psalm 94]
Prayer for deliverance from evildoers
1 O LORD, you God of vengeance,
you God of vengeance, shine forth!
2 Rise up, O judge of the earth;
give to the proud what they deserve!
3 O LORD, how long shall the wicked,
how long shall the wicked exult?
4 They pour out their arrogant words;
all the evildoers boast.
5 They crush your people, O LORD,
and afflict your heritage.
6 They kill the widow and the stranger,
they murder the orphan,
7 and they say, "The LORD does not see;
the God of Jacob does not perceive."

1161

PSALMS 1162

8 Understand, O dullest of the people;
fools, when will you be wise?
9 He who planted the ear, does he not hear?
He who formed the eye, does he not see?
10 He who disciplines the nations,
he who teaches knowledge to humankind,
does he not chastise?
11 The LORD knows our thoughts,
that they are but an empty breath.
12 Happy are those whom you discipline, O LORD,
and whom you teach out of your law,
13 giving them respite from days of trouble,
until a pit is dug for the wicked.
14 For the LORD will not forsake his people;
he will not abandon his heritage;
15 for justice will return to the righteous,
and all the upright in heart will follow it.
16 Who rises up for me against the wicked?
Who stands up for me against evildoers?
17 If the LORD had not been my help,
my soul would soon have lived in the land of silence.
18 When I thought, "My foot is slipping,"
your steadfast love, O LORD, held me up.
19 When the cares of my heart are many,
your consolations cheer my soul.
20 Can wicked rulers be allied with you,
those who contrive mischief by statute?
21 They band together against the life of the righteous,
and condemn the innocent to death.
22 But the LORD has become my stronghold,
and my God the rock of my refuge.
23 He will repay them for their iniquity
and wipe them out for their wickedness;
the LORD our God will wipe them out.

1162

PSALMS 1163

[Psalm 95]
God's kingship
1 O come, let us sing to the LORD;
let us make a joyful noise to the rock of our salvation!
2 Let us come into his presence with thanksgiving;
let us make a joyful noise to him with songs of praise!
3 For the LORD is a great God,
and a great King above all gods.
4 In his hand are the depths of the earth;
the heights of the mountains are his also.
5 The sea is his, for he made it,
and the dry land, which his hands have formed.
6 O come, let us worship and bow down,
let us kneel before the LORD, our Maker!
7 For he is our God,
and we are the people of his pasture,
and the sheep of his hand.
O that today you would listen to his voice!
8
Do not harden your hearts, as at Meribah,
as on the day at Massah in the wilderness,
9 when your ancestors tested me,
and put me to the proof, though they had seen my work.
10 For forty years I loathed that generation
and said, "They are a people whose hearts go astray,
and they do not regard my ways."
11 Therefore in my anger I swore,
"They shall not enter my rest."
[Psalm 96]
The LORD's enthronement
1 O sing to the LORD a new song;
sing to the LORD, all the earth.
2 Sing to the LORD, bless his name;
tell of his salvation from day to day.

1163

PSALMS 1164

3 Declare his glory among the nations,
his marvelous works among all the peoples.
4 For great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised;
he is to be revered above all gods.
5 For all the gods of the peoples are idols,
but the LORD made the heavens.
6 Honor and majesty are before him;
strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.
7 Ascribe to the LORD, O families of the peoples,
ascribe to the LORD glory and strength.
8 Ascribe to the LORD the glory due his name;
bring an offering, and come into his courts.
9 Worship the LORD in holy splendor;
tremble before him, all the earth.
10 Say among the nations, "The LORD is king!
The world is firmly established; it shall never be moved.
He will judge the peoples with equity."
11 Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice;
let the sea roar, and all that fills it;
12
let the field exult, and everything in it.
Then shall all the trees of the forest sing for joy
13
before the LORD; for he is coming,
for he is coming to judge the earth.
He will judge the world with righteousness,
and the peoples with his truth.
[Psalm 97]
The LORD's enthronement
1 The LORD is king! Let the earth rejoice;
let the many coastlands be glad!
2 Clouds and thick darkness are all around him;
righteousness and justice are the foundation of his throne.
3 Fire goes before him,
and consumes his adversaries on every side.
4 His lightnings light up the world;
the earth sees and trembles.

1164

PSALMS 1165

5 The mountains melt like wax before the LORD,
before the Lord of all the earth.
6 The heavens proclaim his righteousness;
and all the peoples behold his glory.
7 All worshipers of images are put to shame,
those who make their boast in worthless idols;
all gods bow down before him.
8 Zion hears and is glad,
and the towns of Judah rejoice,
because of your judgments, O God.
9 For you, O LORD, are most high over all the earth;
you are exalted far above all gods.
10 The LORD loves those who hate evil;
he guards the lives of his faithful;
he rescues them from the hand of the wicked.
11 Light dawns for the righteous,
and joy for the upright in heart.
12 Rejoice in the LORD, O you righteous,
and give thanks to his holy name!
[Psalm 98]
God's kingship
1 O sing to the LORD a new song,
for he has done marvelous things.
His right hand and his holy arm
have gotten him victory.
2 The LORD has made known his victory;
he has revealed his vindication in the sight of the nations.
3 He has remembered his steadfast love and faithfulness
to the house of Israel.
All the ends of the earth have seen
the victory of our God.

1165

PSALMS 1166

4 Make a joyful noise to the LORD, all the earth;
break forth into joyous song and sing praises.
5 Sing praises to the LORD with the lyre,
with the lyre and the sound of melody.
6 With trumpets and the sound of the horn
make a joyful noise before the King, the LORD.
7 Let the sea roar, and all that fills it;
the world and those who live in it.
8 Let the floods clap their hands;
let the hills sing together for joy
9 at the presence of the LORD, for he is coming
to judge the earth.
He will judge the world with righteousness,
and the peoples with equity.
[Psalm 99]
The LORD's enthronement
1 The LORD is king; let the peoples tremble!
He sits enthroned upon the cherubim; let the earth quake!
2 The LORD is great in Zion;
he is exalted over all the peoples.
3 Let them praise your great and awesome name.
Holy is he!
4 Mighty King, lover of justice,
you have established equity;
you have executed justice
and righteousness in Jacob.
5 Extol the LORD our God;
worship at his footstool.
Holy is he!
6 Moses and Aaron were among his priests,
Samuel also was among those who called on his name.
They cried to the LORD, and he answered them.

1166

PSALMS 1167

7 He spoke to them in the pillar of cloud;
they kept his decrees,
and the statutes that he gave them.
8 O LORD our God, you answered them;
you were a forgiving God to them,
but an avenger of their wrongdoings.
9 Extol the LORD our God,
and worship at his holy mountain;
for the LORD our God is holy.
[Psalm 100]
Praise of God from the nations
1 Make a joyful noise to the LORD, all the earth.
2
Worship the LORD with gladness;
come into his presence with singing.
3 Know that the LORD is God.
It is he that made us, and we are his;
we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.
4 Enter his gates with thanksgiving,
and his courts with praise.
Give thanks to him, bless his name.
5 For the LORD is good;
his steadfast love endures forever,
and his faithfulness to all generations.
[Psalm 101]
The king as wise ruler
1 I will sing of loyalty and of justice;
to you, O LORD, I will sing.
2 I will study the way that is blameless.
When shall I attain it?

1167

PSALMS 1168

I will walk with integrity of heart
within my house;
3 I will not set before my eyes
anything that is base.
I hate the work of those who fall away;
it shall not cling to me.
4 Perverseness of heart shall be far from me;
I will know nothing of evil.
5 One who secretly slanders a neighbor
I will destroy.
A haughty look and an arrogant heart
I will not tolerate.
6 I will look with favor on the faithful in the land,
so that they may live with me;
whoever walks in the way that is blameless
shall minister to me.
7 No one who practices deceit
shall remain in my house;
no one who utters lies
shall continue in my presence.
8 Morning by morning I will destroy
all the wicked in the land,
cutting off all evildoers
from the city of the LORD.
[Psalm 102]
Prayer for personal and national restoration
1 Hear my prayer, O LORD;
let my cry come to you.
2 Do not hide your face from me
in the day of my distress.
Incline your ear to me;
answer me speedily in the day when I call.

1168

PSALMS 1169

3 For my days pass away like smoke,
and my bones burn like a furnace.
4 My heart is stricken and withered like grass;
I am too wasted to eat my bread.
5 Because of my loud groaning
my bones cling to my skin.
6 I am like an owl of the wilderness,
like a little owl of the waste places.
7 I lie awake;
I am like a lonely bird on the housetop.
8 All day long my enemies taunt me;
those who deride me use my name for a curse.
9 For I eat ashes like bread,
and mingle tears with my drink,
10 because of your indignation and anger;
for you have lifted me up and thrown me aside.
11 My days are like an evening shadow;
I wither away like grass.
12 But you, O LORD, are enthroned forever;
your name endures to all generations.
13 You will rise up and have compassion on Zion,
for it is time to favor it;
the appointed time has come.
14 For your servants hold its stones dear,
and have pity on its dust.
15 The nations will fear the name of the LORD,
and all the kings of the earth your glory.
16 For the LORD will build up Zion;
he will appear in his glory.
17 He will regard the prayer of the destitute,
and will not despise their prayer.
18 Let this be recorded for a generation to come,
so that a people yet unborn may praise the LORD:
19 that he looked down from his holy height,
from heaven the LORD looked at the earth,

1169

PSALMS 1170

20 to hear the groans of the prisoners,
to set free those who were doomed to die;
21 so that the name of the LORD may be declared in Zion,
and his praise in Jerusalem,
22 when peoples gather together,
and kingdoms, to worship the LORD.
23 He has broken my strength in midcourse;
he has shortened my days.
24 "O my God," I say, "do not take me away
at the midpoint of my life,
you whose years endure
throughout all generations."
25 Long ago you laid the foundation of the earth,
and the heavens are the work of your hands.
26 They will perish, but you endure;
they will all wear out like a garment.
You change them like clothing, and they pass away;
27
but you are the same, and your years have no end.
28 The children of your servants shall live secure;
their offspring shall be established in your presence.
[Psalm 103]
Praise of the savior God
1 Bless the LORD, O my soul,
and all that is within me,
bless his holy name.
2 Bless the LORD, O my soul,
and do not forget all his benefits —
3 who forgives all your iniquity,
who heals all your diseases,
4 who redeems your life from the Pit,
who crowns you with steadfast love and mercy,
5 who satisfies you with good as long as you live
so that your youth is renewed like the eagle's.

1170

PSALMS 1171

6 The LORD works vindication
and justice for all who are oppressed.
7 He made known his ways to Moses,
his acts to the people of Israel.
8 The LORD is merciful and gracious,
slow to anger and abounding in steadfast love.
9 He will not always accuse,
nor will he keep his anger forever.
10 He does not deal with us according to our sins,
nor repay us according to our iniquities.
11 For as the heavens are high above the earth,
so great is his steadfast love toward those who fear him;
12 as far as the east is from the west,
so far he removes our transgressions from us.
13 As a father has compassion for his children,
so the LORD has compassion for those who fear him.
14 For he knows how we were made;
he remembers that we are dust.
15 As for mortals, their days are like grass;
they flourish like a flower of the field;
16 for the wind passes over it, and it is gone,
and its place knows it no more.
17 But the steadfast love of the LORD is from everlasting to everlasting
on those who fear him,
and his righteousness to children's children,
18 to those who keep his covenant
and remember to do his commandments.
19 The LORD has established his throne in the heavens,
and his kingdom rules over all.
20 Bless the LORD, O you his angels,
you mighty ones who do his bidding,
obedient to his spoken word.
21 Bless the LORD, all his hosts,
his ministers that do his will.
22 Bless the LORD, all his works,
in all places of his dominion.
Bless the LORD, O my soul.

1171

PSALMS 1172

[Psalm 104]
God the creator and sustainer
1 Bless the LORD, O my soul.
O LORD my God, you are very great.
You are clothed with honor and majesty,
2
wrapped in light as with a garment.
You stretch out the heavens like a tent,
3
you set the beams of your chambers on the waters,
you make the clouds your chariot,
you ride on the wings of the wind,
4 you make the winds your messengers,
fire and flame your ministers.
5 You set the earth on its foundations,
so that it shall never be shaken.
6 You cover it with the deep as with a garment;
the waters stood above the mountains.
7 At your rebuke they flee;
at the sound of your thunder they take to flight.
8 They rose up to the mountains, ran down to the valleys
to the place that you appointed for them.
9 You set a boundary that they may not pass,
so that they might not again cover the earth.
10 You make springs gush forth in the valleys;
they flow between the hills,
11 giving drink to every wild animal;
the wild asses quench their thirst.
12 By the streams the birds of the air have their habitation;
they sing among the branches.
13 From your lofty abode you water the mountains;
the earth is satisfied with the fruit of your work.

1172

PSALMS 1173

14 You cause the grass to grow for the cattle,
and plants for people to use,
to bring forth food from the earth,
15
and wine to gladden the human heart,
oil to make the face shine,
and bread to strengthen the human heart.
16 The trees of the LORD are watered abundantly,
the cedars of Lebanon that he planted.
17 In them the birds build their nests;
the stork has its home in the fir trees.
18 The high mountains are for the wild goats;
the rocks are a refuge for the coneys.
19 You have made the moon to mark the seasons;
the sun knows its time for setting.
20 You make darkness, and it is night,
when all the animals of the forest come creeping out.
21 The young lions roar for their prey,
seeking their food from God.
22 When the sun rises, they withdraw
and lie down in their dens.
23 People go out to their work
and to their labor until the evening.
24 O LORD, how manifold are your works!
In wisdom you have made them all;
the earth is full of your creatures.
25 Yonder is the sea, great and wide,
creeping things innumerable are there,
living things both small and great.
26 There go the ships,
and Leviathan that you formed to sport in it.
27 These all look to you
to give them their food in due season;
28 when you give to them, they gather it up;
when you open your hand, they are filled with good things.

1173

PSALMS 1174

29 When you hide your face, they are dismayed;
when you take away their breath, they die
and return to their dust.
30 When you send forth your spirit, they are created;
and you renew the face of the ground.
31 May the glory of the LORD endure forever;
may the LORD rejoice in his works —
32 who looks on the earth and it trembles,
who touches the mountains and they smoke.
33 I will sing to the LORD as long as I live;
I will sing praise to my God while I have being.
34 May my meditation be pleasing to him,
for I rejoice in the LORD.
35 Let sinners be consumed from the earth,
and let the wicked be no more.
Bless the LORD, O my soul.
Praise the LORD!
[Psalm 105]
Recital of God's saving acts for Israel
1 O give thanks to the LORD, call on his name,
make known his deeds among the peoples.
2 Sing to him, sing praises to him;
tell of all his wonderful works.
3 Glory in his holy name;
let the hearts of those who seek the LORD rejoice.
4 Seek the LORD and his strength;
seek his presence continually.
5 Remember the wonderful works he has done,
his miracles, and the judgments he has uttered,
6 O offspring of his servant Abraham,
children of Jacob, his chosen ones.

1174

PSALMS 1175

7 He is the LORD our God;
his judgments are in all the earth.
8 He is mindful of his covenant forever,
of the word that he commanded, for a thousand generations,
9 the covenant that he made with Abraham,
his sworn promise to Isaac,
10 which he confirmed to Jacob as a statute,
to Israel as an everlasting covenant,
11 saying, "To you I will give the land of Canaan
as your portion for an inheritance."
12 When they were few in number,
of little account, and strangers in it,
13 wandering from nation to nation,
from one kingdom to another people,
14 he allowed no one to oppress them;
he rebuked kings on their account,
15 saying, "Do not touch my anointed ones;
do my prophets no harm."
16 When he summoned famine against the land,
and broke every staff of bread,
17 he had sent a man ahead of them,
Joseph, who was sold as a slave.
18 His feet were hurt with fetters,
his neck was put in a collar of iron;
19 until what he had said came to pass,
the word of the LORD kept testing him.
20 The king sent and released him;
the ruler of the peoples set him free.
21 He made him lord of his house,
and ruler of all his possessions,
22 to instruct his officials at his pleasure,
and to teach his elders wisdom.

1175

PSALMS 1176

23 Then Israel came to Egypt;
Jacob lived as an alien in the land of Ham.
24 And the LORD made his people very fruitful,
and made them stronger than their foes,
25 whose hearts he then turned to hate his people,
to deal craftily with his servants.
26 He sent his servant Moses,
and Aaron whom he had chosen.
27 They performed his signs among them,
and miracles in the land of Ham.
28 He sent darkness, and made the land dark;
they rebelled against his words.
29 He turned their waters into blood,
and caused their fish to die.
30 Their land swarmed with frogs,
even in the chambers of their kings.
31 He spoke, and there came swarms of flies,
and gnats throughout their country.
32 He gave them hail for rain,
and lightning that flashed through their land.
33 He struck their vines and fig trees,
and shattered the trees of their country.
34 He spoke, and the locusts came,
and young locusts without number;
35 they devoured all the vegetation in their land,
and ate up the fruit of their ground.
36 He struck down all the firstborn in their land,
the first issue of all their strength.
37 Then he brought Israel out with silver and gold,
and there was no one among their tribes who stumbled.
38 Egypt was glad when they departed,
for dread of them had fallen upon it.
39 He spread a cloud for a covering,
and fire to give light by night.

1176

PSALMS 1177

40 They asked, and he brought quails,
and gave them food from heaven in abundance.
41 He opened the rock, and water gushed out;
it flowed through the desert like a river.
42 For he remembered his holy promise,
and Abraham, his servant.
43 So he brought his people out with joy,
his chosen ones with singing.
44 He gave them the lands of the nations,
and they took possession of the wealth of the peoples,
45 that they might keep his statutes
and observe his laws.
Praise the LORD!
[Psalm 106]
Confession of national sin
1 Praise the LORD!
O give thanks to the LORD, for he is good;
for his steadfast love endures forever.
2 Who can utter the mighty doings of the LORD,
or declare all his praise?
3 Happy are those who observe justice,
who do righteousness at all times.
4 Remember me, O LORD, when you show favor to your people;
help me when you deliver them;
5 that I may see the prosperity of your chosen ones,
that I may rejoice in the gladness of your nation,
that I may glory in your heritage.
6 Both we and our ancestors have sinned;
we have committed iniquity, have done wickedly.
7 Our ancestors, when they were in Egypt,
did not consider your wonderful works;
they did not remember the abundance of your steadfast love,
but rebelled against the Most High at the Red Sea.
8 Yet he saved them for his name's sake,
so that he might make known his mighty power.

1177

PSALMS 1178

9 He rebuked the Red Sea, and it became dry;
he led them through the deep as through a desert.
10 So he saved them from the hand of the foe,
and delivered them from the hand of the enemy.
11 The waters covered their adversaries;
not one of them was left.
12 Then they believed his words;
they sang his praise.
13 But they soon forgot his works;
they did not wait for his counsel.
14 But they had a wanton craving in the wilderness,
and put God to the test in the desert;
15 he gave them what they asked,
but sent a wasting disease among them.
16 They were jealous of Moses in the camp,
and of Aaron, the holy one of the LORD.
17 The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan,
and covered the faction of Abiram.
18 Fire also broke out in their company;
the flame burned up the wicked.
19 They made a calf at Horeb
and worshiped a cast image.
20 They exchanged the glory of God
for the image of an ox that eats grass.
21 They forgot God, their Savior,
who had done great things in Egypt,
22 wondrous works in the land of Ham,
and awesome deeds by the Red Sea.
23 Therefore he said he would destroy them —
had not Moses, his chosen one,
stood in the breach before him,
to turn away his wrath from destroying them.

1178

PSALMS 1179

24 Then they despised the pleasant land,
having no faith in his promise.
25 They grumbled in their tents,
and did not obey the voice of the LORD.
26 Therefore he raised his hand and swore to them
that he would make them fall in the wilderness,
27 and would disperse their descendants among the nations,
scattering them over the lands.
28 Then they attached themselves to the Baal of Peor,
and ate sacrifices offered to the dead;
29 they provoked the LORD to anger with their deeds,
and a plague broke out among them.
30 Then Phinehas stood up and interceded,
and the plague was stopped.
31 And that has been reckoned to him as righteousness
from generation to generation forever.
32 They angered the LORD at the waters of Meribah,
and it went ill with Moses on their account;
33 for they made his spirit bitter,
and he spoke words that were rash.
34 They did not destroy the peoples,
as the LORD commanded them,
35 but they mingled with the nations
and learned to do as they did.
36 They served their idols,
which became a snare to them.
37 They sacrificed their sons
and their daughters to the demons;
38 they poured out innocent blood,
the blood of their sons and daughters,
whom they sacrificed to the idols of Canaan;
and the land was polluted with blood.
39 Thus they became unclean by their acts,
and prostituted themselves in their doings.
40 Then the anger of the LORD was kindled against his people,
and he abhorred his heritage;

1179

PSALMS 1180

41 he gave them into the hand of the nations,
so that those who hated them ruled over them.
42 Their enemies oppressed them,
and they were brought into subjection under their power.
43 Many times he delivered them,
but they were rebellious in their purposes,
and were brought low through their iniquity.
44 Nevertheless he regarded their distress
when he heard their cry.
45 For their sake he remembered his covenant,
and showed compassion according to the abundance
of his steadfast love.
46 He caused them to be pitied
by all who held them captive.
47 Save us, O LORD our God,
and gather us from among the nations,
that we may give thanks to your holy name
and glory in your praise.
48 Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel,
from everlasting to everlasting.
And let all the people say, "Amen."
Praise the LORD!

BOOK V (PSALMS 107–150)
[Psalm 107]
Thanksgiving for return from exile
1 O give thanks to the LORD, for he is good;
for his steadfast love endures forever.
2 Let the redeemed of the LORD say so,
those he redeemed from trouble
3 and gathered in from the lands,
from the east and from the west,
from the north and from the south.

1180

PSALMS 1181

4 Some wandered in desert wastes,
finding no way to an inhabited town;
5 hungry and thirsty,
their soul fainted within them.
6 Then they cried to the LORD in their trouble,
and he delivered them from their distress;
7 he led them by a straight way,
until they reached an inhabited town.
8 Let them thank the LORD for his steadfast love,
for his wonderful works to humankind.
9 For he satisfies the thirsty,
and the hungry he fills with good things.
10 Some sat in darkness and in gloom,
prisoners in misery and in irons,
11 for they had rebelled against the words of God,
and spurned the counsel of the Most High.
12 Their hearts were bowed down with hard labor;
they fell down, with no one to help.
13 Then they cried to the LORD in their trouble,
and he saved them from their distress;
14 he brought them out of darkness and gloom,
and broke their bonds asunder.
15 Let them thank the LORD for his steadfast love,
for his wonderful works to humankind.
16 For he shatters the doors of bronze,
and cuts in two the bars of iron.
17 Some were sick through their sinful ways,
and because of their iniquities endured affliction;
18 they loathed any kind of food,
and they drew near to the gates of death.
19 Then they cried to the LORD in their trouble,
and he saved them from their distress;
20 he sent out his word and healed them,
and delivered them from destruction.
21 Let them thank the LORD for his steadfast love,
for his wonderful works to humankind.

1181

PSALMS 1182

22 And let them offer thanksgiving sacrifices,
and tell of his deeds with songs of joy.
23 Some went down to the sea in ships,
doing business on the mighty waters;
24 they saw the deeds of the LORD,
his wondrous works in the deep.
25 For he commanded and raised the stormy wind,
which lifted up the waves of the sea.
26 They mounted up to heaven, they went down to the depths;
their courage melted away in their calamity;
27 they reeled and staggered like drunkards,
and were at their wits' end.
28 Then they cried to the LORD in their trouble,
and he brought them out from their distress;
29 he made the storm be still,
and the waves of the sea were hushed.
30 Then they were glad because they had quiet,
and he brought them to their desired haven.
31 Let them thank the LORD for his steadfast love,
for his wonderful works to humankind.
32 Let them extol him in the congregation of the people,
and praise him in the assembly of the elders.
33 He turns rivers into a desert,
springs of water into thirsty ground,
34 a fruitful land into a salty waste,
because of the wickedness of its inhabitants.
35 He turns a desert into pools of water,
a parched land into springs of water.
36 And there he lets the hungry live,
and they establish a town to live in;
37 they sow fields, and plant vineyards,
and get a fruitful yield.
38 By his blessing they multiply greatly,
and he does not let their cattle decrease.

1182

PSALMS 1183

39 When they are diminished and brought low
through oppression, trouble, and sorrow,
40 he pours contempt on princes
and makes them wander in trackless wastes;
41 but he raises up the needy out of distress,
and makes their families like flocks.
42 The upright see it and are glad;
and all wickedness stops its mouth.
43 Let those who are wise give heed to these things,
and consider the steadfast love of the LORD.
[Psalm 108]
Request for victory over national enemies
1 My heart is steadfast, O God, my heart is steadfast;
I will sing and make melody.
Awake, my soul!
2 Awake, O harp and lyre!
I will awake the dawn.
3 I will give thanks to you, O LORD, among the peoples,
and I will sing praises to you among the nations.
4 For your steadfast love is higher than the heavens,
and your faithfulness reaches to the clouds.
5 Be exalted, O God, above the heavens,
and let your glory be over all the earth.
6 Give victory with your right hand, and answer me,
so that those whom you love may be rescued.
7 God has promised in his sanctuary:
"With exultation I will divide up Shechem,
and portion out the Vale of Succoth.
8 Gilead is mine; Manasseh is mine;
Ephraim is my helmet;
Judah is my scepter.
9 Moab is my washbasin;
on Edom I hurl my shoe;
over Philistia I shout in triumph."

1183

PSALMS 1184

10 Who will bring me to the fortified city?
Who will lead me to Edom?
11 Have you not rejected us, O God?
You do not go out, O God, with our armies.
12 O grant us help against the foe,
for human help is worthless.
13 With God we shall do valiantly;
it is he who will tread down our foes.
[Psalm 109]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 Do not be silent, O God of my praise.
2 For wicked and deceitful mouths are opened against me,
speaking against me with lying tongues.
3 They beset me with words of hate,
and attack me without cause.
4 In return for my love they accuse me,
even while I make prayer for them.
5 So they reward me evil for good,
and hatred for my love.
6 They say, "Appoint a wicked man against him;
let an accuser stand on his right.
7 When he is tried, let him be found guilty;
let his prayer be counted as sin.
8 May his days be few;
may another seize his position.
9 May his children be orphans,
and his wife a widow.
10 May his children wander about and beg;
may they be driven out of the ruins they inhabit.
11 May the creditor seize all that he has;
may strangers plunder the fruits of his toil.
12 May there be no one to do him a kindness,
nor anyone to pity his orphaned children.
13 May his posterity be cut off;
may his name be blotted out in the second generation.

1184

PSALMS 1185

14 May the iniquity of his father be remembered before the LORD,
and do not let the sin of his mother be blotted out.
15 Let them be before the LORD continually,
and may his memory be cut off from the earth.
16 For he did not remember to show kindness,
but pursued the poor and needy
and the brokenhearted to their death.
17 He loved to curse; let curses come on him.
He did not like blessing; may it be far from him.
18 He clothed himself with cursing as his coat,
may it soak into his body like water,
like oil into his bones.
19 May it be like a garment that he wraps around himself,
like a belt that he wears every day."
20 May that be the reward of my accusers from the LORD,
of those who speak evil against my life.
21 But you, O LORD my Lord,
act on my behalf for your name's sake;
because your steadfast love is good, deliver me.
22 For I am poor and needy,
and my heart is pierced within me.
23 I am gone like a shadow at evening;
I am shaken off like a locust.
24 My knees are weak through fasting;
my body has become gaunt.
25 I am an object of scorn to my accusers;
when they see me, they shake their heads.
26 Help me, O LORD my God!
Save me according to your steadfast love.
27 Let them know that this is your hand;
you, O LORD, have done it.
28 Let them curse, but you will bless.
Let my assailants be put to shame; may your servant be glad.
29 May my accusers be clothed with dishonor;
may they be wrapped in their own shame as in a mantle.

1185

PSALMS 1186

30 With my mouth I will give great thanks to the LORD;
I will praise him in the midst of the throng.
31 For he stands at the right hand of the needy,
to save them from those who would condemn them to death.
[Psalm 110]
The Davidic king
1 The LORD says to my lord,
"Sit at my right hand
until I make your enemies your footstool."
2 The LORD sends out from Zion
your mighty scepter.
Rule in the midst of your foes.
3 Your people will offer themselves willingly
on the day you lead your forces
on the holy mountains.
From the womb of the morning,
like dew, your youth will come to you.
4 The LORD has sworn and will not change his mind,
"You are a priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek."
5 The Lord is at your right hand;
he will shatter kings on the day of his wrath.
6 He will execute judgment among the nations,
filling them with corpses;
he will shatter heads
over the wide earth.
7 He will drink from the stream by the path;
therefore he will lift up his head.

1186

PSALMS 1187

[Psalm 111]
Praise of God for his wondrous deeds
1 Praise the LORD!
I will give thanks to the LORD with my whole heart,
in the company of the upright, in the congregation.
2 Great are the works of the LORD,
studied by all who delight in them.
3 Full of honor and majesty is his work,
and his righteousness endures forever.
4 He has gained renown by his wonderful deeds;
the LORD is gracious and merciful.
5 He provides food for those who fear him;
he is ever mindful of his covenant.
6 He has shown his people the power of his works,
in giving them the heritage of the nations.
7 The works of his hands are faithful and just;
all his precepts are trustworthy.
8 They are established forever and ever,
to be performed with faithfulness and uprightness.
9 He sent redemption to his people;
he has commanded his covenant forever.
Holy and awesome is his name.
10 The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom;
all those who practice it have a good understanding.
His praise endures forever.
[Psalm 112]
The contrasting fates of the righteous and the wicked
1 Praise the LORD!
Happy are those who fear the LORD,
who greatly delight in his commandments.
2 Their descendants will be mighty in the land;
the generation of the upright will be blessed.
3 Wealth and riches are in their houses,
and their righteousness endures forever.

1187

PSALMS 1188

4 They rise in the darkness as a light for the upright;
they are gracious, merciful, and righteous.
5 It is well with those who deal generously and lend,
who conduct their affairs with justice.
6 For the righteous will never be moved;
they will be remembered forever.
7 They are not afraid of evil tidings;
their hearts are firm, secure in the LORD.
8 Their hearts are steady, they will not be afraid;
in the end they will look in triumph on their foes.
9 They have distributed freely, they have given to the poor;
their righteousness endures forever;
their horn is exalted in honor.
10 The wicked see it and are angry;
they gnash their teeth and melt away;
the desire of the wicked comes to nothing.
[Psalm 113]
Praise of the divine name
1 Praise the LORD!
Praise, O servants of the LORD;
praise the name of the LORD.
2 Blessed be the name of the LORD
from this time on and forevermore.
3 From the rising of the sun to its setting
the name of the LORD is to be praised.
4 The LORD is high above all nations,
and his glory above the heavens.
5 Who is like the LORD our God,
who is seated on high,
6 who looks far down
on the heavens and the earth?
7 He raises the poor from the dust,
and lifts the needy from the ash heap,

1188

PSALMS 1189

8 to make them sit with princes,
with the princes of his people.
9 He gives the barren woman a home,
making her the joyous mother of children.
Praise the LORD!
[Psalm 114]
Praise of God of the Exodus
1 When Israel went out from Egypt,
the house of Jacob from a people of strange language,
2 Judah became God's sanctuary,
Israel his dominion.
3 The sea looked and fled;
Jordan turned back.
4 The mountains skipped like rams,
the hills like lambs.
5 Why is it, O sea, that you flee?
O Jordan, that you turn back?
6 O mountains, that you skip like rams?
O hills, like lambs?
7 Tremble, O earth, at the presence of the LORD,
at the presence of the God of Jacob,
8 who turns the rock into a pool of water,
the flint into a spring of water.
[Psalm 115]
The LORD's supremacy over the gods
1 Not to us, O LORD, not to us, but to your name give glory,
for the sake of your steadfast love and your faithfulness.
2 Why should the nations say,
"Where is their God?"

1189

PSALMS 1190

3 Our God is in the heavens;
he does whatever he pleases.
4 Their idols are silver and gold,
the work of human hands.
5 They have mouths, but do not speak;
eyes, but do not see.
6 They have ears, but do not hear;
noses, but do not smell.
7 They have hands, but do not feel;
feet, but do not walk;
they make no sound in their throats.
8 Those who make them are like them;
so are all who trust in them.
9 O Israel, trust in the LORD!
He is their help and their shield.
10 O house of Aaron, trust in the LORD!
He is their help and their shield.
11 You who fear the LORD, trust in the LORD!
He is their help and their shield.
12 The LORD has been mindful of us; he will bless us;
he will bless the house of Israel;
he will bless the house of Aaron;
13 he will bless those who fear the LORD,
both small and great.
14 May the LORD give you increase,
both you and your children.
15 May you be blessed by the LORD,
who made heaven and earth.
16 The heavens are the LORD's heavens,
but the earth he has given to human beings.
17 The dead do not praise the LORD,
nor do any that go down into silence.

1190

PSALMS 1191

18 But we will bless the LORD
from this time on and forevermore.
Praise the LORD!
[Psalm 116]
Thanksgiving for healing
1 I love the LORD, because he has heard
my voice and my supplications.
2 Because he inclined his ear to me,
therefore I will call on him as long as I live.
3 The snares of death encompassed me;
the pangs of Sheol laid hold on me;
I suffered distress and anguish.
4 Then I called on the name of the LORD:
"O LORD, I pray, save my life!"
5 Gracious is the LORD, and righteous;
our God is merciful.
6 The LORD protects the simple;
when I was brought low, he saved me.
7 Return, O my soul, to your rest,
for the LORD has dealt bountifully with you.
8 For you have delivered my soul from death,
my eyes from tears,
my feet from stumbling.
9 I walk before the LORD
in the land of the living.
10 I kept my faith, even when I said,
"I am greatly afflicted";
11 I said in my consternation,
"Everyone is a liar."
12 What shall I return to the LORD
for all his bounty to me?
13 I will lift up the cup of salvation
and call on the name of the LORD,

1191

PSALMS 1192

14 I will pay my vows to the LORD
in the presence of all his people.
15 Precious in the sight of the LORD
is the death of his faithful ones.
16 O LORD, I am your servant;
I am your servant, the child of your serving girl.
You have loosed my bonds.
17 I will offer to you a thanksgiving sacrifice
and call on the name of the LORD.
18 I will pay my vows to the LORD
in the presence of all his people,
19 in the courts of the house of the LORD,
in your midst, O Jerusalem.
Praise the LORD!
[Psalm 117]
Praise of God from the nations
1 Praise the LORD, all you nations!
Extol him, all you peoples!
2 For great is his steadfast love toward us,
and the faithfulness of the LORD endures forever.
Praise the LORD!
[Psalm 118]
Thanksgiving for victory in battle
1 O give thanks to the LORD, for he is good;
his steadfast love endures forever!
2 Let Israel say,
"His steadfast love endures forever."
3 Let the house of Aaron say,
"His steadfast love endures forever."
4 Let those who fear the LORD say,
"His steadfast love endures forever."

1192

PSALMS 1193

5 Out of my distress I called on the LORD;
the LORD answered me and set me in a broad place.
6 With the LORD on my side I do not fear.
What can mortals do to me?
7 The LORD is on my side to help me;
I shall look in triumph on those who hate me.
8 It is better to take refuge in the LORD
than to put confidence in mortals.
9 It is better to take refuge in the LORD
than to put confidence in princes.
10 All nations surrounded me;
in the name of the LORD I cut them off!
11 They surrounded me, surrounded me on every side;
in the name of the LORD I cut them off!
12 They surrounded me like bees;
they blazed like a fire of thorns;
in the name of the LORD I cut them off!
13 I was pushed hard, so that I was falling,
but the LORD helped me.
14 The LORD is my strength and my might;
he has become my salvation.
15 There are glad songs of victory in the tents of the righteous:
"The right hand of the LORD does valiantly;
16 the right hand of the LORD is exalted;
the right hand of the LORD does valiantly."
17 I shall not die, but I shall live,
and recount the deeds of the LORD.
18 The LORD has punished me severely,
but he did not give me over to death.
19 Open to me the gates of righteousness,
that I may enter through them
and give thanks to the LORD.
20 This is the gate of the LORD;
the righteous shall enter through it.

1193

PSALMS 1194

21 I thank you that you have answered me
and have become my salvation.
22 The stone that the builders rejected
has become the chief cornerstone.
23 This is the LORD's doing;
it is marvelous in our eyes.
24 This is the day that the LORD has made;
let us rejoice and be glad in it.
25 Save us, we beseech you, O LORD!
O LORD, we beseech you, give us success!
26 Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the LORD.
We bless you from the house of the LORD.
27 The LORD is God,
and he has given us light.
Bind the festal procession with branches,
up to the horns of the altar.
28 You are my God, and I will give thanks to you;
you are my God, I will extol you.
29 O give thanks to the LORD, for he is good,
for his steadfast love endures forever.
[Psalm 119]
Meditation on God's law
1 Happy are those whose way is blameless,
who walk in the law of the LORD.
2 Happy are those who keep his decrees,
who seek him with their whole heart,
3 who also do no wrong,
but walk in his ways.
4 You have commanded your precepts
to be kept diligently.
5 O that my ways may be steadfast
in keeping your statutes!
6 Then I shall not be put to shame,
having my eyes fixed on all your commandments.

1194

PSALMS 1195

7 I will praise you with an upright heart,
when I learn your righteous ordinances.
8 I will observe your statutes;
do not utterly forsake me.
9 How can young people keep their way pure?
By guarding it according to your word.
10 With my whole heart I seek you;
do not let me stray from your commandments.
11 I treasure your word in my heart,
so that I may not sin against you.
12 Blessed are you, O LORD;
teach me your statutes.
13 With my lips I declare
all the ordinances of your mouth.
14 I delight in the way of your decrees
as much as in all riches.
15 I will meditate on your precepts,
and fix my eyes on your ways.
16 I will delight in your statutes;
I will not forget your word.
17 Deal bountifully with your servant,
so that I may live and observe your word.
18 Open my eyes, so that I may behold
wondrous things out of your law.
19 I live as an alien in the land;
do not hide your commandments from me.
20 My soul is consumed with longing
for your ordinances at all times.
21 You rebuke the insolent, accursed ones,
who wander from your commandments;
22 take away from me their scorn and contempt,
for I have kept your decrees.
23 Even though princes sit plotting against me,
your servant will meditate on your statutes.
24 Your decrees are my delight,
they are my counselors.

1195

PSALMS 1196

25 My soul clings to the dust;
revive me according to your word.
26 When I told of my ways, you answered me;
teach me your statutes.
27 Make me understand the way of your precepts,
and I will meditate on your wondrous works.
28 My soul melts away for sorrow;
strengthen me according to your word.
29 Put false ways far from me;
and graciously teach me your law.
30 I have chosen the way of faithfulness;
I set your ordinances before me.
31 I cling to your decrees, O LORD;
let me not be put to shame.
32 I run the way of your commandments,
for you enlarge my understanding.
33 Teach me, O LORD, the way of your statutes,
and I will observe it to the end.
34 Give me understanding, that I may keep your law
and observe it with my whole heart.
35 Lead me in the path of your commandments,
for I delight in it.
36 Turn my heart to your decrees,
and not to selfish gain.
37 Turn my eyes from looking at vanities;
give me life in your ways.
38 Confirm to your servant your promise,
which is for those who fear you.
39 Turn away the disgrace that I dread,
for your ordinances are good.
40 See, I have longed for your precepts;
in your righteousness give me life.
41 Let your steadfast love come to me, O LORD,
your salvation according to your promise.
42 Then I shall have an answer for those who taunt me,
for I trust in your word.

1196

PSALMS 1197

43 Do not take the word of truth utterly out of my mouth,
for my hope is in your ordinances.
44 I will keep your law continually,
forever and ever.
45 I shall walk at liberty,
for I have sought your precepts.
46 I will also speak of your decrees before kings,
and shall not be put to shame;
47 I find my delight in your commandments,
because I love them.
48 I revere your commandments, which I love,
and I will meditate on your statutes.
49 Remember your word to your servant,
in which you have made me hope.
50 This is my comfort in my distress,
that your promise gives me life.
51 The arrogant utterly deride me,
but I do not turn away from your law.
52 When I think of your ordinances from of old,
I take comfort, O LORD.
53 Hot indignation seizes me because of the wicked,
those who forsake your law.
54 Your statutes have been my songs
wherever I make my home.
55 I remember your name in the night, O LORD,
and keep your law.
56 This blessing has fallen to me,
for I have kept your precepts.
57 The LORD is my portion;
I promise to keep your words.
58 I implore your favor with all my heart;
be gracious to me according to your promise.
59 When I think of your ways,
I turn my feet to your decrees;
60 I hurry and do not delay
to keep your commandments.

1197

PSALMS 1198

61 Though the cords of the wicked ensnare me,
I do not forget your law.
62 At midnight I rise to praise you,
because of your righteous ordinances.
63 I am a companion of all who fear you,
of those who keep your precepts.
64 The earth, O LORD, is full of your steadfast love;
teach me your statutes.
65 You have dealt well with your servant,
O LORD, according to your word.
66 Teach me good judgment and knowledge,
for I believe in your commandments.
67 Before I was humbled I went astray,
but now I keep your word.
68 You are good and do good;
teach me your statutes.
69 The arrogant smear me with lies,
but with my whole heart I keep your precepts.
70 Their hearts are fat and gross,
but I delight in your law.
71 It is good for me that I was humbled,
so that I might learn your statutes.
72 The law of your mouth is better to me
than thousands of gold and silver pieces.
73 Your hands have made and fashioned me;
give me understanding that I may learn your commandments.
74 Those who fear you shall see me and rejoice,
because I have hoped in your word.
75 I know, O LORD, that your judgments are right,
and that in faithfulness you have humbled me.
76 Let your steadfast love become my comfort
according to your promise to your servant.
77 Let your mercy come to me, that I may live;
for your law is my delight.

1198

PSALMS 1199

78 Let the arrogant be put to shame,
because they have subverted me with guile;
as for me, I will meditate on your precepts.
79 Let those who fear you turn to me,
so that they may know your decrees.
80 May my heart be blameless in your statutes,
so that I may not be put to shame.
81 My soul languishes for your salvation;
I hope in your word.
82 My eyes fail with watching for your promise;
I ask, "When will you comfort me?"
83 For I have become like a wineskin in the smoke,
yet I have not forgotten your statutes.
84 How long must your servant endure?
When will you judge those who persecute me?
85 The arrogant have dug pitfalls for me;
they flout your law.
86 All your commandments are enduring;
I am persecuted without cause; help me!
87 They have almost made an end of me on earth;
but I have not forsaken your precepts.
88 In your steadfast love spare my life,
so that I may keep the decrees of your mouth.
89 The LORD exists forever;
your word is firmly fixed in heaven.
90 Your faithfulness endures to all generations;
you have established the earth, and it stands fast.
91 By your appointment they stand today,
for all things are your servants.
92 If your law had not been my delight,
I would have perished in my misery.
93 I will never forget your precepts,
for by them you have given me life.
94 I am yours; save me,
for I have sought your precepts.

1199

PSALMS 1200

95 The wicked lie in wait to destroy me,
but I consider your decrees.
96 I have seen a limit to all perfection,
but your commandment is exceedingly broad.
97 Oh, how I love your law!
It is my meditation all day long.
98 Your commandment makes me wiser than my enemies,
for it is always with me.
99 I have more understanding than all my teachers,
for your decrees are my meditation.
100 I understand more than the aged,
for I keep your precepts.
101 I hold back my feet from every evil way,
in order to keep your word.
102 I do not turn away from your ordinances,
for you have taught me.
103 How sweet are your words to my taste,
sweeter than honey to my mouth!
104 Through your precepts I get understanding;
therefore I hate every false way.
105 Your word is a lamp to my feet
and a light to my path.
106 I have sworn an oath and confirmed it,
to observe your righteous ordinances.
107 I am severely afflicted;
give me life, O LORD, according to your word.
108 Accept my offerings of praise, O LORD,
and teach me your ordinances.
109 I hold my life in my hand continually,
but I do not forget your law.
110 The wicked have laid a snare for me,
but I do not stray from your precepts.
111 Your decrees are my heritage forever;
they are the joy of my heart.
112 I incline my heart to perform your statutes
forever, to the end.

1200

PSALMS 1201

113 I hate the double-minded,
but I love your law.
114 You are my hiding place and my shield;
I hope in your word.
115 Go away from me, you evildoers,
that I may keep the commandments of my God.
116 Uphold me according to your promise, that I may live,
and let me not be put to shame in my hope.
117 Hold me up, that I may be safe
and have regard for your statutes continually.
118 You spurn all who go astray from your statutes;
for their cunning is in vain.
119 All the wicked of the earth you count as dross;
therefore I love your decrees.
120 My flesh trembles for fear of you,
and I am afraid of your judgments.
121 I have done what is just and right;
do not leave me to my oppressors.
122 Guarantee your servant's well-being;
do not let the godless oppress me.
123 My eyes fail from watching for your salvation,
and for the fulfillment of your righteous promise.
124 Deal with your servant according to your steadfast love,
and teach me your statutes.
125 I am your servant; give me understanding,
so that I may know your decrees.
126 It is time for the LORD to act,
for your law has been broken.
127 Truly I love your commandments
more than gold, more than fine gold.
128 Truly I direct my steps by all your precepts;
I hate every false way.
129 Your decrees are wonderful;
therefore my soul keeps them.
130 The unfolding of your words gives light;
it imparts understanding to the simple.

1201

PSALMS 1202

131 With open mouth I pant,
because I long for your commandments.
132 Turn to me and be gracious to me,
as is your custom toward those who love your name.
133 Keep my steps steady according to your promise,
and never let iniquity have dominion over me.
134 Redeem me from human oppression,
that I may keep your precepts.
135 Make your face shine upon your servant,
and teach me your statutes.
136 My eyes shed streams of tears
because your law is not kept.
137 You are righteous, O LORD,
and your judgments are right.
138 You have appointed your decrees in righteousness
and in all faithfulness.
139 My zeal consumes me
because my foes forget your words.
140 Your promise is well tried,
and your servant loves it.
141 I am small and despised,
yet I do not forget your precepts.
142 Your righteousness is an everlasting righteousness,
and your law is the truth.
143 Trouble and anguish have come upon me,
but your commandments are my delight.
144 Your decrees are righteous forever;
give me understanding that I may live.
145 With my whole heart I cry; answer me, O LORD.
I will keep your statutes.
146 I cry to you; save me,
that I may observe your decrees.
147 I rise before dawn and cry for help;
I put my hope in your words.
148 My eyes are awake before each watch of the night,
that I may meditate on your promise.

1202

PSALMS 1203

149 In your steadfast love hear my voice;
O LORD, in your justice preserve my life.
150 Those who persecute me with evil purpose draw near;
they are far from your law.
151 Yet you are near, O LORD,
and all your commandments are true.
152 Long ago I learned from your decrees
that you have established them forever.
153 Look on my misery and rescue me,
for I do not forget your law.
154 Plead my cause and redeem me;
give me life according to your promise.
155 Salvation is far from the wicked,
for they do not seek your statutes.
156 Great is your mercy, O LORD;
give me life according to your justice.
157 Many are my persecutors and my adversaries,
yet I do not swerve from your decrees.
158 I look at the faithless with disgust,
because they do not keep your commands.
159 Consider how I love your precepts;
preserve my life according to your steadfast love.
160 The sum of your word is truth;
and every one of your righteous ordinances endures forever.
161 Princes persecute me without cause,
but my heart stands in awe of your words.
162 I rejoice at your word
like one who finds great spoil.
163 I hate and abhor falsehood,
but I love your law.
164 Seven times a day I praise you
for your righteous ordinances.
165 Great peace have those who love your law;
nothing can make them stumble.
166 I hope for your salvation, O LORD,
and I fulfill your commandments.

1203

PSALMS 1204

167 My soul keeps your decrees;
I love them exceedingly.
168 I keep your precepts and decrees,
for all my ways are before you.
169 Let my cry come before you, O LORD;
give me understanding according to your word.
170 Let my supplication come before you;
deliver me according to your promise.
171 My lips will pour forth praise,
because you teach me your statutes.
172 My tongue will sing of your promise,
for all your commandments are right.
173 Let your hand be ready to help me,
for I have chosen your precepts.
174 I long for your salvation, O LORD,
and your law is my delight.
175 Let me live that I may praise you,
and let your ordinances help me.
176 I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek out your servant,
for I do not forget your commandments.
[Psalm 120]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 In my distress I cry to the LORD,
that he may answer me:
2 "Deliver me, O LORD,
from lying lips,
from a deceitful tongue."
3 What shall be given to you?
And what more shall be done to you,
you deceitful tongue?
4 A warrior's sharp arrows,
with glowing coals of the broom tree!

1204

PSALMS 1205

5 Woe is me, that I am an alien in Meshech,
that I must live among the tents of Kedar.
6 Too long have I had my dwelling
among those who hate peace.
7 I am for peace;
but when I speak,
they are for war.
[Psalm 121]
On pilgrimage to Jerusalem
1 I lift up my eyes to the hills —
from where will my help come?
2 My help comes from the LORD,
who made heaven and earth.
3 He will not let your foot be moved;
he who keeps you will not slumber.
4 He who keeps Israel
will neither slumber nor sleep.
5 The LORD is your keeper;
the LORD is your shade at your right hand.
6 The sun shall not strike you by day,
nor the moon by night.
7 The LORD will keep you from all evil;
he will keep your life.
8 The LORD will keep
your going out and your coming in
from this time on and forevermore.

1205

PSALMS 1206

[Psalm 122]
Praise of Zion
1 I was glad when they said to me,
"Let us go to the house of the LORD!"
2 Our feet are standing
within your gates, O Jerusalem.
3 Jerusalem — built as a city
that is bound firmly together.
4 To it the tribes go up,
the tribes of the LORD,
as was decreed for Israel,
to give thanks to the name of the LORD.
5 For there the thrones for judgment were set up,
the thrones of the house of David.
6 Pray for the peace of Jerusalem:
"May they prosper who love you.
7 Peace be within your walls,
and security within your towers."
8 For the sake of my relatives and friends
I will say, "Peace be within you."
9 For the sake of the house of the LORD our God,
I will seek your good.
[Psalm 123]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 To you I lift up my eyes,
O you who are enthroned in the heavens!
2 As the eyes of servants
look to the hand of their master,
as the eyes of a maid
to the hand of her mistress,
so our eyes look to the LORD our God,
until he has mercy upon us.

1206

PSALMS 1207

3 Have mercy upon us, O LORD, have mercy upon us,
for we have had more than enough of contempt.
4 Our soul has had more than its fill
of the scorn of those who are at ease,
of the contempt of the proud.
[Psalm 124]
Thanksgiving for national deliverance
1 If it had not been the LORD who was on our side
— let Israel now say —
2 if it had not been the LORD who was on our side,
when our enemies attacked us,
3 then they would have swallowed us up alive,
when their anger was kindled against us;
4 then the flood would have swept us away,
the torrent would have gone over us;
5 then over us would have gone
the raging waters.
6 Blessed be the LORD,
who has not given us
as prey to their teeth.
7 We have escaped like a bird
from the snare of the fowlers;
the snare is broken,
and we have escaped.
8 Our help is in the name of the LORD,
who made heaven and earth.

1207

PSALMS 1208

[Psalm 125]
A psalm of trust
1 Those who trust in the LORD are like Mount Zion,
which cannot be moved, but abides forever.
2 As the mountains surround Jerusalem,
so the LORD surrounds his people,
from this time on and forevermore.
3 For the scepter of wickedness shall not rest
on the land allotted to the righteous,
so that the righteous might not stretch out
their hands to do wrong.
4 Do good, O LORD, to those who are good,
and to those who are upright in their hearts.
5 But those who turn aside to their own crooked ways
the LORD will lead away with evildoers.
Peace be upon Israel!
[Psalm 126]
Thanksgiving from returning exiles
1 When the LORD restored the fortunes of Zion,
we were like those who dream.
2 Then our mouth was filled with laughter,
and our tongue with shouts of joy;
then it was said among the nations,
"The LORD has done great things for them."
3 The LORD has done great things for us,
and we rejoiced.
4 Restore our fortunes, O LORD,
like the watercourses in the Negeb.
5 May those who sow in tears
reap with shouts of joy.
6 Those who go out weeping,
bearing the seed for sowing,
shall come home with shouts of joy,
carrying their sheaves.

1208

PSALMS 1209

[Psalm 127]
The blessings of family life
1 Unless the LORD builds the house,
those who build it labor in vain.
Unless the LORD guards the city,
the guard keeps watch in vain.
2 It is in vain that you rise up early
and go late to rest,
eating the bread of anxious toil;
for he gives sleep to his beloved.
3 Sons are indeed a heritage from the LORD,
the fruit of the womb a reward.
4 Like arrows in the hand of a warrior
are the sons of one's youth.
5 Happy is the man who has
his quiver full of them.
He shall not be put to shame
when he speaks with his enemies in the gate.
[Psalm 128]
The blessings of family life
1 Happy is everyone who fears the LORD,
who walks in his ways.
2 You shall eat the fruit of the labor of your hands;
you shall be happy, and it shall go well with you.
3 Your wife will be like a fruitful vine
within your house;
your children will be like olive shoots
around your table.
4 Thus shall the man be blessed
who fears the LORD.

1209

PSALMS 1210

5 The LORD bless you from Zion.
May you see the prosperity of Jerusalem
all the days of your life.
6 May you see your children's children.
Peace be upon Israel!
[Psalm 129]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 "Often have they attacked me from my youth"
— let Israel now say —
2 "often have they attacked me from my youth,
yet they have not prevailed against me.
3 The plowers plowed on my back;
they made their furrows long."
4 The LORD is righteous;
he has cut the cords of the wicked.
5 May all who hate Zion
be put to shame and turned backward.
6 Let them be like the grass on the housetops
that withers before it grows up,
7 with which reapers do not fill their hands
or binders of sheaves their arms,
8 while those who pass by do not say,
"The blessing of the LORD be upon you!
We bless you in the name of the LORD!"
[Psalm 130]
A cry from the depths
1 Out of the depths I cry to you, O LORD.
2 Lord, hear my voice!
Let your ears be attentive
to the voice of my supplications!
3 If you, O LORD, should mark iniquities,
Lord, who could stand?

1210

PSALMS 1211

4 But there is forgiveness with you,
so that you may be revered.
5 I wait for the LORD, my soul waits,
and in his word I hope;
6 my soul waits for the Lord
more than those who watch for the morning,
more than those who watch for the morning.
7 O Israel, hope in the LORD!
For with the LORD there is steadfast love,
and with him is great power to redeem.
8 It is he who will redeem Israel
from all its iniquities.
[Psalm 131]
A prayer of humble trust
1 O LORD, my heart is not lifted up,
my eyes are not raised too high;
I do not occupy myself with things
too great and too marvelous for me.
2 But I have calmed and quieted my soul,
like a weaned child with its mother;
my soul is like the weaned child that is with me.
3 O Israel, hope in the LORD
from this time on and forevermore.
[Psalm 132]
The LORD's choice of David and Zion
1 O LORD, remember in David's favor
all the hardships he endured;
2 how he swore to the LORD
and vowed to the Mighty One of Jacob,
3 "I will not enter my house
or get into my bed;

1211

PSALMS 1212

4 I will not give sleep to my eyes
or slumber to my eyelids,
5 until I find a place for the LORD,
a dwelling place for the Mighty One of Jacob."
6 We heard of it in Ephrathah;
we found it in the fields of Jaar.
7 "Let us go to his dwelling place;
let us worship at his footstool."
8 Rise up, O LORD, and go to your resting place,
you and the ark of your might.
9 Let your priests be clothed with righteousness,
and let your faithful shout for joy.
10 For your servant David's sake
do not turn away the face of your anointed one.
11 The LORD swore to David a sure oath
from which he will not turn back:
"One of the sons of your body
I will set on your throne.
12 If your sons keep my covenant
and my decrees that I shall teach them,
their sons also, forevermore,
shall sit on your throne."
13 For the LORD has chosen Zion;
he has desired it for his habitation:
14 "This is my resting place forever;
here I will reside, for I have desired it.
15 I will abundantly bless its provisions;
I will satisfy its poor with bread.
16 Its priests I will clothe with salvation,
and its faithful will shout for joy.
17 There I will cause a horn to sprout up for David;
I have prepared a lamp for my anointed one.
18 His enemies I will clothe with disgrace,
but on him, his crown will gleam."

1212

PSALMS 1213

[Psalm 133]
Prayer for national unity
1 How very good and pleasant it is
when kindred live together in unity!
2 It is like the precious oil on the head,
running down upon the beard,
on the beard of Aaron,
running down over the collar of his robes.
3 It is like the dew of Hermon,
which falls on the mountains of Zion.
For there the LORD ordained his blessing,
life forevermore.
[Psalm 134]
A doxology
1 Come, bless the LORD, all you servants of the LORD,
who stand by night in the house of the LORD!
2 Lift up your hands to the holy place,
and bless the LORD.
3 May the LORD, maker of heaven and earth,
bless you from Zion.
[Psalm 135]
A hymn of praise
1 Praise the LORD!
Praise the name of the LORD;
give praise, O servants of the LORD,
2 you that stand in the house of the LORD,
in the courts of the house of our God.
3 Praise the LORD, for the LORD is good;
sing to his name, for he is gracious.
4 For the LORD has chosen Jacob for himself,
Israel as his own possession.

1213

PSALMS 1214

5 For I know that the LORD is great;
our Lord is above all gods.
6 Whatever the LORD pleases he does,
in heaven and on earth,
in the seas and all deeps.
7 He it is who makes the clouds rise at the end of the earth;
he makes lightnings for the rain
and brings out the wind from his storehouses.
8 He it was who struck down the firstborn of Egypt,
both human beings and animals;
9 he sent signs and wonders
into your midst, O Egypt,
against Pharaoh and all his servants.
10 He struck down many nations
and killed mighty kings —
11 Sihon, king of the Amorites,
and Og, king of Bashan,
and all the kingdoms of Canaan —
12 and gave their land as a heritage,
a heritage to his people Israel.
13 Your name, O LORD, endures forever,
your renown, O LORD, throughout all ages.
14 For the LORD will vindicate his people,
and have compassion on his servants.
15 The idols of the nations are silver and gold,
the work of human hands.
16 They have mouths, but they do not speak;
they have eyes, but they do not see;
17 they have ears, but they do not hear,
and there is no breath in their mouths.
18 Those who make them
and all who trust them
shall become like them.

1214

PSALMS 1215

19 O house of Israel, bless the LORD!
O house of Aaron, bless the LORD!
20 O house of Levi, bless the LORD!
You that fear the LORD, bless the LORD!
21 Blessed be the LORD from Zion,
he who resides in Jerusalem.
Praise the LORD!
[Psalm 136]
Praise of God, creator and redeemer
1 O give thanks to the LORD, for he is good,
for his steadfast love endures forever.
2 O give thanks to the God of gods,
for his steadfast love endures forever.
3 O give thanks to the Lord of lords,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
4 who alone does great wonders,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
5 who by understanding made the heavens,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
6 who spread out the earth on the waters,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
7 who made the great lights,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
8 the sun to rule over the day,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
9 the moon and stars to rule over the night,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
10 who struck Egypt through their firstborn,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
11 and brought Israel out from among them,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
12 with a strong hand and an outstretched arm,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
13 who divided the Red Sea in two,
for his steadfast love endures forever;

1215

PSALMS 1216

14 and made Israel pass through the midst of it,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
15 but overthrew Pharaoh and his army in the Red Sea,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
16 who led his people through the wilderness,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
17 who struck down great kings,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
18 and killed famous kings,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
19 Sihon, king of the Amorites,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
20 and Og, king of Bashan,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
21 and gave their land as a heritage,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
22 a heritage to his servant Israel,
for his steadfast love endures forever.
23 It is he who remembered us in our low estate,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
24 and rescued us from our foes,
for his steadfast love endures forever;
25 who gives food to all flesh,
for his steadfast love endures forever.
26 O give thanks to the God of heaven,
for his steadfast love endures forever.
[Psalm 137]
Remembering Zion
1 By the rivers of Babylon —
there we sat down and there we wept
when we remembered Zion.
2 On the willows there
we hung up our harps.

1216

PSALMS 1217

3 For there our captors
asked us for songs,
and our tormentors asked for mirth, saying,
"Sing us one of the songs of Zion!"
4 How could we sing the LORD's song
in a foreign land?
5 If I forget you, O Jerusalem,
let my right hand wither!
6 Let my tongue cling to the roof of my mouth,
if I do not remember you,
if I do not set Jerusalem
above my highest joy.
7 Remember, O LORD, against the Edomites
the day of Jerusalem's fall,
how they said, "Tear it down! Tear it down!
Down to its foundations!"
8 O daughter Babylon, you devastator!
Happy shall they be who pay you back
what you have done to us!
9 Happy shall they be who take your little ones
and dash them against the rock!
[Psalm 138]
Thanksgiving in the Temple
1 I give you thanks, O LORD, with my whole heart;
before the gods I sing your praise;
2 I bow down toward your holy temple
and give thanks to your name for your steadfast love
and your faithfulness; for you have exalted your name
and your word above everything.
3 On the day I called, you answered me,
you increased my strength of soul.

1217

PSALMS 1218

4 All the kings of the earth shall praise you, O LORD,
for they have heard the words of your mouth.
5 They shall sing of the ways of the LORD,
for great is the glory of the LORD.
6 For though the LORD is high, he regards the lowly;
but the haughty he perceives from far away.
7 Though I walk in the midst of trouble,
you preserve me against the wrath of my enemies;
you stretch out your hand,
and your right hand delivers me.
8 The LORD will fulfill his purpose for me;
your steadfast love, O LORD, endures forever.
Do not forsake the work of your hands.
[Psalm 139]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 O LORD, you have searched me and known me.
2 You know when I sit down and when I rise up;
you discern my thoughts from far away.
3 You search out my path and my lying down,
and are acquainted with all my ways.
4 Even before a word is on my tongue,
O LORD, you know it completely.
5 You hem me in, behind and before,
and lay your hand upon me.
6 Such knowledge is too wonderful for me;
it is so high that I cannot attain it.
7 Where can I go from your spirit?
Or where can I flee from your presence?
8 If I ascend to heaven, you are there;
if I make my bed in Sheol, you are there.
9 If I take the wings of the morning
and settle at the farthest limits of the sea,
10 even there your hand shall lead me,
and your right hand shall hold me fast.

1218

PSALMS 1219

11 If I say, "Surely the darkness shall cover me,
and the light around me become night,"
12 even the darkness is not dark to you;
the night is as bright as the day,
for darkness is as light to you.
13 For it was you who formed my inward parts;
you knit me together in my mother's womb.
14 I praise you, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made.
Wonderful are your works;
that I know very well.
15
My frame was not hidden from you,
when I was being made in secret,
intricately woven in the depths of the earth.
16 Your eyes beheld my unformed substance.
In your book were written
all the days that were formed for me,
when none of them as yet existed.
17 How weighty to me are your thoughts, O God!
How vast is the sum of them!
18 I try to count them — they are more than the sand;
I come to the end — I am still with you.
19 O that you would kill the wicked, O God,
and that the bloodthirsty would depart from me —
20 those who speak of you maliciously,
and lift themselves up against you for evil!
21 Do I not hate those who hate you, O LORD?
And do I not loathe those who rise up against you?
22 I hate them with perfect hatred;
I count them my enemies.
23 Search me, O God, and know my heart;
test me and know my thoughts.
24 See if there is any wicked way in me,
and lead me in the way everlasting.

1219

PSALMS 1220

[Psalm 140]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 Deliver me, O LORD, from evildoers;
protect me from those who are violent,
2 who plan evil things in their minds
and stir up wars continually.
3 They make their tongue sharp as a snake's,
and under their lips is the venom of vipers.
4 Guard me, O LORD, from the hands of the wicked;
protect me from the violent
who have planned my downfall.
5 The arrogant have hidden a trap for me,
and with cords they have spread a net,
along the road they have set snares for me.
6 I say to the LORD, "You are my God;
give ear, O LORD, to the voice of my supplications."
7 O LORD, my Lord, my strong deliverer,
you have covered my head in the day of battle.
8 Do not grant, O LORD, the desires of the wicked;
do not further their evil plot.
9 Those who surround me lift up their heads;
let the mischief of their lips overwhelm them!
10 Let burning coals fall on them!
Let them be flung into pits, no more to rise!
11 Do not let the slanderer be established in the land;
let evil speedily hunt down the violent!
12 I know that the LORD maintains the cause of the needy,
and executes justice for the poor.
13 Surely the righteous shall give thanks to your name;
the upright shall live in your presence.

1220

PSALMS 1221

[Psalm 141]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 I call upon you, O LORD; come quickly to me;
give ear to my voice when I call to you.
2 Let my prayer be counted as incense before you,
and the lifting up of my hands as an evening sacrifice.
3 Set a guard over my mouth, O LORD;
keep watch over the door of my lips.
4 Do not turn my heart to any evil,
to busy myself with wicked deeds
in company with those who work iniquity;
do not let me eat of their delicacies.
5 Let the righteous strike me;
let the faithful correct me.
Never let the oil of the wicked anoint my head,
for my prayer is continually against their wicked deeds.
6 When they are given over to those who shall condemn them,
then they shall learn that my words were pleasant.
7 Like a rock that one breaks apart and shatters on the land,
so shall their bones be strewn at the mouth of Sheol.
8 But my eyes are turned toward you, O GOD, my Lord;
in you I seek refuge; do not leave me defenseless.
9 Keep me from the trap that they have laid for me,
and from the snares of evildoers.
10 Let the wicked fall into their own nets,
while I alone escape.
[Psalm 142]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 With my voice I cry to the LORD;
with my voice I make supplication to the LORD.
2 I pour out my complaint before him;
I tell my trouble before him.

1221

PSALMS 1222

3 When my spirit is faint,
you know my way.
In the path where I walk
they have hidden a trap for me.
4 Look on my right hand and see —
there is no one who takes notice of me;
no refuge remains to me;
no one cares for me.
5 I cry to you, O LORD;
I say, "You are my refuge,
my portion in the land of the living."
6 Give heed to my cry,
for I am brought very low.
Save me from my persecutors,
for they are too strong for me.
7 Bring me out of prison,
so that I may give thanks to your name.
The righteous will surround me,
for you will deal bountifully with me.
[Psalm 143]
Prayer for deliverance from enemies
1 Hear my prayer, O LORD;
give ear to my supplications in your faithfulness;
answer me in your righteousness.
2 Do not enter into judgment with your servant,
for no one living is righteous before you.
3 For the enemy has pursued me,
crushing my life to the ground,
making me sit in darkness like those long dead.
4 Therefore my spirit faints within me;
my heart within me is appalled.

1222

PSALMS 1223

5 I remember the days of old,
I think about all your deeds,
I meditate on the works of your hands.
6 I stretch out my hands to you;
my soul thirsts for you like a parched land.
7 Answer me quickly, O LORD;
my spirit fails.
Do not hide your face from me,
or I shall be like those who go down to the Pit.
8 Let me hear of your steadfast love in the morning,
for in you I put my trust.
Teach me the way I should go,
for to you I lift up my soul.
9 Save me, O LORD, from my enemies;
I have fled to you for refuge.
10 Teach me to do your will,
for you are my God.
Let your good spirit lead me
on a level path.
11 For your name's sake, O LORD, preserve my life.
In your righteousness bring me out of trouble.
12 In your steadfast love cut off my enemies,
and destroy all my adversaries,
for I am your servant.
[Psalm 144]
Royal prayer for deliverance
1 Blessed be the LORD, my rock,
who trains my hands for war, and my fingers for battle;
2 my rock and my fortress,
my stronghold and my deliverer,
my shield, in whom I take refuge,
who subdues the peoples under me.

1223

PSALMS 1224

3 O LORD, what are human beings that you regard them,
or mortals that you think of them?
4 They are like a breath;
their days are like a passing shadow.
5 Bow your heavens, O LORD, and come down;
touch the mountains so that they smoke.
6 Make the lightning flash and scatter them;
send out your arrows and rout them.
7 Stretch out your hand from on high;
set me free and rescue me from the mighty waters,
from the hand of aliens,
8 whose mouths speak lies,
and whose right hands are false.
9 I will sing a new song to you, O God;
upon a ten-stringed harp I will play to you,
10 the one who gives victory to kings,
who rescues his servant David.
11 Rescue me from the cruel sword,
and deliver me from the hand of aliens,
whose mouths speak lies,
and whose right hands are false.
12 May our sons in their youth
be like plants full grown,
our daughters like corner pillars,
cut for the building of a palace.
13 May our barns be filled,
with produce of every kind;
may our sheep increase by thousands,
by tens of thousands in our fields,
14
and may our cattle be heavy with young.
May there be no breach in the walls, no exile,
and no cry of distress in our streets.
15 Happy are the people to whom such blessings fall;
happy are the people whose God is the LORD.

1224

PSALMS 1225

[Psalm 145]
Praise of the divine king
1 I will extol you, my God and King,
and bless your name forever and ever.
2 Every day I will bless you,
and praise your name forever and ever.
3 Great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised;
his greatness is unsearchable.
4 One generation shall laud your works to another,
and shall declare your mighty acts.
5 On the glorious splendor of your majesty,
and on your wondrous works, I will meditate.
6 The might of your awesome deeds shall be proclaimed,
and I will declare your greatness.
7 They shall celebrate the fame of your abundant goodness,
and shall sing aloud of your righteousness.
8 The LORD is gracious and merciful,
slow to anger and abounding in steadfast love.
9 The LORD is good to all,
and his compassion is over all that he has made.
10 All your works shall give thanks to you, O LORD,
and all your faithful shall bless you.
11 They shall speak of the glory of your kingdom,
and tell of your power,
12 to make known to all people your mighty deeds,
and the glorious splendor of your kingdom.
13 Your kingdom is an everlasting kingdom,
and your dominion endures throughout all generations.
The LORD is faithful in all his words,
and gracious in all his deeds.
14 The LORD upholds all who are falling,
and raises up all who are bowed down.

1225

PSALMS 1226

15 The eyes of all look to you,
and you give them their food in due season.
16 You open your hand,
satisfying the desire of every living thing.
17 The LORD is just in all his ways,
and kind in all his doings.
18 The LORD is near to all who call on him,
to all who call on him in truth.
19 He fulfills the desire of all who fear him;
he also hears their cry, and saves them.
20 The LORD watches over all who love him,
but all the wicked he will destroy.
21 My mouth will speak the praise of the LORD,
and all flesh will bless his holy name forever and ever.
[Psalm 146]
Praise of God, creator and savior
1 Praise the LORD!
Praise the LORD, O my soul!
2 I will praise the LORD as long as I live;
I will sing praises to my God all my life long.
3 Do not put your trust in princes,
in mortals, in whom there is no help.
4 When their breath departs, they return to the earth;
on that very day their plans perish.
5 Happy are those whose help is the God of Jacob,
whose hope is in the LORD their God,
6 who made heaven and earth,
the sea, and all that is in them;
who keeps faith forever;
7 who executes justice for the oppressed;
who gives food to the hungry.

1226

PSALMS 1227

The LORD sets the prisoners free;
8
the LORD opens the eyes of the blind.
The LORD lifts up those who are bowed down;
the LORD loves the righteous.
9 The LORD watches over the strangers;
he upholds the orphan and the widow,
but the way of the wicked he brings to ruin.
10 The LORD will reign forever,
your God, O Zion, for all generations.
Praise the LORD!
[Psalm 147]
Praise of God, creator and savior
1 Praise the LORD!
How good it is to sing praises to our God;
for he is gracious, and a song of praise is fitting.
2 The LORD builds up Jerusalem;
he gathers the outcasts of Israel.
3 He heals the brokenhearted,
and binds up their wounds.
4 He determines the number of the stars;
he gives to all of them their names.
5 Great is our Lord, and abundant in power;
his understanding is beyond measure.
6 The LORD lifts up the downtrodden;
he casts the wicked to the ground.
7 Sing to the LORD with thanksgiving;
make melody to our God on the lyre.
8 He covers the heavens with clouds,
prepares rain for the earth,
makes grass grow on the hills.
9 He gives to the animals their food,
and to the young ravens when they cry.
10 His delight is not in the strength of the horse,
nor his pleasure in the speed of a runner;

1227

PSALMS 1228

11 but the LORD takes pleasure in those who fear him,
in those who hope in his steadfast love.
12 Praise the LORD, O Jerusalem!
Praise your God, O Zion!
13 For he strengthens the bars of your gates;
he blesses your children within you.
14 He grants peace within your borders;
he fills you with the finest of wheat.
15 He sends out his command to the earth;
his word runs swiftly.
16 He gives snow like wool;
he scatters frost like ashes.
17 He hurls down hail like crumbs —
who can stand before his cold?
18 He sends out his word, and melts them;
he makes his wind blow, and the waters flow.
19 He declares his word to Jacob,
his statutes and ordinances to Israel.
20 He has not dealt thus with any other nation;
they do not know his ordinances.
Praise the LORD!
[Psalm 148]
Praise of God from heaven and earth
1 Praise the LORD!
Praise the LORD from the heavens;
praise him in the heights!
2 Praise him, all his angels;
praise him, all his host!
3 Praise him, sun and moon;
praise him, all you shining stars!
4 Praise him, you highest heavens,
and you waters above the heavens!

1228

PSALMS 1229

5 Let them praise the name of the LORD,
for he commanded and they were created.
6 He established them forever and ever;
he fixed their bounds, which cannot be passed.
7 Praise the LORD from the earth,
you sea monsters and all deeps,
8 fire and hail, snow and frost,
stormy wind fulfilling his command!
9 Mountains and all hills,
fruit trees and all cedars!
10 Wild animals and all cattle,
creeping things and flying birds!
11 Kings of the earth and all peoples,
princes and all rulers of the earth!
12 Young men and women alike,
old and young together!
13 Let them praise the name of the LORD,
for his name alone is exalted;
his glory is above earth and heaven.
14 He has raised up a horn for his people,
praise for all his faithful,
for the people of Israel who are close to him.
Praise the LORD!
[Psalm 149]
Praise of Israel's creator and king
1 Praise the LORD!
Sing to the LORD a new song,
his praise in the assembly of the faithful.
2 Let Israel be glad in its Maker;
let the children of Zion rejoice in their King.
3 Let them praise his name with dancing,
making melody to him with tambourine and lyre.

1229

PSALMS 1230

4 For the LORD takes pleasure in his people;
he adorns the humble with victory.
5 Let the faithful exult in glory;
let them sing for joy on their couches.
6 Let the high praises of God be in their throats
and two-edged swords in their hands,
7 to execute vengeance on the nations
and punishment on the peoples,
8 to bind their kings with fetters
and their nobles with chains of iron,
9 to execute on them the judgment decreed.
This is glory for all his faithful ones.
Praise the LORD!
[Psalm 150]
Praise of God in the Temple
1 Praise the LORD!
Praise God in his sanctuary;
praise him in his mighty firmament!
2 Praise him for his mighty deeds;
praise him according to his surpassing greatness!
3 Praise him with trumpet sound;
praise him with lute and harp!
4 Praise him with tambourine and dance;
praise him with strings and pipe!
5 Praise him with clanging cymbals;
praise him with loud clashing cymbals!
6 Let everything that breathes praise the LORD!
Praise the LORD!

1230

PROVERBS 1231

PROVERBS
Introduction
The purpose of the book of Proverbs is to transmit insights whereby
one might learn to cope with life (1.2-6). Its emphasis is on teachings
gathered from tradition of the elders (e.g., 4.1-4) and from experience
(e.g., 6.6-11). In contrast to many other books of the Hebrew Bible,
major themes such as the Mosaic and Davidic covenants are absent;
Temple worship and sacrifice are rarely mentioned.
Although some sayings are neutral observations, on the whole a moral
ideal is inculcated. Guided by the principle that "the fear of the Lord is
the beginning of wisdom" (9.10; 1.7; 15.33), the sages emphasize values
such as honesty, diligence, trustworthiness, self-restraint, and
appropriate attitudes toward wealth and poverty. Proverbs
acknowledges the limitations of human wisdom (16.1-2, 9; 21.30), yet
the book offers a clear view of divine reward and punishment: Wisdom
(generally equated with righteousness) brings success; folly (or
wickedness) leads to destruction. The books of Job and Ecclesiastes,
however, show that this schematic account of divine justice remained a
problem for the sages.
The authorship of this composite work is multiple and essentially
anonymous. Some of the material appears to be preexilic, but the book
was completed in the post-exilic period. The attribution to Solomon
(1.1; 10.1; 25.1) derives from traditional accounts of his legendary
wisdom (1 Kings 4.29-34) and lends authority to the collection. The
book is typical of the wisdom literature of the Hebrew Bible and also
of the ancient Near East, especially Egypt. In fact, most scholars agree
that 22.17-23.11 is in some way dependent upon the "Instruction" of the
Egyptian sage, Amen-em-ope (ca. 1100 BCE). Royal scribes are
responsible for much of the material in Proverbs; hence the sayings
sometimes reflect an elite point of view. But the learned editors of the
1231

PROVERBS 1232

book also preserve the folk wisdom of ancient Israelite villages and
extended families.
The original audience of Proverbs was primarily young men preparing
for adult responsibilities; a male-centered perspective prevails in the
book. There is intense interest in finding a "good wife" (e.g., 12.4) and
in governing a household successfully. In chs 1-9, presented as the
instruction of a father to his son, the center of attention is a vibrant
feminine personification of divine Wisdom. She is opposed to the
foolish woman (ch 9) and to the complex, threatening figure of the
"strange woman" (chs 2, 5, 7).
Proverbs contains several sub-collections of short proverbial saying
framed by sets of longer wisdom poems in chs 1-9 and 30-31. The book
opens (1.1-7) with a title (1.1) followed by a programmatic statement of
purpose and theme (1.2-7). Then comes a lengthy instruction in Wisdom
(1.8-9.18), consisting of extended poems in second-person perspective,
with commands and admonitions usually completed by motive clauses.
Personified Wisdom and her opposites, the "strange woman" and the
foolish woman, are prominent. A collection of proverbial sayings
follows (10.1-22.16), each of which is typically two lines in parallel
thought, as is characteristic of Hebrew poetry. Antithetical parallelism
predominates in chs 10-15; synonymous or synthetic parallelism (in
which the second line repeats or extends the thought of the first) in
16.1-22.16. Another collection is "the words of the wise" (22.17-24.34),
which are teachings, chiefly brief admonitions, patterned after the
Egyptian "Instruction of Amen-em-ope" (esp. 22.17-23.11), with an
appendix of additional "sayings of the wise" in 24.23-24. Another
collection of sayings (25.1-29.27), credited to the "officials of King
Hezekiah (25.1), comprises two main sub-units, chs 25-27 and 28-29. The
words of Agur and other sayings (30.1-33) are a wisdom dialogue and a
prayer (vv. 1-9) followed by admonitions and numerical sayings (vv. 1033). The words of Lemuel (31.1-9) consist of teachings on sobriety and
responsibility attributed to King Lemuel's mother. Ending the
collection, and expressing both closure and completeness by its acrostic
form, is the section in praise of the woman of worth (31.10-31), a poem
on the ideal wife, the embodiment of Wisdom.

1232

PROVERBS 1233

The reader should begin with chs 1-9, which form an extended
invitation to the pursuit of Wisdom. Especially noteworthy are the
programmatic statements of 1.1-7 and 8-19 and the speeches of divine
Wisdom in 1.20-33 and 8.1-36. The sayings collections of chs 10-29 may
be approached as exercises in judicious reading. The artful
arrangement of discrete proverbs creates a certain coherence in the
Hebrew by means of catchwords, plays on words, alliteration and
assonance, and the thematic associations. Some sayings have been
repeated in other collections (e.g., 21.9 = 25.24); others are
meaningfully paired (e.g., 17.27-28; 26.4-5), or gathered in thematic
groups (e.g., 25.1-7). Although these verbal characteristics and thematic
arrangements may have been an mnemonic aid, the care given to these
groupings indicates that the interpretation of the sayings is meant to
be an exacting discipline (cf. 26.7, 9). Individual proverbs are not simply
to be mechanically applied; rather they should be read in creative
tension with one another. Proverbs invites the reader to intellectual
discipline as a life-giving synthesis of keen observation and reflection,
ethical concern, and piety.

[Proverbs 1]
Introduction
1 The proverbs of Solomon son of David, king of Israel:
The purpose of the book
2 For learning about wisdom and instruction,
for understanding words of insight,
3 for gaining instruction in wise dealing,
righteousness, justice, and equity;
4 to teach shrewdness to the simple,
knowledge and prudence to the young —
5 let the wise also hear and gain in learning,
and the discerning acquire skill,

1233

PROVERBS 1234

6 to understand a proverb and a figure,
the words of the wise and their riddles.
7 The fear of the LORD is the beginning of knowledge;
fools despise wisdom and instruction.
Instruction in Wisdom; instruction as a moral safeguard
8 Hear, my child, your father's instruction,
and do not reject your mother's teaching;
9 for they are a fair garland for your head,
and pendants for your neck.
10 My child, if sinners entice you,
do not consent.
11 If they say, "Come with us, let us lie in wait for blood;
let us wantonly ambush the innocent;
12 like Sheol let us swallow them alive
and whole, like those who go down to the Pit.
13 We shall find all kinds of costly things;
we shall fill our houses with booty.
14 Throw in your lot among us;
we will all have one purse" —
15 my child, do not walk in their way,
keep your foot from their paths;
16 for their feet run to evil,
and they hurry to shed blood.
17 For in vain is the net baited
while the bird is looking on;
18 yet they lie in wait — to kill themselves!
and set an ambush — for their own lives!
19 Such is the end of all who are greedy for gain;
it takes away the life of its possessors.
Wisdom personified as a prophet
20 Wisdom cries out in the street;
in the squares she raises her voice.

1234

PROVERBS 1235

21 At the busiest corner she cries out;
at the entrance of the city gates she speaks:
22 "How long, O simple ones, will you love being simple?
How long will scoffers delight in their scoffing
and fools hate knowledge?
23 Give heed to my reproof;
I will pour out my thoughts to you;
I will make my words known to you.
24 Because I have called and you refused,
have stretched out my hand and no one heeded,
25 and because you have ignored all my counsel
and would have none of my reproof,
26 I also will laugh at your calamity;
I will mock when panic strikes you,
27 when panic strikes you like a storm,
and your calamity comes like a whirlwind,
when distress and anguish come upon you.
28 Then they will call upon me, but I will not answer;
they will seek me diligently, but will not find me.
29 Because they hated knowledge
and did not choose the fear of the LORD,
30 would have none of my counsel,
and despised all my reproof,
31 therefore they shall eat the fruit of their way
and be sated with their own devices.
32 For waywardness kills the simple,
and the complacency of fools destroys them;
33 but those who listen to me will be secure
and will live at ease, without dread of disaster."
[Proverbs 2]
The fruits of the search for wisdom
1 My child, if you accept my words
and treasure up my commandments within you,
2 making your ear attentive to wisdom
and inclining your heart to understanding;

1235

PROVERBS 1236

3 if you indeed cry out for insight,
and raise your voice for understanding;
4 if you seek it like silver,
and search for it as for hidden treasures —
5 then you will understand the fear of the LORD
and find the knowledge of God.
6 For the LORD gives wisdom;
from his mouth come knowledge and understanding;
7 he stores up sound wisdom for the upright;
he is a shield to those who walk blamelessly,
8 guarding the paths of justice
and preserving the way of his faithful ones.
9 Then you will understand righteousness and justice
and equity, every good path;
10 for wisdom will come into your heart,
and knowledge will be pleasant to your soul;
11 prudence will watch over you;
and understanding will guard you.
12 It will save you from the way of evil,
from those who speak perversely,
13 who forsake the paths of uprightness
to walk in the ways of darkness,
14 who rejoice in doing evil
and delight in the perverseness of evil;
15 those whose paths are crooked,
and who are devious in their ways.
16 You will be saved from the loose woman,
from the adulteress with her smooth words,
17 who forsakes the partner of her youth
and forgets her sacred covenant;
18 for her way leads down to death,
and her paths to the shades;
19 those who go to her never come back,
nor do they regain the paths of life.

1236

PROVERBS 1237

20 Therefore walk in the way of the good,
and keep to the paths of the just.
21 For the upright will abide in the land,
and the innocent will remain in it;
22 but the wicked will be cut off from the land,
and the treacherous will be rooted out of it.
[Proverbs 3]
Instruction in fear of the Lord
1 My child, do not forget my teaching,
but let your heart keep my commandments;
2 for length of days and years of life
and abundant welfare they will give you.
3 Do not let loyalty and faithfulness forsake you;
bind them around your neck,
write them on the tablet of your heart.
4 So you will find favor and good repute
in the sight of God and of people.
5 Trust in the LORD with all your heart,
and do not rely on your own insight.
6 In all your ways acknowledge him,
and he will make straight your paths.
7 Do not be wise in your own eyes;
fear the LORD, and turn away from evil.
8 It will be a healing for your flesh
and a refreshment for your body.
9 Honor the LORD with your substance
and with the first fruits of all your produce;
10 then your barns will be filled with plenty,
and your vats will be bursting with wine.
11 My child, do not despise the LORD's discipline
or be weary of his reproof,
12 for the LORD reproves the one he loves,
as a father the son in whom he delights.

1237

PROVERBS 1238

In praise of Wisdom
13 Happy are those who find wisdom,
and those who get understanding,
14 for her income is better than silver,
and her revenue better than gold.
15 She is more precious than jewels,
and nothing you desire can compare with her.
16 Long life is in her right hand;
in her left hand are riches and honor.
17 Her ways are ways of pleasantness,
and all her paths are peace.
18 She is a tree of life to those who lay hold of her;
those who hold her fast are called happy.
19 The LORD by wisdom founded the earth;
by understanding he established the heavens;
20 by his knowledge the deeps broke open,
and the clouds drop down the dew.
An admonition followed by six prohibitions
21 My child, do not let these escape from your sight:
keep sound wisdom and prudence,
22 and they will be life for your soul
and adornment for your neck.
23 Then you will walk on your way securely
and your foot will not stumble.
24 If you sit down, you will not be afraid;
when you lie down, your sleep will be sweet.
25 Do not be afraid of sudden panic,
or of the storm that strikes the wicked;
26 for the LORD will be your confidence
and will keep your foot from being caught.
27 Do not withhold good from those to whom it is due,
when it is in your power to do it.

1238

PROVERBS 1239

28 Do not say to your neighbor, "Go, and come again,
tomorrow I will give it" — when you have it with you.
29 Do not plan harm against your neighbor
who lives trustingly beside you.
30 Do not quarrel with anyone without cause,
when no harm has been done to you.
31 Do not envy the violent
and do not choose any of their ways;
32 for the perverse are an abomination to the LORD,
but the upright are in his confidence.
33 The LORD's curse is on the house of the wicked,
but he blesses the abode of the righteous.
34 Toward the scorners he is scornful,
but to the humble he shows favor.
35 The wise will inherit honor,
but stubborn fools, disgrace.
[Proverbs 4]
Get Wisdom
1 Listen, children, to a father's instruction,
and be attentive, that you may gain insight;
2 for I give you good precepts:
do not forsake my teaching.
3 When I was a son with my father,
tender, and my mother's favorite,
4 he taught me, and said to me,
"Let your heart hold fast my words;
keep my commandments, and live.
5 Get wisdom; get insight: do not forget, nor turn away
from the words of my mouth.
6 Do not forsake her, and she will keep you;
love her, and she will guard you.
7 The beginning of wisdom is this: Get wisdom,
and whatever else you get, get insight.
8 Prize her highly, and she will exalt you;
she will honor you if you embrace her.

1239

PROVERBS 1240

9 She will place on your head a fair garland;
she will bestow on you a beautiful crown."
10 Hear, my child, and accept my words,
that the years of your life may be many.
11 I have taught you the way of wisdom;
I have led you in the paths of uprightness.
12 When you walk, your step will not be hampered;
and if you run, you will not stumble.
13 Keep hold of instruction; do not let go;
guard her, for she is your life.
14 Do not enter the path of the wicked,
and do not walk in the way of evildoers.
15 Avoid it; do not go on it;
turn away from it and pass on.
16 For they cannot sleep unless they have done wrong;
they are robbed of sleep unless they have made
someone stumble.
17 For they eat the bread of wickedness
and drink the wine of violence.
18 But the path of the righteous is like the light of dawn,
which shines brighter and brighter until full day.
19 The way of the wicked is like deep darkness;
they do not know what they stumble over.
20 My child, be attentive to my words;
incline your ear to my sayings.
21 Do not let them escape from your sight;
keep them within your heart.
22 For they are life to those who find them,
and healing to all their flesh.
23 Keep your heart with all vigilance,
for from it flow the springs of life.
24 Put away from you crooked speech,
and put devious talk far from you.
25 Let your eyes look directly forward,
and your gaze be straight before you.
26 Keep straight the path of your feet,
and all your ways will be sure.

1240

PROVERBS 1241

27 Do not swerve to the right or to the left;
turn your foot away from evil.
[Proverbs 5]
The dangers of the "strange woman"
1 My child, be attentive to my wisdom;
incline your ear to my understanding,
2 so that you may hold on to prudence,
and your lips may guard knowledge.
3 For the lips of a loose woman drip honey,
and her speech is smoother than oil;
4 but in the end she is bitter as wormwood,
sharp as a two-edged sword.
5 Her feet go down to death;
her steps follow the path to Sheol.
6 She does not keep straight to the path of life;
her ways wander, and she does not know it.
7 And now, my child, listen to me,
and do not depart from the words of my mouth.
8 Keep your way far from her,
and do not go near the door of her house;
9 or you will give your honor to others,
and your years to the merciless,
10 and strangers will take their fill of your wealth,
and your labors will go to the house of an alien;
11 and at the end of your life you will groan,
when your flesh and body are consumed,
12 and you say, "Oh, how I hated discipline,
and my heart despised reproof!
13 I did not listen to the voice of my teachers
or incline my ear to my instructors.
14 Now I am at the point of utter ruin
in the public assembly."
15 Drink water from your own cistern,
flowing water from your own well.

1241

PROVERBS 1242

16 Should your springs be scattered abroad,
streams of water in the streets?
17 Let them be for yourself alone,
and not for sharing with strangers.
18 Let your fountain be blessed,
and rejoice in the wife of your youth,
19 a lovely deer, a graceful doe.
May her breasts satisfy you at all times;
may you be intoxicated always by her love.
20 Why should you be intoxicated, my son, by another woman
and embrace the bosom of an adulteress?
21 For human ways are under the eyes of the LORD,
and he examines all their paths.
22 The iniquities of the wicked ensnare them,
and they are caught in the toils of their sin.
23 They die for lack of discipline,
and because of their great folly they are lost.
[Proverbs 6]
Warning
1 My child, if you have given your pledge to your neighbor,
if you have bound yourself to another,
2 you are snared by the utterance of your lips,
caught by the words of your mouth.
3 So do this, my child, and save yourself,
for you have come into your neighbor's power:
go, hurry, and plead with your neighbor.
4 Give your eyes no sleep
and your eyelids no slumber;
5 save yourself like a gazelle from the hunter,
like a bird from the hand of the fowler.
6 Go to the ant, you lazybones;
consider its ways, and be wise.
7 Without having any chief
or officer or ruler,

1242

PROVERBS 1243

8 it prepares its food in summer,
and gathers its sustenance in harvest.
9 How long will you lie there, O lazybones?
When will you rise from your sleep?
10 A little sleep, a little slumber,
a little folding of the hands to rest,
11 and poverty will come upon you like a robber,
and want, like an armed warrior.
12 A scoundrel and a villain
goes around with crooked speech,
13 winking the eyes, shuffling the feet,
pointing the fingers,
14 with perverted mind devising evil,
continually sowing discord;
15 on such a one calamity will descend suddenly;
in a moment, damage beyond repair.
16 There are six things that the LORD hates,
seven that are an abomination to him:
17 haughty eyes, a lying tongue,
and hands that shed innocent blood,
18 a heart that devises wicked plans,
feet that hurry to run to evil,
19 a lying witness who testifies falsely,
and one who sows discord in a family.
The perils of adultery
20 My child, keep your father's commandment,
and do not forsake your mother's teaching.
21 Bind them upon your heart always;
tie them around your neck.
22 When you walk, they will lead you;
when you lie down, they will watch over you;
and when you awake, they will talk with you.
23 For the commandment is a lamp and the teaching a light,
and the reproofs of discipline are the way of life,

1243

PROVERBS 1244

24 to preserve you from the wife of another,
from the smooth tongue of the adulteress.
25 Do not desire her beauty in your heart,
and do not let her capture you with her eyelashes;
26 for a prostitute's fee is only a loaf of bread,
but the wife of another stalks a man's very life.
27 Can fire be carried in the bosom
without burning one's clothes?
28 Or can one walk on hot coals
without scorching the feet?
29 So is he who sleeps with his neighbor's wife;
no one who touches her will go unpunished.
30 Thieves are not despised who steal only
to satisfy their appetite when they are hungry.
31 Yet if they are caught, they will pay sevenfold;
they will forfeit all the goods of their house.
32 But he who commits adultery has no sense;
he who does it destroys himself.
33 He will get wounds and dishonor,
and his disgrace will not be wiped away.
34 For jealousy arouses a husband's fury,
and he shows no restraint when he takes revenge.
35 He will accept no compensation,
and refuses a bribe no matter how great.
[Proverbs 7]
Another warning against the "strange woman"
1 My child, keep my words
and store up my commandments with you;
2 keep my commandments and live,
keep my teachings as the apple of your eye;
3 bind them on your fingers,
write them on the tablet of your heart.
4 Say to wisdom, "You are my sister,"
and call insight your intimate friend,
5 that they may keep you from the loose woman,
from the adulteress with her smooth words.

1244

PROVERBS 1245

6 For at the window of my house
I looked out through my lattice,
7 and I saw among the simple ones,
I observed among the youths,
a young man without sense,
8 passing along the street near her corner,
taking the road to her house
9 in the twilight, in the evening,
at the time of night and darkness.
10 Then a woman comes toward him,
decked out like a prostitute, wily of heart.
11 She is loud and wayward;
her feet do not stay at home;
12 now in the street, now in the squares,
and at every corner she lies in wait.
13 She seizes him and kisses him,
and with impudent face she says to him:
14 "I had to offer sacrifices,
and today I have paid my vows;
15 so now I have come out to meet you,
to seek you eagerly, and I have found you!
16 I have decked my couch with coverings,
colored spreads of Egyptian linen;
17 I have perfumed my bed with myrrh,
aloes, and cinnamon.
18 Come, let us take our fill of love until morning;
let us delight ourselves with love.
19 For my husband is not at home;
he has gone on a long journey.
20 He took a bag of money with him;
he will not come home until full moon."
21 With much seductive speech she persuades him;
with her smooth talk she compels him.
22 Right away he follows her,
and goes like an ox to the slaughter,
or bounds like a stag toward the trap

1245

PROVERBS 1246

23 until an arrow pierces its entrails.
He is like a bird rushing into a snare,
not knowing that it will cost him his life.
24 And now, my children, listen to me,
and be attentive to the words of my mouth.
25 Do not let your hearts turn aside to her ways;
do not stray into her paths.
26 for many are those she has laid low,
and numerous are her victims.
27 Her house is the way to Sheol,
going down to the chambers of death.
[Proverbs 8]
Wisdom speaks
1 Does not wisdom call,
and does not understanding raise her voice?
2 On the heights, beside the way,
at the crossroads she takes her stand;
3 beside the gates in front of the town,
at the entrance of the portals she cries out:
4 "To you, O people, I call,
and my cry is to all that live.
5 O simple ones, learn prudence;
acquire intelligence, you who lack it.
6 Hear, for I will speak noble things,
and from my lips will come what is right;
7 for my mouth will utter truth;
wickedness is an abomination to my lips.
8 All the words of my mouth are righteous;
there is nothing twisted or crooked in them.
9 They are all straight to one who understands
and right to those who find knowledge.
10 Take my instruction instead of silver,
and knowledge rather than choice gold;
11 for wisdom is better than jewels,
and all that you may desire cannot compare with her.

1246

PROVERBS 1247

12 I, wisdom, live with prudence,
and I attain knowledge and discretion.
13 The fear of the LORD is hatred of evil.
Pride and arrogance and the way of evil
and perverted speech I hate.
14 I have good advice and sound wisdom;
I have insight, I have strength.
15 By me kings reign,
and rulers decree what is just;
16 by me rulers rule,
and nobles, all who govern rightly.
17 I love those who love me,
and those who seek me diligently find me.
18 Riches and honor are with me,
enduring wealth and prosperity.
19 My fruit is better than gold, even fine gold,
and my yield than choice silver.
20 I walk in the way of righteousness,
along the paths of justice,
21 endowing with wealth those who love me,
and filling their treasuries.
22 The LORD created me at the beginning of his work,
the first of his acts of long ago.
23 Ages ago I was set up,
at the first, before the beginning of the earth.
24 When there were no depths I was brought forth,
when there were no springs abounding with water.
25 Before the mountains had been shaped,
before the hills, I was brought forth —
26 when he had not yet made earth and fields,
or the world's first bits of soil.
27 When he established the heavens, I was there,
when he drew a circle on the face of the deep,
28 when he made firm the skies above,
when he established the fountains of the deep,
29 when he assigned to the sea its limit,
so that the waters might not transgress his command,
when he marked out the foundations of the earth,

1247

PROVERBS 1248

30 then I was beside him, like a master worker;
and I was daily his delight,
rejoicing before him always,
31 rejoicing in his inhabited world
and delighting in the human race.
32 "And now, my children, listen to me:
happy are those who keep my ways.
33 Hear instruction and be wise,
and do not neglect it.
34 Happy is the one who listens to me,
watching daily at my gates,
waiting beside my doors.
35 For whoever finds me finds life
and obtains favor from the LORD;
36 but those who miss me injure themselves;
all who hate me love death."
[Proverbs 9]
Wisdom invites the unwise to her banquet
1 Wisdom has built her house,
she has hewn her seven pillars.
2 She has slaughtered her animals, she has mixed her wine,
she has also set her table.
3 She has sent out her servant-girls, she calls
from the highest places in the town,
4 "You that are simple, turn in here!"
To those without sense she says,
5 "Come, eat of my bread
and drink of the wine I have mixed.
6 Lay aside immaturity, and live,
and walk in the way of insight."
7 Whoever corrects a scoffer wins abuse;
whoever rebukes the wicked gets hurt.
8 A scoffer who is rebuked will only hate you;
the wise, when rebuked, will love you.

1248

PROVERBS 1249

9 Give instruction to the wise, and they will become wiser still;
teach the righteous and they will gain in learning.
10 The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom,
and the knowledge of the Holy One is insight.
11 For by me your days will be multiplied,
and years will be added to your life.
12 If you are wise, you are wise for yourself;
if you scoff, you alone will bear it.
13 The foolish woman is loud;
she is ignorant and knows nothing.
14 She sits at the door of her house,
on a seat at the high places of the town,
15 calling to those who pass by,
who are going straight on their way,
16 "You who are simple, turn in here!"
And to those without sense she says,
17 "Stolen water is sweet,
and bread eaten in secret is pleasant."
18 But they do not know that the dead are there,
that her guests are in the depths of Sheol.
[Proverbs 10]
Proverbial sayings
1 The proverbs of Solomon.
A wise child makes a glad father,
but a foolish child is a mother's grief.
2 Treasures gained by wickedness do not profit,
but righteousness delivers from death.
3 The LORD does not let the righteous go hungry,
but he thwarts the craving of the wicked.
4 A slack hand causes poverty,
but the hand of the diligent makes rich.
5 A child who gathers in summer is prudent,
but a child who sleeps in harvest brings shame.

1249

PROVERBS 1250

6 Blessings are on the head of the righteous,
but the mouth of the wicked conceals violence.
7 The memory of the righteous is a blessing,
but the name of the wicked will rot.
8 The wise of heart will heed commandments,
but a babbling fool will come to ruin.
9 Whoever walks in integrity walks securely,
but whoever follows perverse ways will be found out.
10 Whoever winks the eye causes trouble,
but the one who rebukes boldly makes peace.
11 The mouth of the righteous is a fountain of life,
but the mouth of the wicked conceals violence.
12 Hatred stirs up strife,
but love covers all offenses.
13 On the lips of one who has understanding wisdom is found,
but a rod is for the back of one who lacks sense.
14 The wise lay up knowledge,
but the babbling of a fool brings ruin near.
15 The wealth of the rich is their fortress;
the poverty of the poor is their ruin.
16 The wage of the righteous leads to life,
the gain of the wicked to sin.
17 Whoever heeds instruction is on the path to life,
but one who rejects a rebuke goes astray.
18 Lying lips conceal hatred,
and whoever utters slander is a fool.
19 When words are many, transgression is not lacking,
but the prudent are restrained in speech.
20 The tongue of the righteous is choice silver;
the mind of the wicked is of little worth.
21 The lips of the righteous feed many,
but fools die for lack of sense.
22 The blessing of the LORD makes rich,
and he adds no sorrow with it.
23 Doing wrong is like sport to a fool,
but wise conduct is pleasure to a person of understanding.
24 What the wicked dread will come upon them,
but the desire of the righteous will be granted.

1250

PROVERBS 1251

25 When the tempest passes, the wicked are no more,
but the righteous are established forever.
26 Like vinegar to the teeth, and smoke to the eyes,
so are the lazy to their employers.
27 The fear of the LORD prolongs life,
but the years of the wicked will be short.
28 The hope of the righteous ends in gladness,
but the expectation of the wicked comes to nothing.
29 The way of the LORD is a stronghold for the upright,
but destruction for evildoers.
30 The righteous will never be removed,
but the wicked will not remain in the land.
31 The mouth of the righteous brings forth wisdom,
but the perverse tongue will be cut off.
32 The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable,
but the mouth of the wicked what is perverse.
[Proverbs 11]
1 A false balance is an abomination to the LORD,
but an accurate weight is his delight.
2 When pride comes, then comes disgrace;
but wisdom is with the humble.
3 The integrity of the upright guides them,
but the crookedness of the treacherous destroys them.
4 Riches do not profit in the day of wrath,
but righteousness delivers from death.
5 The righteousness of the blameless keeps their ways straight,
but the wicked fall by their own wickedness.
6 The righteousness of the upright saves them,
but the treacherous are taken captive by their schemes.
7 When the wicked die, their hope perishes,
and the expectation of the godless comes to nothing.
8 The righteous are delivered from trouble,
and the wicked get into it instead.
9 With their mouths the godless would destroy their neighbors,
but by knowledge the righteous are delivered.

1251

PROVERBS 1252

10 When it goes well with the righteous, the city rejoices;
and when the wicked perish, there is jubilation.
11 By the blessing of the upright a city is exalted,
but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.
12 Whoever belittles another lacks sense,
but an intelligent person remains silent.
13 A gossip goes about telling secrets,
but one who is trustworthy in spirit keeps a confidence.
14 Where there is no guidance, a nation falls,
but in an abundance of counselors there is safety.
15 To guarantee loans for a stranger brings trouble,
but there is safety in refusing to do so.
16 A gracious woman gets honor,
but she who hates virtue is covered with shame.
The timid become destitute,
but the aggressive gain riches.
17 Those who are kind reward themselves,
but the cruel do themselves harm.
18 The wicked earn no real gain,
but those who sow righteousness get a true reward.
19 Whoever is steadfast in righteousness will live,
but whoever pursues evil will die.
20 Crooked minds are an abomination to the LORD,
but those of blameless ways are his delight.
21 Be assured, the wicked will not go unpunished,
but those who are righteous will escape.
22 Like a gold ring in a pig's snout
is a beautiful woman without good sense.
23 The desire of the righteous ends only in good;
the expectation of the wicked in wrath.
24 Some give freely, yet grow all the richer;
others withhold what is due, and only suffer want.
25 A generous person will be enriched,
and one who gives water will get water.
26 The people curse those who hold back grain,
but a blessing is on the head of those who sell it.
27 Whoever diligently seeks good seeks favor,
but evil comes to the one who searches for it.

1252

PROVERBS 1253

28 Those who trust in their riches will wither,
but the righteous will flourish like green leaves.
29 Those who trouble their households will inherit wind,
and the fool will be servant to the wise.
30 The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life,
but violence takes lives away.
31 If the righteous are repaid on earth,
how much more the wicked and the sinner!
[Proverbs 12]
1 Whoever loves discipline loves knowledge,
but those who hate to be rebuked are stupid.
2 The good obtain favor from the LORD,
but those who devise evil he condemns.
3 No one finds security by wickedness,
but the root of the righteous will never be moved.
4 A good wife is the crown of her husband,
but she who brings shame is like rottenness in his bones.
5 The thoughts of the righteous are just;
the advice of the wicked is treacherous.
6 The words of the wicked are a deadly ambush,
but the speech of the upright delivers them.
7 The wicked are overthrown and are no more,
but the house of the righteous will stand.
8 One is commended for good sense,
but a perverse mind is despised.
9 Better to be despised and have a servant,
than to be self-important and lack food.
10 The righteous know the needs of their animals,
but the mercy of the wicked is cruel.
11 Those who till their land will have plenty of food,
but those who follow worthless pursuits have no sense.
12 The wicked covet the proceeds of wickedness,
but the root of the righteous bears fruit.
13 The evil are ensnared by the transgression of their lips,
but the righteous escape from trouble.

1253

PROVERBS 1254

14 From the fruit of the mouth one is filled with good things,
and manual labor has its reward.
15 Fools think their own way is right,
but the wise listen to advice.
16 Fools show their anger at once,
but the prudent ignore an insult.
17 Whoever speaks the truth gives honest evidence,
but a false witness speaks deceitfully.
18 Rash words are like sword thrusts,
but the tongue of the wise brings healing.
19 Truthful lips endure forever,
but a lying tongue lasts only a moment.
20 Deceit is in the mind of those who plan evil,
but those who counsel peace have joy.
21 No harm happens to the righteous,
but the wicked are filled with trouble.
22 Lying lips are an abomination to the LORD,
but those who act faithfully are his delight.
23 One who is clever conceals knowledge,
but the mind of a fool broadcasts folly.
24 The hand of the diligent will rule,
while the lazy will be put to forced labor.
25 Anxiety weighs down the human heart,
but a good word cheers it up.
26 The righteous gives good advice to friends,
but the way of the wicked leads astray.
27 The lazy do not roast their game,
but the diligent obtain precious wealth.
28 In the path of righteousness there is life,
in walking its path there is no death.
[Proverbs 13]
1 A wise child loves discipline,
but a scoffer does not listen to rebuke.
2 From the fruit of their words good persons eat good things,
but the desire of the treacherous is for wrongdoing.

1254

PROVERBS 1255

3 Those who guard their mouths preserve their lives;
those who open wide their lips come to ruin.
4 The appetite of the lazy craves, and gets nothing,
while the appetite of the diligent is richly supplied.
5 The righteous hate falsehood,
but the wicked act shamefully and disgracefully.
6 Righteousness guards one whose way is upright,
but sin overthrows the wicked.
7 Some pretend to be rich, yet have nothing;
others pretend to be poor, yet have great wealth.
8 Wealth is a ransom for a person's life,
but the poor get no threats.
9 The light of the righteous rejoices,
but the lamp of the wicked goes out.
10 By insolence the heedless make strife,
but wisdom is with those who take advice.
11 Wealth hastily gotten will dwindle,
but those who gather little by little will increase it.
12 Hope deferred makes the heart sick,
but a desire fulfilled is a tree of life.
13 Those who despise the word bring destruction on themselves,
but those who respect the commandment will be rewarded.
14 The teaching of the wise is a fountain of life,
so that one may avoid the snares of death.
15 Good sense wins favor,
but the way of the faithless is their ruin.
16 The clever do all things intelligently,
but the fool displays folly.
17 A bad messenger brings trouble,
but a faithful envoy, healing.
18 Poverty and disgrace are for the one who ignores instruction,
but one who heeds reproof is honored.
19 A desire realized is sweet to the soul,
but to turn away from evil is an abomination to fools.
20 Whoever walks with the wise becomes wise,
but the companion of fools suffers harm.
21 Misfortune pursues sinners,
but prosperity rewards the righteous.

1255

PROVERBS 1256

22 The good leave an inheritance to their children's children,
but the sinner's wealth is laid up for the righteous.
23 The field of the poor may yield much food,
but it is swept away through injustice.
24 Those who spare the rod hate their children,
but those who love them are diligent to discipline them.
25 The righteous have enough to satisfy their appetite,
but the belly of the wicked is empty.
[Proverbs 14]
1 The wise woman builds her house,
but the foolish tears it down with her own hands.
2 Those who walk uprightly fear the LORD,
but one who is devious in conduct despises him.
3 The talk of fools is a rod for their backs,
but the lips of the wise preserve them.
4 Where there are no oxen, there is no grain;
abundant crops come by the strength of the ox.
5 A faithful witness does not lie,
but a false witness breathes out lies.
6 A scoffer seeks wisdom in vain,
but knowledge is easy for one who understands.
7 Leave the presence of a fool,
for there you do not find words of knowledge.
8 It is the wisdom of the clever to understand where they go,
but the folly of fools misleads.
9 Fools mock at the guilt offering,
but the upright enjoy God's favor.
10 The heart knows its own bitterness,
and no stranger shares its joy.
11 The house of the wicked is destroyed,
but the tent of the upright flourishes.
12 There is a way that seems right to a person,
but its end is the way to death.
13 Even in laughter the heart is sad,
and the end of joy is grief.

1256

PROVERBS 1257

14 The perverse get what their ways deserve,
and the good, what their deeds deserve.
15 The simple believe everything,
but the clever consider their steps.
16 The wise are cautious and turn away from evil,
but the fool throws off restraint and is careless.
17 One who is quick-tempered acts foolishly,
and the schemer is hated.
18 The simple are adorned with folly,
but the clever are crowned with knowledge.
19 The evil bow down before the good,
the wicked at the gates of the righteous.
20 The poor are disliked even by their neighbors,
but the rich have many friends.
21 Those who despise their neighbors are sinners,
but happy are those who are kind to the poor.
22 Do they not err that plan evil?
Those who plan good find loyalty and faithfulness.
23 In all toil there is profit,
but mere talk leads only to poverty.
24 The crown of the wise is their wisdom,
but folly is the garland of fools.
25 A truthful witness saves lives,
but one who utters lies is a betrayer.
26 In the fear of the LORD one has strong confidence,
and one's children will have a refuge.
27 The fear of the LORD is a fountain of life,
so that one may avoid the snares of death.
28 The glory of a king is a multitude of people;
without people a prince is ruined.
29 Whoever is slow to anger has great understanding,
but one who has a hasty temper exalts folly.
30 A tranquil mind gives life to the flesh,
but passion makes the bones rot.
31 Those who oppress the poor insult their Maker,
but those who are kind to the needy honor him.
32 The wicked are overthrown by their evildoing,
but the righteous find a refuge in their integrity.

1257

PROVERBS 1258

33 Wisdom is at home in the mind of one who has understanding,
but it is not known in the heart of fools.
34 Righteousness exalts a nation,
but sin is a reproach to any people.
35 A servant who deals wisely has the king's favor,
but his wrath falls on one who acts shamefully.
[Proverbs 15]
1 A soft answer turns away wrath,
but a harsh word stirs up anger.
2 The tongue of the wise dispenses knowledge,
but the mouths of fools pour out folly.
3 The eyes of the LORD are in every place,
keeping watch on the evil and the good.
4 A gentle tongue is a tree of life,
but perverseness in it breaks the spirit.
5 A fool despises a parent's instruction,
but the one who heeds admonition is prudent.
6 In the house of the righteous there is much treasure,
but trouble befalls the income of the wicked.
7 The lips of the wise spread knowledge;
not so the minds of fools.
8 The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the LORD,
but the prayer of the upright is his delight.
9 The way of the wicked is an abomination to the LORD,
but he loves the one who pursues righteousness.
10 There is severe discipline for one who forsakes the way,
but one who hates a rebuke will die.
11 Sheol and Abaddon lie open before the LORD,
how much more human hearts!
12 Scoffers do not like to be rebuked;
they will not go to the wise.
13 A glad heart makes a cheerful countenance,
but by sorrow of heart the spirit is broken.
14 The mind of one who has understanding seeks knowledge,
but the mouths of fools feed on folly.

1258

PROVERBS 1259

15 All the days of the poor are hard,
but a cheerful heart has a continual feast.
16 Better is a little with the fear of the LORD
than great treasure and trouble with it.
17 Better is a dinner of vegetables where love is
than a fatted ox and hatred with it.
18 Those who are hot-tempered stir up strife,
but those who are slow to anger calm contention.
19 The way of the lazy is overgrown with thorns,
but the path of the upright is a level highway.
20 A wise child makes a glad father,
but the foolish despise their mothers.
21 Folly is a joy to one who has no sense,
but a person of understanding walks straight ahead.
22 Without counsel, plans go wrong,
but with many advisers they succeed.
23 To make an apt answer is a joy to anyone,
and a word in season, how good it is!
24 For the wise the path of life leads upward,
in order to avoid Sheol below.
25 The LORD tears down the house of the proud,
but maintains the widow's boundaries.
26 Evil plans are an abomination to the LORD,
but gracious words are pure.
27 Those who are greedy for unjust gain make
trouble for their households,
but those who hate bribes will live.
28 The mind of the righteous ponders how to answer,
but the mouth of the wicked pours out evil.
29 The LORD is far from the wicked,
but he hears the prayer of the righteous.
30 The light of the eyes rejoices the heart,
and good news refreshes the body.
31 The ear that heeds wholesome admonition
will lodge among the wise.
32 Those who ignore instruction despise themselves,
but those who heed admonition gain understanding.

1259

PROVERBS 1260

33 The fear of the LORD is instruction in wisdom,
and humility goes before honor.
[Proverbs 16]
1 The plans of the mind belong to mortals,
but the answer of the tongue is from the LORD.
2 All one's ways may be pure in one's own eyes,
but the LORD weighs the spirit.
3 Commit your work to the LORD,
and your plans will be established.
4 The LORD has made everything for its purpose,
even the wicked for the day of trouble.
5 All those who are arrogant are an abomination to the LORD;
be assured, they will not go unpunished.
6 By loyalty and faithfulness iniquity is atoned for,
and by the fear of the LORD one avoids evil.
7 When the ways of people please the LORD,
he causes even their enemies to be at peace with them.
8 Better is a little with righteousness
than large income with injustice.
9 The human mind plans the way,
but the LORD directs the steps.
10 Inspired decisions are on the lips of a king;
his mouth does not sin in judgment.
11 Honest balances and scales are the LORD's;
all the weights in the bag are his work.
12 It is an abomination to kings to do evil,
for the throne is established by righteousness.
13 Righteous lips are the delight of a king,
and he loves those who speak what is right.
14 A king's wrath is a messenger of death,
and whoever is wise will appease it.
15 In the light of a king's face there is life,
and his favor is like the clouds that bring the spring rain.
16 How much better to get wisdom than gold!
To get understanding is to be chosen rather than silver.

1260

PROVERBS 1261

17 The highway of the upright avoids evil;
those who guard their way preserve their lives.
18 Pride goes before destruction,
and a haughty spirit before a fall.
19 It is better to be of a lowly spirit among the poor
than to divide the spoil with the proud.
20 Those who are attentive to a matter will prosper,
and happy are those who trust in the LORD.
21 The wise of heart is called perceptive,
and pleasant speech increases persuasiveness.
22 Wisdom is a fountain of life to one who has it,
but folly is the punishment of fools.
23 The mind of the wise makes their speech judicious,
and adds persuasiveness to their lips.
24 Pleasant words are like a honeycomb,
sweetness to the soul and health to the body.
25 Sometimes there is a way that seems to be right,
but in the end it is the way to death.
26 The appetite of workers works for them;
their hunger urges them on.
27 Scoundrels concoct evil,
and their speech is like a scorching fire.
28 A perverse person spreads strife,
and a whisperer separates close friends.
29 The violent entice their neighbors,
and lead them in a way that is not good.
30 One who winks the eyes plans perverse things;
one who compresses the lips brings evil to pass.
31 Gray hair is a crown of glory;
it is gained in a righteous life.
32 One who is slow to anger is better than the mighty,
and one whose temper is controlled than one who captures a city.
33 The lot is cast into the lap,
but the decision is the LORD's alone.

1261

PROVERBS 1262

[Proverbs 17]
1 Better is a dry morsel with quiet
than a house full of feasting with strife.
2 A slave who deals wisely will rule over a child who acts shamefully,
and will share the inheritance as one of the family.
3 The crucible is for silver, and the furnace is for gold,
but the LORD tests the heart.
4 An evildoer listens to wicked lips;
and a liar gives heed to a mischievous tongue.
5 Those who mock the poor insult their Maker;
those who are glad at calamity will not go unpunished.
6 Grandchildren are the crown of the aged,
and the glory of children is their parents.
7 Fine speech is not becoming to a fool;
still less is false speech to a ruler.
8 A bribe is like a magic stone in the eyes of those who give it;
wherever they turn they prosper.
9 One who forgives an affront fosters friendship,
but one who dwells on disputes will alienate a friend.
10 A rebuke strikes deeper into a discerning person
than a hundred blows into a fool.
11 Evil people seek only rebellion,
but a cruel messenger will be sent against them.
12 Better to meet a she-bear robbed of its cubs
than to confront a fool immersed in folly.
13 Evil will not depart from the house
of one who returns evil for good.
14 The beginning of strife is like letting out water;
so stop before the quarrel breaks out.
15 One who justifies the wicked and one who condemns the righteous
are both alike an abomination to the LORD.
16 Why should fools have a price in hand
to buy wisdom, when they have no mind to learn?
17 A friend loves at all times,
and kinsfolk are born to share adversity.
18 It is senseless to give a pledge,
to become surety for a neighbor.

1262

PROVERBS 1263

19 One who loves transgression loves strife;
one who builds a high threshold invites broken bones.
20 The crooked of mind do not prosper,
and the perverse of tongue fall into calamity.
21 The one who begets a fool gets trouble;
the parent of a fool has no joy.
22 A cheerful heart is a good medicine,
but a downcast spirit dries up the bones.
23 The wicked accept a concealed bribe
to pervert the ways of justice.
24 The discerning person looks to wisdom,
but the eyes of a fool to the ends of the earth.
25 Foolish children are a grief to their father
and bitterness to her who bore them.
26 To impose a fine on the innocent is not right,
or to flog the noble for their integrity.
27 One who spares words is knowledgeable;
one who is cool in spirit has understanding.
28 Even fools who keep silent are considered wise;
when they close their lips, they are deemed intelligent.
[Proverbs 18]
1 The one who lives alone is self-indulgent,
showing contempt for all who have sound judgment.
2 A fool takes no pleasure in understanding,
but only in expressing personal opinion.
3 When wickedness comes, contempt comes also;
and with dishonor comes disgrace.
4 The words of the mouth are deep waters;
the fountain of wisdom is a gushing stream.
5 It is not right to be partial to the guilty,
or to subvert the innocent in judgment.
6 A fool's lips bring strife,
and a fool's mouth invites a flogging.
7 The mouths of fools are their ruin,
and their lips a snare to themselves.

1263

PROVERBS 1264

8 The words of a whisperer are like delicious morsels;
they go down into the inner parts of the body.
9 One who is slack in work
is close kin to a vandal.
10 The name of the LORD is a strong tower;
the righteous run into it and are safe.
11 The wealth of the rich is their strong city;
in their imagination it is like a high wall.
12 Before destruction one's heart is haughty,
but humility goes before honor.
13 If one gives answer before hearing,
it is folly and shame.
14 The human spirit will endure sickness;
but a broken spirit — who can bear?
15 An intelligent mind acquires knowledge,
and the ear of the wise seeks knowledge.
16 A gift opens doors;
it gives access to the great.
17 The one who first states a case seems right,
until the other comes and cross-examines.
18 Casting the lot puts an end to disputes
and decides between powerful contenders.
19 An ally offended is stronger than a city;
such quarreling is like the bars of a castle.
20 From the fruit of the mouth one's stomach is satisfied;
the yield of the lips brings satisfaction.
21 Death and life are in the power of the tongue,
and those who love it will eat its fruits.
22 He who finds a wife finds a good thing,
and obtains favor from the LORD.
23 The poor use entreaties,
but the rich answer roughly.
24 Some friends play at friendship
but a true friend sticks closer than one's nearest kin.

1264

PROVERBS 1265

[Proverbs 19]
1 Better the poor walking in integrity
than one perverse of speech who is a fool.
2 Desire without knowledge is not good,
and one who moves too hurriedly misses the way.
3 One's own folly leads to ruin,
yet the heart rages against the LORD.
4 Wealth brings many friends,
but the poor are left friendless.
5 A false witness will not go unpunished,
and a liar will not escape.
6 Many seek the favor of the generous,
and everyone is a friend to a giver of gifts.
7 If the poor are hated even by their kin,
how much more are they shunned by their friends!
When they call after them, they are not there.
8 To get wisdom is to love oneself;
to keep understanding is to prosper.
9 A false witness will not go unpunished,
and the liar will perish.
10 It is not fitting for a fool to live in luxury,
much less for a slave to rule over princes.
11 Those with good sense are slow to anger,
and it is their glory to overlook an offense.
12 A king's anger is like the growling of a lion,
but his favor is like dew on the grass.
13 A stupid child is ruin to a father,
and a wife's quarreling is a continual dripping of rain.
14 House and wealth are inherited from parents,
but a prudent wife is from the LORD.
15 Laziness brings on deep sleep;
an idle person will suffer hunger.
16 Those who keep the commandment will live;
those who are heedless of their ways will die.
17 Whoever is kind to the poor lends to the LORD,
and will be repaid in full.

1265

PROVERBS 1266

18 Discipline your children while there is hope;
do not set your heart on their destruction.
19 A violent tempered person will pay the penalty;
if you effect a rescue, you will only have to do it again.
20 Listen to advice and accept instruction,
that you may gain wisdom for the future.
21 The human mind may devise many plans,
but it is the purpose of the LORD that will be established.
22 What is desirable in a person is loyalty,
and it is better to be poor than a liar.
23 The fear of the LORD is life indeed;
filled with it one rests secure
and suffers no harm.
24 The lazy person buries a hand in the dish,
and will not even bring it back to the mouth.
25 Strike a scoffer, and the simple will learn prudence;
reprove the intelligent, and they will gain knowledge.
26 Those who do violence to their father and chase away their mother
are children who cause shame and bring reproach.
27 Cease straying, my child, from the words of knowledge,
in order that you may hear instruction.
28 A worthless witness mocks at justice,
and the mouth of the wicked devours iniquity.
29 Condemnation is ready for scoffers,
and flogging for the backs of fools.
[Proverbs 20]
1 Wine is a mocker, strong drink a brawler,
and whoever is led astray by it is not wise.
2 The dread anger of a king is like the growling of a lion;
anyone who provokes him to anger forfeits life itself.
3 It is honorable to refrain from strife,
but every fool is quick to quarrel.
4 The lazy person does not plow in season;
harvest comes, and there is nothing to be found.
5 The purposes in the human mind are like deep water,
but the intelligent will draw them out.

1266

PROVERBS 1267

6 Many proclaim themselves loyal,
but who can find one worthy of trust?
7 The righteous walk in integrity —
happy are the children who follow them!
8 A king who sits on the throne of judgment
winnows all evil with his eyes.
9 Who can say, "I have made my heart clean;
I am pure from my sin"?
10 Diverse weights and diverse measures
are both alike an abomination to the LORD.
11 Even children make themselves known by their acts,
by whether what they do is pure and right.
12 The hearing ear and the seeing eye —
the LORD has made them both.
13 Do not love sleep, or else you will come to poverty;
open your eyes, and you will have plenty of bread.
14 "Bad, bad," says the buyer,
then goes away and boasts.
15 There is gold, and abundance of costly stones;
but the lips informed by knowledge are a precious jewel.
16 Take the garment of one who has given surety for a stranger;
seize the pledge given as surety for foreigners.
17 Bread gained by deceit is sweet,
but afterward the mouth will be full of gravel.
18 Plans are established by taking advice;
wage war by following wise guidance.
19 A gossip reveals secrets;
therefore do not associate with a babbler.
20 If you curse father or mother,
your lamp will go out in utter darkness.
21 An estate quickly acquired in the beginning
will not be blessed in the end.
22 Do not say, "I will repay evil";
wait for the LORD, and he will help you.
23 Differing weights are an abomination to the LORD,
and false scales are not good.
24 All our steps are ordered by the LORD;
how then can we understand our own ways?

1267

PROVERBS 1268

25 It is a snare for one to say rashly, "It is holy,"
and begin to reflect only after making a vow.
26 A wise king winnows the wicked,
and drives the wheel over them.
27 The human spirit is the lamp of the LORD,
searching every inmost part.
28 Loyalty and faithfulness preserve the king,
and his throne is upheld by righteousness.
29 The glory of youths is their strength,
but the beauty of the aged is their gray hair.
30 Blows that wound cleanse away evil;
beatings make clean the innermost parts.
[Proverbs 21]
1 The king's heart is a stream of water in the hand of the LORD;
he turns it wherever he will.
2 All deeds are right in the sight of the doer,
but the LORD weighs the heart.
3 To do righteousness and justice
is more acceptable to the LORD than sacrifice.
4 Haughty eyes and a proud heart —
the lamp of the wicked — are sin.
5 The plans of the diligent lead surely to abundance,
but everyone who is hasty comes only to want.
6 The getting of treasures by a lying tongue
is a fleeting vapor and a snare of death.
7 The violence of the wicked will sweep them away,
because they refuse to do what is just.
8 The way of the guilty is crooked,
but the conduct of the pure is right.
9 It is better to live in a corner of the housetop
than in a house shared with a contentious wife.
10 The souls of the wicked desire evil;
their neighbors find no mercy in their eyes.
11 When a scoffer is punished, the simple become wiser;
when the wise are instructed, they increase in knowledge.

1268

PROVERBS 1269

12 The Righteous One observes the house of the wicked;
he casts the wicked down to ruin.
13 If you close your ear to the cry of the poor,
you will cry out and not be heard.
14 A gift in secret averts anger;
and a concealed bribe in the bosom, strong wrath.
15 When justice is done, it is a joy to the righteous,
but dismay to evildoers.
16 Whoever wanders from the way of understanding
will rest in the assembly of the dead.
17 Whoever loves pleasure will suffer want;
whoever loves wine and oil will not be rich.
18 The wicked is a ransom for the righteous,
and the faithless for the upright.
19 It is better to live in a desert land
than with a contentious and fretful wife.
20 Precious treasure remains in the house of the wise,
but the fool devours it.
21 Whoever pursues righteousness and kindness
will find life and honor.
22 One wise person went up against a city of warriors
and brought down the stronghold in which they trusted.
23 To watch over mouth and tongue
is to keep out of trouble.
24 The proud, haughty person, named "Scoffer,"
acts with arrogant pride.
25 The craving of the lazy person is fatal,
for lazy hands refuse to labor.
26 All day long the wicked covet,
but the righteous give and do not hold back.
27 The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination;
how much more when brought with evil intent.
28 A false witness will perish,
but a good listener will testify successfully.
29 The wicked put on a bold face,
but the upright give thought to their ways.
30 No wisdom, no understanding, no counsel,
can avail against the LORD.

1269

PROVERBS 1270

31 The horse is made ready for the day of battle,
but the victory belongs to the LORD.
[Proverbs 22]
1 A good name is to be chosen rather than great riches,
and favor is better than silver or gold.
2 The rich and the poor have this in common:
the LORD is the maker of them all.
3 The clever see danger and hide;
but the simple go on, and suffer for it.
4 The reward for humility and fear of the LORD
is riches and honor and life.
5 Thorns and snares are in the way of the perverse;
the cautious will keep far from them.
6 Train children in the right way,
and when old, they will not stray.
7 The rich rule over the poor,
and the borrower is the slave of the lender.
8 Whoever sows injustice will reap calamity,
and the rod of anger will fail.
9 Those who are generous are blessed,
for they share their bread with the poor.
10 Drive out a scoffer, and strife goes out;
quarreling and abuse will cease.
11 Those who love a pure heart and are gracious in speech
will have the king as a friend.
12 The eyes of the LORD keep watch over knowledge,
but he overthrows the words of the faithless.
13 The lazy person says, "There is a lion outside!
I shall be killed in the streets!"
14 The mouth of a loose woman is a deep pit;
he with whom the LORD is angry falls into it.
15 Folly is bound up in the heart of a boy,
but the rod of discipline drives it far away.
16 Oppressing the poor in order to enrich oneself,
and giving to the rich, will lead only to loss.

1270

PROVERBS 1271

The words of the wise
17 The words of the wise:
Incline your ear and hear my words,
and apply your mind to my teaching;
18 for it will be pleasant if you keep them within you,
if all of them are ready on your lips.
19 So that your trust may be in the LORD,
I have made them known to you today — yes, to you.
20 Have I not written for you thirty sayings
of admonition and knowledge,
21 to show you what is right and true,
so that you may give a true answer to those who sent you?
22 Do not rob the poor because they are poor,
or crush the afflicted at the gate;
23 for the LORD pleads their cause
and despoils of life those who despoil them.
24 Make no friends with those given to anger,
and do not associate with hotheads,
25 or you may learn their ways
and entangle yourself in a snare.
26 Do not be one of those who give pledges,
who become surety for debts.
27 If you have nothing with which to pay,
why should your bed be taken from under you?
28 Do not remove the ancient landmark
that your ancestors set up.
29 Do you see those who are skillful in their work?
They will serve kings;
they will not serve common people.
[Proverbs 23]
1 When you sit down to eat with a ruler,
observe carefully what is before you,

1271

PROVERBS 1272

2 and put a knife to your throat
if you have a big appetite.
3 Do not desire the ruler's delicacies,
for they are deceptive food.
4 Do not wear yourself out to get rich;
be wise enough to desist.
5 When your eyes light upon it, it is gone;
for suddenly it takes wings to itself,
flying like an eagle toward heaven.
6 Do not eat the bread of the stingy;
do not desire their delicacies;
7 for like a hair in the throat, so are they.
"Eat and drink!" they say to you;
but they do not mean it.
8 You will vomit up the little you have eaten,
and you will waste your pleasant words.
9 Do not speak in the hearing of a fool,
who will only despise the wisdom of your words.
10 Do not remove an ancient landmark
or encroach on the fields of orphans,
11 for their redeemer is strong;
he will plead their cause against you.
12 Apply your mind to instruction
and your ear to words of knowledge.
13 Do not withhold discipline from your children;
if you beat them with a rod, they will not die.
14 If you beat them with the rod,
you will save their lives from Sheol.
15 My child, if your heart is wise,
my heart too will be glad.
16 My soul will rejoice
when your lips speak what is right.
17 Do not let your heart envy sinners,
but always continue in the fear of the LORD.
18 Surely there is a future,
and your hope will not be cut off.
19 Hear, my child, and be wise,
and direct your mind in the way.

1272

PROVERBS 1273

20 Do not be among winebibbers,
or among gluttonous eaters of meat;
21 for the drunkard and the glutton will come to poverty,
and drowsiness will clothe them with rags.
22 Listen to your father who begot you,
and do not despise your mother when she is old.
23 Buy truth, and do not sell it;
buy wisdom, instruction, and understanding.
24 The father of the righteous will greatly rejoice;
he who begets a wise son will be glad in him.
25 Let your father and mother be glad;
let her who bore you rejoice.
26 My child, give me your heart,
and let your eyes observe my ways.
27 For a prostitute is a deep pit;
an adulteress is a narrow well.
28 She lies in wait like a robber
and increases the number of the faithless.
29 Who has woe? Who has sorrow?
Who has strife? Who has complaining?
Who has wounds without cause?
Who has redness of eyes?
30 Those who linger late over wine,
those who keep trying mixed wines.
31 Do not look at wine when it is red,
when it sparkles in the cup
and goes down smoothly.
32 At the last it bites like a serpent,
and stings like an adder.
33 Your eyes will see strange things,
and your mind utter perverse things.
34 You will be like one who lies down in the midst of the sea,
like one who lies on the top of a mast.

1273

PROVERBS 1274

35 "They struck me," you will say, "but I was not hurt;
they beat me, but I did not feel it.
When shall I awake?
I will seek another drink."
[Proverbs 24]
1 Do not envy the wicked,
nor desire to be with them;
2 for their minds devise violence,
and their lips talk of mischief.
3 By wisdom a house is built,
and by understanding it is established;
4 by knowledge the rooms are filled
with all precious and pleasant riches.
5 Wise warriors are mightier than strong ones,
and those who have knowledge than those who have strength;
6 for by wise guidance you can wage your war,
and in abundance of counselors there is victory.
7 Wisdom is too high for fools;
in the gate they do not open their mouths.
8 Whoever plans to do evil
will be called a mischief-maker.
9 The devising of folly is sin,
and the scoffer is an abomination to all.
10 If you faint in the day of adversity,
your strength being small;
11 if you hold back from rescuing those taken away to death,
those who go staggering to the slaughter;
12 if you say, "Look, we did not know this" —
does not he who weighs the heart perceive it?
Does not he who keeps watch over your soul know it?
And will he not repay all according to their deeds?

1274

PROVERBS 1275

13 My child, eat honey, for it is good,
and the drippings of the honeycomb are sweet to your taste.
14 Know that wisdom is such to your soul;
if you find it, you will find a future,
and your hope will not be cut off.
15 Do not lie in wait like an outlaw against the home of the righteous;
do no violence to the place where the righteous live;
16 for though they fall seven times, they will rise again;
but the wicked are overthrown by calamity.
17 Do not rejoice when your enemies fall,
and do not let your heart be glad when they stumble,
18 or else the LORD will see it and be displeased,
and turn away his anger from them.
19 Do not fret because of evildoers.
Do not envy the wicked;
20 for the evil have no future;
the lamp of the wicked will go out.
21 My child, fear the LORD and the king,
and do not disobey either of them;
22 for disaster comes from them suddenly,
and who knows the ruin that both can bring?
23 These also are sayings of the wise:
Partiality in judging is not good.
24 Whoever says to the wicked, "You are innocent,"
will be cursed by peoples, abhorred by nations;
25 but those who rebuke the wicked will have delight,
and a good blessing will come upon them.
26 One who gives an honest answer
gives a kiss on the lips.
27 Prepare your work outside,
get everything ready for you in the field;
and after that build your house.

1275

PROVERBS 1276

28 Do not be a witness against your neighbor without cause,
and do not deceive with your lips.
29 Do not say, "I will do to others as they have done to me;
I will pay them back for what they have done."
30 I passed by the field of one who was lazy,
by the vineyard of a stupid person;
31 and see, it was all overgrown with thorns;
the ground was covered with nettles,
and its stone wall was broken down.
32 Then I saw and considered it;
I looked and received instruction.
33 A little sleep, a little slumber,
a little folding of the hands to rest,
34 and poverty will come upon you like a robber,
and want, like an armed warrior.
[Proverbs 25]
Another sayings collection
1 These are other proverbs of Solomon that the officials of King
Hezekiah of Judah copied.
2 It is the glory of God to conceal things,
but the glory of kings is to search things out.
3 Like the heavens for height, like the earth for depth,
so the mind of kings is unsearchable.
4 Take away the dross from the silver,
and the smith has material for a vessel;
5 take away the wicked from the presence of the king,
and his throne will be established in righteousness.
6 Do not put yourself forward in the king's presence
or stand in the place of the great;
7 for it is better to be told, "Come up here,"
than to be put lower in the presence of a noble.

1276

PROVERBS 1277

What your eyes have seen
8 do not hastily bring into court;
for what will you do in the end,
when your neighbor puts you to shame?
9 Argue your case with your neighbor directly,
and do not disclose another's secret;
10 or else someone who hears you will bring shame upon you,
and your ill repute will have no end.
11 A word fitly spoken
is like apples of gold in a setting of silver.
12 Like a gold ring or an ornament of gold
is a wise rebuke to a listening ear.
13 Like the cold of snow in the time of harvest
are faithful messengers to those who send them;
they refresh the spirit of their masters.
14 Like clouds and wind without rain
is one who boasts of a gift never given.
15 With patience a ruler may be persuaded,
and a soft tongue can break bones.
16 If you have found honey, eat only enough for you,
or else, having too much, you will vomit it.
17 Let your foot be seldom in your neighbor's house,
otherwise the neighbor will become weary of you and hate you.
18 Like a war club, a sword, or a sharp arrow
is one who bears false witness against a neighbor.
19 Like a bad tooth or a lame foot
is trust in a faithless person in time of trouble.
20 Like vinegar on a wound
is one who sings songs to a heavy heart.
Like a moth in clothing or a worm in wood,
sorrow gnaws at the human heart.
21 If your enemies are hungry, give them bread to eat;
and if they are thirsty, give them water to drink;
22 for you will heap coals of fire on their heads,
and the LORD will reward you.
23 The north wind produces rain,
and a backbiting tongue, angry looks.

1277

PROVERBS 1278

24 It is better to live in a corner of the housetop
than in a house shared with a contentious wife.
25 Like cold water to a thirsty soul,
so is good news from a far country.
26 Like a muddied spring or a polluted fountain
are the righteous who give way before the wicked.
27 It is not good to eat much honey,
or to seek honor on top of honor.
28 Like a city breached, without walls,
is one who lacks self-control.
[Proverbs 26]
Concerning fools and their folly
1 Like snow in summer or rain in harvest,
so honor is not fitting for a fool.
2 Like a sparrow in its flitting, like a swallow in its flying,
an undeserved curse goes nowhere.
3 A whip for the horse, a bridle for the donkey,
and a rod for the back of fools.
4 Do not answer fools according to their folly,
or you will be a fool yourself.
5 Answer fools according to their folly,
or they will be wise in their own eyes.
6 It is like cutting off one's foot and drinking down violence,
to send a message by a fool.
7 The legs of a disabled person hang limp;
so does a proverb in the mouth of a fool.
8 It is like binding a stone in a sling
to give honor to a fool.
9 Like a thornbush brandished by the hand of a drunkard
is a proverb in the mouth of a fool.
10 Like an archer who wounds everybody
is one who hires a passing fool or drunkard.
11 Like a dog that returns to its vomit
is a fool who reverts to his folly.
12 Do you see persons wise in their own eyes?
There is more hope for fools than for them.

1278

PROVERBS 1279

13 The lazy person says, "There is a lion in the road!
There is a lion in the streets!"
14 As a door turns on its hinges,
so does a lazy person in bed.
15 The lazy person buries a hand in the dish,
and is too tired to bring it back to the mouth.
16 The lazy person is wiser in self-esteem
than seven who can answer discreetly.
17 Like somebody who takes a passing dog by the ears
is one who meddles in the quarrel of another.
18 Like a maniac who shoots deadly firebrands and arrows,
19 so is one who deceives a neighbor
and says, "I am only joking!"
20 For lack of wood the fire goes out,
and where there is no whisperer, quarreling ceases.
21 As charcoal is to hot embers and wood to fire,
so is a quarrelsome person for kindling strife.
22 The words of a whisperer are like delicious morsels;
they go down into the inner parts of the body.
23 Like the glaze covering an earthen vessel
are smooth lips with an evil heart.
24 An enemy dissembles in speaking
while harboring deceit within;
25 when an enemy speaks graciously, do not believe it,
for there are seven abominations concealed within;
26 though hatred is covered with guile,
the enemy's wickedness will be exposed in the assembly.
27 Whoever digs a pit will fall into it,
and a stone will come back on the one who starts it rolling.
28 A lying tongue hates its victims,
and a flattering mouth works ruin.
[Proverbs 27]
1 Do not boast about tomorrow,
for you do not know what a day may bring.
2 Let another praise you, and not your own mouth —
a stranger, and not your own lips.

1279

PROVERBS 1280

3 A stone is heavy, and sand is weighty,
but a fool's provocation is heavier than both.
4 Wrath is cruel, anger is overwhelming,
but who is able to stand before jealousy?
5 Better is open rebuke
than hidden love.
6 Well meant are the wounds a friend inflicts,
but profuse are the kisses of an enemy.
7 The sated appetite spurns honey,
but to a ravenous appetite even the bitter is sweet.
8 Like a bird that strays from its nest
is one who strays from home.
9 Perfume and incense make the heart glad,
but the soul is torn by trouble.
10 Do not forsake your friend or the friend of your parent;
do not go to the house of your kindred in the day
of your calamity.
Better is a neighbor who is nearby
than kindred who are far away.
11 Be wise, my child, and make my heart glad,
so that I may answer whoever reproaches me.
12 The clever see danger and hide;
but the simple go on, and suffer for it.
13 Take the garment of one who has given surety for a stranger;
seize the pledge given as surety for foreigners.
14 Whoever blesses a neighbor with a loud voice,
rising early in the morning,
will be counted as cursing.
15 A continual dripping on a rainy day
and a contentious wife are alike;
16 to restrain her is to restrain the wind
or to grasp oil in the right hand.
17 Iron sharpens iron,
and one person sharpens the wits of another.
18 Anyone who tends a fig tree will eat its fruit,
and anyone who takes care of a master will be honored.
19 Just as water reflects the face,
so one human heart reflects another.

1280

PROVERBS 1281

20 Sheol and Abaddon are never satisfied,
and human eyes are never satisfied.
21 The crucible is for silver, and the furnace is for gold,
so a person is tested by being praised.
22 Crush a fool in a mortar with a pestle
along with crushed grain,
but the folly will not be driven out.
23 Know well the condition of your flocks,
and give attention to your herds;
24 for riches do not last forever,
nor a crown for all generations.
25 When the grass is gone, and new growth appears,
and the herbage of the mountains is gathered,
26 the lambs will provide your clothing,
and the goats the price of a field;
27 there will be enough goats' milk for your food,
for the food of your household
and nourishment for your servant-girls.
[Proverbs 28]
1 The wicked flee when no one pursues,
but the righteous are as bold as a lion.
2 When a land rebels
it has many rulers;
but with an intelligent ruler
there is lasting order.
3 A ruler who oppresses the poor
is a beating rain that leaves no food.
4 Those who forsake the law praise the wicked,
but those who keep the law struggle against them.
5 The evil do not understand justice,
but those who seek the LORD understand it completely.
6 Better to be poor and walk in integrity
than to be crooked in one's ways even though rich.
7 Those who keep the law are wise children,
but companions of gluttons shame their parents.

1281

PROVERBS 1282

8 One who augments wealth by exorbitant interest
gathers it for another who is kind to the poor.
9 When one will not listen to the law,
even one's prayers are an abomination.
10 Those who mislead the upright into evil ways
will fall into pits of their own making,
but the blameless will have a goodly inheritance.
11 The rich is wise in self-esteem,
but an intelligent poor person sees through the pose.
12 When the righteous triumph, there is great glory,
but when the wicked prevail, people go into hiding.
13 No one who conceals transgressions will prosper,
but one who confesses and forsakes them will obtain mercy.
14 Happy is the one who is never without fear,
but one who is hard-hearted will fall into calamity.
15 Like a roaring lion or a charging bear
is a wicked ruler over a poor people.
16 A ruler who lacks understanding is a cruel oppressor;
but one who hates unjust gain will enjoy a long life.
17 If someone is burdened with the blood of another,
let that killer be a fugitive until death;
let no one offer assistance.
18 One who walks in integrity will be safe,
but whoever follows crooked ways will fall into the Pit.
19 Anyone who tills the land will have plenty of bread,
but one who follows worthless pursuits will have
plenty of poverty.
20 The faithful will abound with blessings,
but one who is in a hurry to be rich will not go unpunished.
21 To show partiality is not good —
yet for a piece of bread a person may do wrong.
22 The miser is in a hurry to get rich
and does not know that loss is sure to come.
23 Whoever rebukes a person will afterward find more favor
than one who flatters with the tongue.
24 Anyone who robs father or mother
and says, "That is no crime,"
is partner to a thug.

1282

PROVERBS 1283

25 The greedy person stirs up strife,
but whoever trusts in the LORD will be enriched.
26 Those who trust in their own wits are fools;
but those who walk in wisdom come through safely.
27 Whoever gives to the poor will lack nothing,
but one who turns a blind eye will get many a curse.
28 When the wicked prevail, people go into hiding;
but when they perish, the righteous increase.
[Proverbs 29]
1 One who is often reproved, yet remains stubborn,
will suddenly be broken beyond healing.
2 When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice;
but when the wicked rule, the people groan.
3 A child who loves wisdom makes a parent glad,
but to keep company with prostitutes is to
squander one's substance.
4 By justice a king gives stability to the land,
but one who makes heavy exactions ruins it.
5 Whoever flatters a neighbor
is spreading a net for the neighbor's feet.
6 In the transgression of the evil there is a snare,
but the righteous sing and rejoice.
7 The righteous know the rights of the poor;
the wicked have no such understanding.
8 Scoffers set a city aflame,
but the wise turn away wrath.
9 If the wise go to law with fools,
there is ranting and ridicule without relief.
10 The bloodthirsty hate the blameless,
and they seek the life of the upright.
11 A fool gives full vent to anger,
but the wise quietly holds it back.
12 If a ruler listens to falsehood,
all his officials will be wicked.
13 The poor and the oppressor have this in common:
the LORD gives light to the eyes of both.

1283

PROVERBS 1284

14 If a king judges the poor with equity,
his throne will be established forever.
15 The rod and reproof give wisdom,
but a mother is disgraced by a neglected child.
16 When the wicked are in authority, transgression increases,
but the righteous will look upon their downfall.
17 Discipline your children, and they will give you rest;
they will give delight to your heart.
18 Where there is no vision, the people perish,
but happy are those who keep the law.
19 By mere words servants are not disciplined,
for though they understand, they will not give heed.
20 Do you see someone who is hasty in speech?
There is more hope for a fool than for anyone like that.
21 A slave pampered from childhood
will come to a bad end.
22 One given to anger stirs up strife,
and the hothead causes much transgression.
23 A person's pride will bring humiliation,
but one who is lowly in spirit will obtain honor.
24 To be a partner of a thief is to hate one's own life;
one hears the victim's curse, but discloses nothing.
25 The fear of others lays a snare,
but one who trusts in the LORD is secure.
26 Many seek the favor of a ruler,
but it is from the LORD that one gets justice.
27 The unjust are an abomination to the righteous,
but the upright are an abomination to the wicked.
[Proverbs 30]
The words of Agur and other sayings
1 The words of Agur son of Jakeh. An oracle.
Thus says the man: I am weary, O God,
I am weary, O God. How can I prevail?
2 Surely I am too stupid to be human;
I do not have human understanding.

1284

PROVERBS 1285

3 I have not learned wisdom,
nor have I knowledge of the holy ones.
4 Who has ascended to heaven and come down?
Who has gathered the wind in the hollow of the hand?
Who has wrapped up the waters in a garment?
Who has established all the ends of the earth?
What is the person's name?
And what is the name of the person's child?
Surely you know!
5 Every word of God proves true;
he is a shield to those who take refuge in him.
6 Do not add to his words,
or else he will rebuke you, and you will be found a liar.
7 Two things I ask of you;
do not deny them to me before I die:
8 Remove far from me falsehood and lying;
give me neither poverty nor riches;
feed me with the food that I need,
9 or I shall be full, and deny you,
and say, "Who is the LORD?"
or I shall be poor, and steal,
and profane the name of my God.
10 Do not slander a servant to a master,
or the servant will curse you, and you will be held guilty.
11 There are those who curse their fathers
and do not bless their mothers.
12 There are those who are pure in their own eyes
yet are not cleansed of their filthiness.
13 There are those — how lofty are their eyes,
how high their eyelids lift! —
14 there are those whose teeth are swords,
whose teeth are knives,
to devour the poor from off the earth,
the needy from among mortals.

1285

PROVERBS 1286

15 The leech has two daughters;
"Give, give," they cry.
Three things are never satisfied;
four never say, "Enough":
16 Sheol, the barren womb,
the earth ever thirsty for water,
and the fire that never says, "Enough."
17 The eye that mocks a father
and scorns to obey a mother
will be pecked out by the ravens of the valley
and eaten by the vultures.
18 Three things are too wonderful for me;
four I do not understand:
19 the way of an eagle in the sky,
the way of a snake on a rock,
the way of a ship on the high seas,
and the way of a man with a girl.
20 This is the way of an adulteress:
she eats, and wipes her mouth,
and says, "I have done no wrong."
21 Under three things the earth trembles;
under four it cannot bear up:
22 a slave when he becomes king,
and a fool when glutted with food;
23 an unloved woman when she gets a husband,
and a maid when she succeeds her mistress.
24 Four things on earth are small,
yet they are exceedingly wise:
25 the ants are a people without strength,
yet they provide their food in the summer;
26 the badgers are a people without power,
yet they make their homes in the rocks;
27 the locusts have no king,
yet all of them march in rank;

1286

PROVERBS 1287

28 the lizard can be grasped in the hand,
yet it is found in kings' palaces.
29 Three things are stately in their stride;
four are stately in their gait:
30 the lion, which is mightiest among wild animals
and does not turn back before any;
31 the strutting rooster, the he-goat,
and a king striding before his people.
32 If you have been foolish, exalting yourself,
or if you have been devising evil,
put your hand on your mouth.
33 For as pressing milk produces curds,
and pressing the nose produces blood,
so pressing anger produces strife.
[Proverbs 31]
The words of Lemuel
1 The words of King Lemuel. An oracle that his mother taught him:
2 No, my son! No, son of my womb!
No, son of my vows!
3 Do not give your strength to women,
your ways to those who destroy kings.
4 It is not for kings, O Lemuel,
it is not for kings to drink wine,
or for rulers to desire strong drink;
5 or else they will drink and forget what has been decreed,
and will pervert the rights of all the afflicted.
6 Give strong drink to one who is perishing,
and wine to those in bitter distress;
7 let them drink and forget their poverty,
and remember their misery no more.
8 Speak out for those who cannot speak,
for the rights of all the destitute.
9 Speak out, judge righteously,
defend the rights of the poor and needy.

1287

PROVERBS 1288

The woman of worth
10 A capable wife who can find?
She is far more precious than jewels.
11 The heart of her husband trusts in her,
and he will have no lack of gain.
12 She does him good, and not harm,
all the days of her life.
13 She seeks wool and flax,
and works with willing hands.
14 She is like the ships of the merchant,
she brings her food from far away.
15 She rises while it is still night
and provides food for her household
and tasks for her servant-girls.
16 She considers a field and buys it;
with the fruit of her hands she plants a vineyard.
17 She girds herself with strength,
and makes her arms strong.
18 She perceives that her merchandise is profitable.
Her lamp does not go out at night.
19 She puts her hands to the distaff,
and her hands hold the spindle.
20 She opens her hand to the poor,
and reaches out her hands to the needy.
21 She is not afraid for her household when it snows,
for all her household are clothed in crimson.
22 She makes herself coverings;
her clothing is fine linen and purple.
23 Her husband is known in the city gates,
taking his seat among the elders of the land.
24 She makes linen garments and sells them;
she supplies the merchant with sashes.
25 Strength and dignity are her clothing,
and she laughs at the time to come.
26 She opens her mouth with wisdom,
and the teaching of kindness is on her tongue.

1288

PROVERBS 1289

27 She looks well to the ways of her household,
and does not eat the bread of idleness.
28 Her children rise up and call her happy;
her husband too, and he praises her:
29 "Many women have done excellently,
but you surpass them all."
30 Charm is deceitful, and beauty is vain,
but a woman who fears the LORD is to be praised.
31 Give her a share in the fruit of her hands,
and let her works praise her in the city gates.

1289

ECCLESIASTES 1290

ECCLESIASTES
Introduction
Ecclesiastes is the Latin transliteration of the Greek rendering of the
pen-name of the author, known in Hebrew as Qohelet ("Gatherer,"
traditionally "the teacher" or "the Preacher"). The superscription of
the book (1.2) presents Qohelet as "the son of David" who ruled in
Jerusalem, evoking the memory of Solomon, king of Israel (968-928
BCE), the consummate sage and gatherer of wealth and wisdom (see 1
Kings 3-4; 10). Apart from the superscription and 1.12-2.11, however the
author never speaks as king. The epilogue portrays the author as a
teacher, rather than as a king (12.9-14). Moreover, the perspective in
most of the book is that of an outsider to the royal court (3.16; 4.13-16;
8.1-6; 10.16-20).
The date of the book is a matter of dispute, although most scholars
argue on linguistic grounds that it should be dated to the postexilic
period. The presence of two indisputable Persian loan words ("parks"
in 2.5; "sentence" in 8.11) point to a date some time after 450 BCE, for
there are no Persian loan words or Persian names in the Hebrew Bible
that can be dated earlier. The abundance of Aramaisms (Aramaic loan
words, forms, and constructions) also points to the postexilic period,
when Aramaic became the 'linga franca' in Palestine. A number of
specific idioms regarding inheritance, grants, prisons, social abuses,
judicial problems, and socioeconomic classes are attested in documents
from the Persian period; in no other periods in history do we find such
a coincidence of terminology. These features, together with the fact
that there are no Greek loan words (or indisputable Greek ideas),
suggests that the book should be dated sometime between 450 and
330 BCE, although many scholars date it a century or two later.
The period in question was one of tremendous economic growth,
spurred on in no small part by the introduction of standardized
1290

ECCLESIASTES 1291

coinage by the Persian central government. Money quickly became a
commodity, desired for its own sake (cf. 5.10; 7.12; 10.19). Standardized
currency helped to democratize economic opportunities, so that it
became possible for even the poorest people in society to become
wealthy. As in any era of significant economic innovation, the Persian
period brought both opportunities and risks to the average person in
the empire.
The context that Ecclesiastes addresses, however, goes beyond the
economic one. The sense of the individual as a small part of a large
scene is evident in the political allusions (4.1; 5.7), which should be read
against the background of the empire. Even descriptions of life and
death reinforce the idea of the powerless individual (8.8). The
inevitability of one's fate (3.15; 6.10), the unavoidability of death (3.19),
and the repetitions of life (3.1-8) all work together to create a vision of
the remoteness, the inscrutability, and ultimately the indifference of
the world to the individual. In a vision of bleak grandeur the author
faces this indifference, acknowledges it, and admits an inability to
transcend it, but nevertheless derives from it a hard-won wisdom: This
is how the world is.
The author appears to have drawn lessons from the wider wisdom
tradition. Yet he approached the issues through the socioeconomic
idioms current in his generation to address the preoccupation and
obsessions of his audience. Despite the novelty of their environment,
the fundamental problems they face about the possibility of coping
with life in a world that is inconsistent, if not contradictory, are not
new after all (see 1.10). Every generation must deal with the fact that
mortals inevitably live in a world in which they have been thrust into
and over which they do not control ("all is vanity") and life can only be
lived before a sovereign God who alone determines all that happens
on earth.

1291

ECCLESIASTES 1292

[Ecclesiastes 1]
Superscription
1 The words of the Teacher, the son of David, king in Jerusalem.
Preface
2 Vanity of vanities, says the Teacher,
vanity of vanities! All is vanity.
3 What do people gain from all the toil
at which they toil under the sun?
4 A generation goes, and a generation comes,
but the earth remains forever.
5 The sun rises and the sun goes down,
and hurries to the place where it rises.
6 The wind blows to the south,
and goes around to the north;
round and round goes the wind,
and on its circuits the wind returns.
7 All streams run to the sea,
but the sea is not full;
to the place where the streams flow,
there they continue to flow.
8 All things are wearisome;
more than one can express;
the eye is not satisfied with seeing,
or the ear filled with hearing.
9 What has been is what will be,
and what has been done is what will be done;
there is nothing new under the sun.
10 Is there a thing of which it is said,
"See, this is new"?
It has already been,
in the ages before us.
11 The people of long ago are not remembered,
nor will there be any remembrance
of people yet to come
by those who come after them.

1292

ECCLESIASTES 1293

The author's experiences and accomplishments
12 I, the Teacher, when king over Israel in Jerusalem, 13 applied my
mind to seek and to search out by wisdom all that is done under
heaven; it is an unhappy business that God has given to human beings
to be busy with. 14 I saw all the deeds that are done under the sun; and
see, all is vanity and a chasing after wind.
15 What is crooked cannot be made straight,
and what is lacking cannot be counted.
16 I said to myself, "I have acquired great wisdom, surpassing all who
were over Jerusalem before me; and my mind has had great experience
of wisdom and knowledge." 17 And I applied my mind to know wisdom
and to know madness and folly. I perceived that this also is but a
chasing after wind.
18 For in much wisdom is much vexation,
and those who increase knowledge increase sorrow.
[Ecclesiastes 2]
The leveling effect of death
1 I said to myself, "Come now, I will make a test of pleasure; enjoy
yourself." But again, this also was vanity. 2 I said of laughter, "It is
mad," and of pleasure, "What use is it?" 3 I searched with my mind
how to cheer my body with wine — my mind still guiding me with
wisdom — and how to lay hold on folly, until I might see what was
good for mortals to do under heaven during the few days of their life.
4 I made great works; I built houses and planted vineyards for myself; 5
I made myself gardens and parks, and planted in them all kinds of fruit
trees. 6 I made myself pools from which to water the forest of growing
trees. 7 I bought male and female slaves, and had slaves who were
born in my house; I also had great possessions of herds and flocks,
more than any who had been before me in Jerusalem. 8 I also gathered
for myself silver and gold and the treasure of kings and of the
provinces; I got singers, both men and women, and delights of the
flesh, and many concubines.

1293

ECCLESIASTES 1294

9 So I became great and surpassed all who were before me in
Jerusalem; also my wisdom remained with me. 10 Whatever my eyes
desired I did not keep from them; I kept my heart from no pleasure, for
my heart found pleasure in all my toil, and this was my reward for all
my toil. 11 Then I considered all that my hands had done and the toil I
had spent in doing it, and again, all was vanity and a chasing after
wind, and there was nothing to be gained under the sun.
12 So I turned to consider wisdom and madness and folly; for what can
the one do who comes after the king? Only what has already been
done. 13 Then I saw that wisdom excels folly as light excels darkness.
14 The wise have eyes in their head,
but fools walk in darkness.
Yet I perceived that the same fate befalls all of them. 15 Then I said to
myself, "What happens to the fool will happen to me also; why then
have I been so very wise?" And I said to myself that this also is vanity.
16 For there is no enduring remembrance of the wise or of fools, seeing
that in the days to come all will have been long forgotten. How can
the wise die just like fools? 17 So I hated life, because what is done
under the sun was grievous to me; for all is vanity and a chasing after
wind.
18 I hated all my toil in which I had toiled under the sun, seeing that I
must leave it to those who come after me 19 — and who knows
whether they will be wise or foolish? Yet they will be master of all for
which I toiled and used my wisdom under the sun. This also is vanity. 20
So I turned and gave my heart up to despair concerning all the toil of
my labors under the sun, 21 because sometimes one who has toiled
with wisdom and knowledge and skill must leave all to be enjoyed by
another who did not toil for it. This also is vanity and a great evil. 22
What do mortals get from all the toil and strain with which they toil
under the sun? 23 For all their days are full of pain, and their work is a
vexation; even at night their minds do not rest. This also is vanity.
24 There is nothing better for mortals than to eat and drink, and find
enjoyment in their toil. This also, I saw, is from the hand of God; 25 for
apart from him who can eat or who can have enjoyment? 26 For to the

1294

ECCLESIASTES 1295

one who pleases him God gives wisdom and knowledge and joy; but to
the sinner he gives the work of gathering and heaping, only to give to
one who pleases God. This also is vanity and a chasing after wind.
[Ecclesiastes 3]
The determination of events
1 For everything there is a season, and a time for every matter under
heaven:
2 a time to be born, and a time to die;
a time to plant, and a time to pluck up what is planted;
3 a time to kill, and a time to heal;
a time to break down, and a time to build up;
4 a time to weep, and a time to laugh;
a time to mourn, and a time to dance;
5 a time to throw away stones, and a time to gather stones together;
a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing;
6 a time to seek, and a time to lose;
a time to keep, and a time to throw away;
7 a time to tear, and a time to sew;
a time to keep silence, and a time to speak;
8 a time to love, and a time to hate;
a time for war, and a time for peace.
9 What gain have the workers from their toil? 10 I have seen the
business that God has given to everyone to be busy with. 11 He has
made everything suitable for its time; moreover he has put a sense of
past and future into their minds, yet they cannot find out what God
has done from the beginning to the end. 12 I know that there is
nothing better for them than to be happy and enjoy themselves as
long as they live; 13 moreover, it is God's gift that all should eat and
drink and take pleasure in all their toil. 14 I know that whatever God
does endures forever; nothing can be added to it, nor anything taken
from it; God has done this, so that all should stand in awe before him.
15 That which is, already has been; that which is to be, already is; and
God seeks out what has gone by.

1295

ECCLESIASTES 1296

The determination of humanity's fate
16 Moreover I saw under the sun that in the place of justice, wickedness
was there, and in the place of righteousness, wickedness was there as
well. 17 I said in my heart, God will judge the righteous and the wicked,
for he has appointed a time for every matter, and for every work. 18 I
said in my heart with regard to human beings that God is testing them
to show that they are but animals. 19 For the fate of humans and the
fate of animals is the same; as one dies, so dies the other. They all have
the same breath, and humans have no advantage over the animals; for
all is vanity. 20 All go to one place; all are from the dust, and all turn to
dust again. 21 Who knows whether the human spirit goes upward and
the spirit of animals goes downward to the earth? 22 So I saw that
there is nothing better than that all should enjoy their work, for that is
their lot; who can bring them to see what will be after them?
[Ecclesiastes 4]
Relative good
1 Again I saw all the oppressions that are practiced under the sun.
Look, the tears of the oppressed — with no one to comfort them! On
the side of their oppressors there was power — with no one to comfort
them. 2 And I thought the dead, who have already died, more
fortunate than the living, who are still alive; 3 but better than both is
the one who has not yet been, and has not seen the evil deeds that are
done under the sun.
4 Then I saw that all toil and all skill in work come from one person's
envy of another. This also is vanity and a chasing after wind.
5 Fools fold their hands
and consume their own flesh.
6 Better is a handful with quiet
than two handfuls with toil,
and a chasing after wind.

1296

ECCLESIASTES 1297

7 Again, I saw vanity under the sun: 8 the case of solitary individuals,
without sons or brothers; yet there is no end to all their toil, and their
eyes are never satisfied with riches. "For whom am I toiling," they ask,
"and depriving myself of pleasure?" This also is vanity and an unhappy
business.
9 Two are better than one, because they have a good reward for their
toil. 10 For if they fall, one will lift up the other; but woe to one who is
alone and falls and does not have another to help. 11 Again, if two lie
together, they keep warm; but how can one keep warm alone? 12 And
though one might prevail against another, two will withstand one. A
threefold cord is not quickly broken.
13 Better is a poor but wise youth than an old but foolish king, who
will no longer take advice. 14 One can indeed come out of prison to
reign, even though born poor in the kingdom. 15 I saw all the living
who, moving about under the sun, follow that youth who replaced the
king; 16 there was no end to all those people whom he led. Yet those
who come later will not rejoice in him. Surely this also is vanity and a
chasing after wind.
[Ecclesiastes 5]
Attitude before God
1 Guard your steps when you go to the house of God; to draw near to
listen is better than the sacrifice offered by fools; for they do not know
how to keep from doing evil. 2 Never be rash with your mouth, nor let
your heart be quick to utter a word before God, for God is in heaven,
and you upon earth; therefore let your words be few.
3 For dreams come with many cares, and a fool's voice with many
words.
4 When you make a vow to God, do not delay fulfilling it; for he has no
pleasure in fools. Fulfill what you vow. 5 It is better that you should not
vow than that you should vow and not fulfill it. 6 Do not let your
mouth lead you into sin, and do not say before the messenger that it

1297

ECCLESIASTES 1298

was a mistake; why should God be angry at your words, and destroy
the work of your hands?
7 With many dreams come vanities and a multitude of words; but fear
God.
Enjoy, but do not be greedy
8 If you see in a province the oppression of the poor and the violation
of justice and right, do not be amazed at the matter; for the high
official is watched by a higher, and there are yet higher ones over
them. 9 But all things considered, this is an advantage for a land: a
king for a plowed field.
10 The lover of money will not be satisfied with money; nor the lover of
wealth, with gain. This also is vanity.
11 When goods increase, those who eat them increase; and what gain
has their owner but to see them with his eyes?
12 Sweet is the sleep of laborers, whether they eat little or much; but
the surfeit of the rich will not let them sleep.
13 There is a grievous ill that I have seen under the sun: riches were
kept by their owners to their hurt, 14 and those riches were lost in a
bad venture; though they are parents of children, they have nothing in
their hands. 15 As they came from their mother's womb, so they shall
go again, naked as they came; they shall take nothing for their toil,
which they may carry away with their hands. 16 This also is a grievous
ill: just as they came, so shall they go; and what gain do they have from
toiling for the wind? 17 Besides, all their days they eat in darkness, in
much vexation and sickness and resentment.
18 This is what I have seen to be good: it is fitting to eat and drink and
find enjoyment in all the toil with which one toils under the sun the
few days of the life God gives us; for this is our lot. 19 Likewise all to
whom God gives wealth and possessions and whom he enables to
enjoy them, and to accept their lot and find enjoyment in their toil —

1298

ECCLESIASTES 1299

this is the gift of God. 20 For they will scarcely brood over the days of
their lives, because God keeps them occupied with the joy of their
hearts.
[Ecclesiastes 6]
1 There is an evil that I have seen under the sun, and it lies heavy upon
humankind: 2 those to whom God gives wealth, possessions, and
honor, so that they lack nothing of all that they desire, yet God does
not enable them to enjoy these things, but a stranger enjoys them. This
is vanity; it is a grievous ill. 3 A man may beget a hundred children, and
live many years; but however many are the days of his years, if he does
not enjoy life's good things, or has no burial, I say that a stillborn child
is better off than he. 4 For it comes into vanity and goes into darkness,
and in darkness its name is covered; 5 moreover it has not seen the sun
or known anything; yet it finds rest rather than he. 6 Even though he
should live a thousand years twice over, yet enjoy no good — do not all
go to one place?
7 All human toil is for the mouth, yet the appetite is not satisfied. 8 For
what advantage have the wise over fools? And what do the poor have
who know how to conduct themselves before the living? 9 Better is the
sight of the eyes than the wandering of desire; this also is vanity and a
chasing after wind.
No one knows what is good
10 Whatever has come to be has already been named, and it is known
what human beings are, and that they are not able to dispute with
those who are stronger. 11 The more words, the more vanity, so how is
one the better? 12 For who knows what is good for mortals while they
live the few days of their vain life, which they pass like a shadow? For
who can tell them what will be after them under the sun?

1299

ECCLESIASTES 1300

[Ecclesiastes 7]
1 A good name is better than precious ointment,
and the day of death, than the day of birth.
2 It is better to go to the house of mourning
than to go to the house of feasting;
for this is the end of everyone,
and the living will lay it to heart.
3 Sorrow is better than laughter,
for by sadness of countenance the heart is made glad.
4 The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning;
but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth.
5 It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise
than to hear the song of fools.
6 For like the crackling of thorns under a pot,
so is the laughter of fools;
this also is vanity.
7 Surely oppression makes the wise foolish,
and a bribe corrupts the heart.
8 Better is the end of a thing than its beginning;
the patient in spirit are better than the proud in spirit.
9 Do not be quick to anger,
for anger lodges in the bosom of fools.
10 Do not say, "Why were the former days better than these?"
For it is not from wisdom that you ask this.
11 Wisdom is as good as an inheritance,
an advantage to those who see the sun.
12 For the protection of wisdom is like the protection of money,
and the advantage of knowledge is that wisdom gives life
to the one who possesses it.
13 Consider the work of God;
who can make straight what he has made crooked?
14 In the day of prosperity be joyful, and in the day of adversity
consider; God has made the one as well as the other, so that mortals
may not find out anything that will come after them.

1300

ECCLESIASTES 1301

Righteousness and wisdom are elusive
15 In my vain life I have seen everything; there are righteous people
who perish in their righteousness, and there are wicked people who
prolong their life in their evildoing. 16 Do not be too righteous, and do
not act too wise; why should you destroy yourself? 17 Do not be too
wicked, and do not be a fool; why should you die before your time? 18
It is good that you should take hold of the one, without letting go of
the other; for the one who fears God shall succeed with both.
19 Wisdom gives strength to the wise more than ten rulers that are in a
city.
20 Surely there is no one on earth so righteous as to do good without
ever sinning.
21 Do not give heed to everything that people say, or you may hear
your servant cursing you; 22 your heart knows that many times you
have yourself cursed others.
23 All this I have tested by wisdom; I said, "I will be wise," but it was far
from me. 24 That which is, is far off, and deep, very deep; who can find
it out? 25 I turned my mind to know and to search out and to seek
wisdom and the sum of things, and to know that wickedness is folly
and that foolishness is madness. 26 I found more bitter than death the
woman who is a trap, whose heart is snares and nets, whose hands are
fetters; one who pleases God escapes her, but the sinner is taken by
her. 27 See, this is what I found, says the Teacher, adding one thing to
another to find the sum, 28 which my mind has sought repeatedly, but
I have not found. One man among a thousand I found, but a woman
among all these I have not found. 29 See, this alone I found, that God
made human beings straightforward, but they have devised many
schemes.

1301

ECCLESIASTES 1302

[Ecclesiastes 8]
Reflections on the limits of human power
1 Who is like the wise man?
And who knows the interpretation of a thing?
Wisdom makes one's face shine,
and the hardness of one's countenance is changed.
2 Keep the king's command because of your sacred oath. 3 Do not be
terrified; go from his presence, do not delay when the matter is
unpleasant, for he does whatever he pleases. 4 For the word of the
king is powerful, and who can say to him, "What are you doing?" 5
Whoever obeys a command will meet no harm, and the wise mind will
know the time and way. 6 For every matter has its time and way,
although the troubles of mortals lie heavy upon them. 7 Indeed, they
do not know what is to be, for who can tell them how it will be? 8 No
one has power over the wind to restrain the wind, or power over the
day of death; there is no discharge from the battle, nor does
wickedness deliver those who practice it. 9 All this I observed, applying
my mind to all that is done under the sun, while one person exercises
authority over another to the other's hurt.
10 Then I saw the wicked buried; they used to go in and out of the holy
place, and were praised in the city where they had done such things.
This also is vanity. 11 Because sentence against an evil deed is not
executed speedily, the human heart is fully set to do evil. 12 Though
sinners do evil a hundred times and prolong their lives, yet I know that
it will be well with those who fear God, because they stand in fear
before him, 13 but it will not be well with the wicked, neither will they
prolong their days like a shadow, because they do not stand in fear
before God.
14 There is a vanity that takes place on earth, that there are righteous
people who are treated according to the conduct of the wicked, and
there are wicked people who are treated according to the conduct of
the righteous. I said that this also is vanity. 15 So I commend
enjoyment, for there is nothing better for people under the sun than

1302

ECCLESIASTES 1303

to eat, and drink, and enjoy themselves, for this will go with them in
their toil through the days of life that God gives them under the sun.
16 When I applied my mind to know wisdom, and to see the business
that is done on earth, how one's eyes see sleep neither day nor night,
17 then I saw all the work of God, that no one can find out what is
happening under the sun. However much they may toil in seeking, they
will not find it out; even though those who are wise claim to know,
they cannot find it out.
[Ecclesiastes 9]
Enjoy your life
1 All this I laid to heart, examining it all, how the righteous and the
wise and their deeds are in the hand of God; whether it is love or hate
one does not know. Everything that confronts them 2 is vanity, since
the same fate comes to all, to the righteous and the wicked, to the
good and the evil, to the clean and the unclean, to those who sacrifice
and those who do not sacrifice. As are the good, so are the sinners;
those who swear are like those who shun an oath. 3 This is an evil in all
that happens under the sun, that the same fate comes to everyone.
Moreover, the hearts of all are full of evil; madness is in their hearts
while they live, and after that they go to the dead. 4 But whoever is
joined with all the living has hope, for a living dog is better than a
dead lion. 5 The living know that they will die, but the dead know
nothing; they have no more reward, and even the memory of them is
lost. 6 Their love and their hate and their envy have already perished;
never again will they have any share in all that happens under the sun.
7 Go, eat your bread with enjoyment, and drink your wine with a
merry heart; for God has long ago approved what you do. 8 Let your
garments always be white; do not let oil be lacking on your head. 9
Enjoy life with the wife whom you love, all the days of your vain life
that are given you under the sun, because that is your portion in life
and in your toil at which you toil under the sun. 10 Whatever your
hand finds to do, do with your might; for there is no work or thought
or knowledge or wisdom in Sheol, to which you are going.

1303

ECCLESIASTES 1304

The world is full of risks
11 Again I saw that under the sun the race is not to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong, nor bread to the wise, nor riches to the intelligent,
nor favor to the skillful; but time and chance happen to them all. 12 For
no one can anticipate the time of disaster. Like fish taken in a cruel
net, and like birds caught in a snare, so mortals are snared at a time of
calamity, when it suddenly falls upon them.
13 I have also seen this example of wisdom under the sun, and it
seemed great to me. 14 There was a little city with few people in it. A
great king came against it and besieged it, building great siegeworks
against it. 15 Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his
wisdom delivered the city. Yet no one remembered that poor man. 16
So I said, "Wisdom is better than might; yet the poor man's wisdom is
despised, and his words are not heeded."
17 The quiet words of the wise are more to be heeded
than the shouting of a ruler among fools.
18 Wisdom is better than weapons of war,
but one bungler destroys much good.
[Ecclesiastes 10]
1 Dead flies make the perfumer's ointment give off a foul odor;
so a little folly outweighs wisdom and honor.
2 The heart of the wise inclines to the right,
but the heart of a fool to the left.
3 Even when fools walk on the road, they lack sense,
and show to everyone that they are fools.
4 If the anger of the ruler rises against you, do not leave your post,
for calmness will undo great offenses.
5 There is an evil that I have seen under the sun, as great an error as if
it proceeded from the ruler: 6 folly is set in many high places, and the
rich sit in a low place. 7 I have seen slaves on horseback, and princes
walking on foot like slaves.

1304

ECCLESIASTES 1305

8 Whoever digs a pit will fall into it;
and whoever breaks through a wall will be bitten by a snake.
9 Whoever quarries stones will be hurt by them;
and whoever splits logs will be endangered by them.
10 If the iron is blunt, and one does not whet the edge,
then more strength must be exerted;
but wisdom helps one to succeed.
11 If the snake bites before it is charmed,
there is no advantage in a charmer.
12 Words spoken by the wise bring them favor,
but the lips of fools consume them.
13 The words of their mouths begin in foolishness,
and their talk ends in wicked madness;
14 yet fools talk on and on.
No one knows what is to happen,
and who can tell anyone what the future holds?
15 The toil of fools wears them out,
for they do not even know the way to town.
Living with risks
16 Alas for you, O land, when your king is a servant,
and your princes feast in the morning!
17 Happy are you, O land, when your king is a nobleman,
and your princes feast at the proper time —
for strength, and not for drunkenness!
18 Through sloth the roof sinks in,
and through indolence the house leaks.
19 Feasts are made for laughter;
wine gladdens life,
and money meets every need.
20 Do not curse the king, even in your thoughts,
or curse the rich, even in your bedroom;
for a bird of the air may carry your voice,
or some winged creature tell the matter.

1305

ECCLESIASTES 1306

[Ecclesiastes 11]
1 Send out your bread upon the waters,
for after many days you will get it back.
2 Divide your means seven ways, or even eight,
for you do not know what disaster may happen on earth.
3 When clouds are full,
they empty rain on the earth;
whether a tree falls to the south or to the north,
in the place where the tree falls, there it will lie.
4 Whoever observes the wind will not sow;
and whoever regards the clouds will not reap.
5 Just as you do not know how the breath comes to the bones in the
mother's womb, so you do not know the work of God, who makes
everything.
6 In the morning sow your seed, and at evening do not let your hands
be idle; for you do not know which will prosper, this or that, or
whether both alike will be good.
The conclusion
7 Light is sweet, and it is pleasant for the eyes to see the sun.
8 Even those who live many years should rejoice in them all; yet let
them remember that the days of darkness will be many. All that comes
is vanity.
9 Rejoice, young man, while you are young, and let your heart cheer
you in the days of your youth. Follow the inclination of your heart and
the desire of your eyes, but know that for all these things God will
bring you into judgment.
10 Banish anxiety from your mind, and put away pain from your body;
for youth and the dawn of life are vanity.

1306

ECCLESIASTES 1307

[Ecclesiastes 12]
1 Remember your creator in the days of your youth, before the days of
trouble come, and the years draw near when you will say, "I have no
pleasure in them"; 2 before the sun and the light and the moon and
the stars are darkened and the clouds return with the rain; 3 in the day
when the guards of the house tremble, and the strong men are bent,
and the women who grind cease working because they are few, and
those who look through the windows see dimly; 4 when the doors on
the street are shut, and the sound of the grinding is low, and one rises
up at the sound of a bird, and all the daughters of song are brought
low; 5 when one is afraid of heights, and terrors are in the road; the
almond tree blossoms, the grasshopper drags itself along and desire
fails; because all must go to their eternal home, and the mourners will
go about the streets; 6 before the silver cord is snapped, and the
golden bowl is broken, and the pitcher is broken at the fountain, and
the wheel broken at the cistern, 7 and the dust returns to the earth as
it was, and the breath returns to God who gave it. 8 Vanity of vanities,
says the Teacher; all is vanity.
Epilogue
9 Besides being wise, the Teacher also taught the people knowledge,
weighing and studying and arranging many proverbs. 10 The Teacher
sought to find pleasing words, and he wrote words of truth plainly.
11 The sayings of the wise are like goads, and like nails firmly fixed are
the collected sayings that are given by one shepherd. 12 Of anything
beyond these, my child, beware. Of making many books there is no
end, and much study is a weariness of the flesh.
13 The end of the matter; all has been heard. Fear God, and keep his
commandments; for that is the whole duty of everyone. 14 For God will
bring every deed into judgment, including every secret thing, whether
good or evil.

1307

SONG OF SOLOMON 1308

SONG OF SOLOMON
Introduction
The Song of Solomon, also known as "Song of Songs" and "Canticles,"
is a sequence of lyric poems celebrating human love. The poetry is
graceful, sensuous, and replete with erotic imagery and allusions. It is
unclear whether the composition should be read as a single, unified
poem or as a collection of several shorter pieces written in a common
style and idiom. Nevertheless, the sequence is coherent and exhibits a
lyrical structure that derives its unity from repetitions and
juxtapositions rather than from narrative devices such as plot or
character development. The poem features the voices of two lovers,
one male and one female, and their professions of love for one
another. At times the two voices join in dialogue (e.g., 1.9-2.7; 4.1-5.1),
but at others they speak separately, addressing each other or the
woman's companions, the "daughters of Jerusalem" (3.1-5, 6-11; 7.1-9).
Given its style and theme, it is not surprising that there are no specific
allusions that would tie it to a specific historical setting. Although the
superscription in 1.1 associates the poem with Solomon, king of Israel
(968-928 BCE), he is not the author. The nature of the Hebrew used in
the songs, with its Aramaisms and possibly even Persian and Greek loan
words, suggests a postexilic date (perhaps sometime in the fourth or
third centuries BCE). The connection with Solomon may stem from his
reputation as a composer of songs (1 Kings 4.32).
Despite its late date, the Song of Songs is part of an ancient tradition
of Near Eastern love poetry. Some of the images and motifs echo those
of Mesopotamian sacred marriage poems from the late third and early
second millennium BCE. A closer parallel, however, is to be found in
Egyptian love songs from the thirteenth and twelfth centuries BCE.
These highly erotic compositions use many of the same genres found in
the Song of Solomon: poems describing the lover's physical attractions,
1308

SONG OF SOLOMON 1309

poems of yearning, poems of of admiration and boasting. Also
common to both is the use of sensuous imagery, which invokes not
only sight but also touch, hearing, and the smell of aromatic
fragrances. The Egyptian poems were likely sung at banquets by
professional male and female entertainers, and it is possible that the
same holds true for the Song of Songs. Although he disapproved of the
practice, Rabbi Aqiba (d. 135 CE) attests that the Song of Songs was sun
in banquet halls (Tos. Sanh. 12.10). By Aqiba's time the Song had
already come to be interpreted as a sacred text; hence its continuing
profane use was disturbing. At roughly the same time Rabbi Simeon be
Gamaliel associated the Song of Songs with harvest festivals in which
the young women of Jerusalem would go out to dance and sing in the
vineyards, appealing to the young men to notice them as potential
brides (m. Ta'anit 4.8).
From a relatively early date (perhaps before the turn of the era) the
Song of Songs began to be interpreted symbolically as an account of
the love between God and Israel. This interpretation is reflected both
in the Targum (Aramaic translation) and in Midrash Rabbah, an early
commentary. In the Jewish liturgy Song of Songs is read during the
celebration of Passover. The traditional symbolic understanding
remained dominant in Jewish interpretation until the modern period.
A return to a literal understanding is perhaps first reflected in the
translation of the Song by Moses Mendelssohn in 1788. Christian
tradition also developed a symbolic or allegorical interpretation,
reading the Song as an account of Christ's love for the church and later
as an expression of the soul's spiritual union with God. Over the
centuries many commentators and homilists, from Origen (third
century CE) to Bernard of Clairvaux (twelfth century) to St. John of the
Cross (sixteenth century CE) have developed this allegorical
interpretation. Even among the Protestant reformers some form of
allegorical interpretation remained prevalent until the rise of historical
criticism in the eighteenth century.

1309

SONG OF SOLOMON 1310

[Song of Solomon 1]
Title
1 The Song of Songs, which is Solomon's.
Opening poem
2 Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth!
For your love is better than wine,
3
your anointing oils are fragrant,
your name is perfume poured out;
therefore the maidens love you.
4 Draw me after you, let us make haste.
The king has brought me into his chambers.
We will exult and rejoice in you;
we will extol your love more than wine;
rightly do they love you.
5 I am black and beautiful,
O daughters of Jerusalem,
like the tents of Kedar,
like the curtains of Solomon.
6 Do not gaze at me because I am dark,
because the sun has gazed on me.
My mother's sons were angry with me;
they made me keeper of the vineyards,
but my own vineyard I have not kept!
7 Tell me, you whom my soul loves,
where you pasture your flock,
where you make it lie down at noon;
for why should I be like one who is veiled
beside the flocks of your companions?
8 If you do not know,
O fairest among women,
follow the tracks of the flock,
and pasture your kids
beside the shepherds' tents.

1310

SONG OF SOLOMON 1311

A dialogue of mutual admiration
9 I compare you, my love,
to a mare among Pharaoh's chariots.
10 Your cheeks are comely with ornaments,
your neck with strings of jewels.
11 We will make you ornaments of gold,
studded with silver.
12 While the king was on his couch,
my nard gave forth its fragrance.
13 My beloved is to me a bag of myrrh
that lies between my breasts.
14 My beloved is to me a cluster of henna blossoms
in the vineyards of En-gedi.
15 Ah, you are beautiful, my love;
ah, you are beautiful;
your eyes are doves.
16 Ah, you are beautiful, my beloved,
truly lovely.
Our couch is green;
17 the beams of our house are cedar,
our rafters are pine.
[Song of Solomon 2]
1 I am a rose of Sharon,
a lily of the valleys.
2 As a lily among brambles,
so is my love among maidens.
3 As an apple tree among the trees of the wood,
so is my beloved among young men.
With great delight I sat in his shadow,
and his fruit was sweet to my taste.
4 He brought me to the banqueting house,
and his intention toward me was love.

1311

SONG OF SOLOMON 1312

5 Sustain me with raisins,
refresh me with apples;
for I am faint with love.
6 O that his left hand were under my head,
and that his right hand embraced me!
7 I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem,
by the gazelles or the wild does:
do not stir up or awaken love
until it is ready!
8 The voice of my beloved!
Look, he comes,
leaping upon the mountains,
bounding over the hills.
9 My beloved is like a gazelle
or a young stag.
Look, there he stands
behind our wall,
gazing in at the windows,
looking through the lattice.
10 My beloved speaks and says to me:
"Arise, my love, my fair one,
and come away;
11 for now the winter is past,
the rain is over and gone.
12 The flowers appear on the earth;
the time of singing has come,
and the voice of the turtledove
is heard in our land.
13 The fig tree puts forth its figs,
and the vines are in blossom;
they give forth fragrance.
Arise, my love, my fair one,
and come away.

1312

SONG OF SOLOMON 1313

14 O my dove, in the clefts of the rock,
in the covert of the cliff,
let me see your face,
let me hear your voice;
for your voice is sweet,
and your face is lovely.
15 Catch us the foxes,
the little foxes,
that ruin the vineyards —
for our vineyards are in blossom."
16 My beloved is mine and I am his;
he pastures his flock among the lilies.
17 Until the day breathes
and the shadows flee,
turn, my beloved, be like a gazelle
or a young stag on the cleft mountains.
[Song of Solomon 3]
Nighttime search for the beloved
1 Upon my bed at night
I sought him whom my soul loves;
I sought him, but found him not;
I called him, but he gave no answer.
2 "I will rise now and go about the city,
in the streets and in the squares;
I will seek him whom my soul loves."
I sought him, but found him not.
3 The sentinels found me,
as they went about in the city.
"Have you seen him whom my soul loves?"
4 Scarcely had I passed them,
when I found him whom my soul loves.
I held him, and would not let him go
until I brought him into my mother's house,
and into the chamber of her that conceived me.

1313

SONG OF SOLOMON 1314

5 I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem,
by the gazelles or the wild does:
do not stir up or awaken love
until it is ready!
Solomon's wedding procession
6 What is that coming up from the wilderness,
like a column of smoke,
perfumed with myrrh and frankincense,
with all the fragrant powders of the merchant?
7 Look, it is the litter of Solomon!
Around it are sixty mighty men
of the mighty men of Israel,
8 all equipped with swords
and expert in war,
each with his sword at his thigh
because of alarms by night.
9 King Solomon made himself a palanquin
from the wood of Lebanon.
10 He made its posts of silver,
its back of gold, its seat of purple;
its interior was inlaid with love.
Daughters of Jerusalem,
11
come out.
Look, O daughters of Zion,
at King Solomon,
at the crown with which his mother crowned him
on the day of his wedding,
on the day of the gladness of his heart.

1314

SONG OF SOLOMON 1315

[Song of Solomon 4]
Praise of the woman's beauty
1 How beautiful you are, my love,
how very beautiful!
Your eyes are doves
behind your veil.
Your hair is like a flock of goats,
moving down the slopes of Gilead.
2 Your teeth are like a flock of shorn ewes
that have come up from the washing,
all of which bear twins,
and not one among them is bereaved.
3 Your lips are like a crimson thread,
and your mouth is lovely.
Your cheeks are like halves of a pomegranate
behind your veil.
4 Your neck is like the tower of David,
built in courses;
on it hang a thousand bucklers,
all of them shields of warriors.
5 Your two breasts are like two fawns,
twins of a gazelle,
that feed among the lilies.
6 Until the day breathes
and the shadows flee,
I will hasten to the mountain of myrrh
and the hill of frankincense.
7 You are altogether beautiful, my love;
there is no flaw in you.
8 Come with me from Lebanon, my bride;
come with me from Lebanon.
Depart from the peak of Amana,
from the peak of Senir and Hermon,
from the dens of lions,
from the mountains of leopards.

1315

SONG OF SOLOMON 1316

9 You have ravished my heart, my sister, my bride,
you have ravished my heart with a glance of your eyes,
with one jewel of your necklace.
10 How sweet is your love, my sister, my bride!
how much better is your love than wine,
and the fragrance of your oils than any spice!
11 Your lips distill nectar, my bride;
honey and milk are under your tongue;
the scent of your garments is like the scent of Lebanon.
12 A garden locked is my sister, my bride,
a garden locked, a fountain sealed.
13 Your channel is an orchard of pomegranates
with all choicest fruits,
henna with nard,
14 nard and saffron, calamus and cinnamon,
with all trees of frankincense,
myrrh and aloes,
with all chief spices —
15 a garden fountain, a well of living water,
and flowing streams from Lebanon.
16 Awake, O north wind,
and come, O south wind!
Blow upon my garden
that its fragrance may be wafted abroad.
Let my beloved come to his garden,
and eat its choicest fruits.
[Song of Solomon 5]
The woman's search
1 I come to my garden, my sister, my bride;
I gather my myrrh with my spice,
I eat my honeycomb with my honey,
I drink my wine with my milk.
Eat, friends, drink,
and be drunk with love.

1316

SONG OF SOLOMON 1317

2 I slept, but my heart was awake.
Listen! my beloved is knocking.
"Open to me, my sister, my love,
my dove, my perfect one;
for my head is wet with dew,
my locks with the drops of the night."
3 I had put off my garment;
how could I put it on again?
I had bathed my feet;
how could I soil them?
4 My beloved thrust his hand into the opening,
and my inmost being yearned for him.
5 I arose to open to my beloved,
and my hands dripped with myrrh,
my fingers with liquid myrrh,
upon the handles of the bolt.
6 I opened to my beloved,
but my beloved had turned and was gone.
My soul failed me when he spoke.
I sought him, but did not find him;
I called him, but he gave no answer.
7 Making their rounds in the city
the sentinels found me;
they beat me, they wounded me,
they took away my mantle,
those sentinels of the walls.
8 I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem,
if you find my beloved,
tell him this:
I am faint with love.
9 What is your beloved more than another beloved,
O fairest among women?
What is your beloved more than another beloved,
that you thus adjure us?
10 My beloved is all radiant and ruddy,
distinguished among ten thousand.

1317

SONG OF SOLOMON 1318

11 His head is the finest gold;
his locks are wavy,
black as a raven.
12 His eyes are like doves
beside springs of water,
bathed in milk,
fitly set.
13 His cheeks are like beds of spices,
yielding fragrance.
His lips are lilies,
distilling liquid myrrh.
14 His arms are rounded gold,
set with jewels.
His body is ivory work,
encrusted with sapphires.
15 His legs are alabaster columns,
set upon bases of gold.
His appearance is like Lebanon,
choice as the cedars.
16 His speech is most sweet,
and he is altogether desirable.
This is my beloved and this is my friend,
O daughters of Jerusalem.
[Song of Solomon 6]
In praise of the woman's beauty
1 Where has your beloved gone,
O fairest among women?
Which way has your beloved turned,
that we may seek him with you?
2 My beloved has gone down to his garden,
to the beds of spices,
to pasture his flock in the gardens,
and to gather lilies.
3 I am my beloved's and my beloved is mine;
he pastures his flock among the lilies.

1318

SONG OF SOLOMON 1319

4 You are beautiful as Tirzah, my love,
comely as Jerusalem,
terrible as an army with banners.
5 Turn away your eyes from me,
for they overwhelm me!
Your hair is like a flock of goats,
moving down the slopes of Gilead.
6 Your teeth are like a flock of ewes,
that have come up from the washing;
all of them bear twins,
and not one among them is bereaved.
7 Your cheeks are like halves of a pomegranate
behind your veil.
8 There are sixty queens and eighty concubines,
and maidens without number.
9 My dove, my perfect one, is the only one,
the darling of her mother,
flawless to her that bore her.
The maidens saw her and called her happy;
the queens and concubines also, and they praised her.
10 "Who is this that looks forth like the dawn,
fair as the moon, bright as the sun,
terrible as an army with banners?"
11 I went down to the nut orchard,
to look at the blossoms of the valley,
to see whether the vines had budded,
whether the pomegranates were in bloom.
12 Before I was aware, my fancy set me
in a chariot beside my prince.
Praise of the woman and her response
13 Return, return, O Shulammite!
Return, return, that we may look upon you.
Why should you look upon the Shulammite,
as upon a dance before two armies?

1319

SONG OF SOLOMON 1320

[Song of Solomon 7]
1 How graceful are your feet in sandals,
O queenly maiden!
Your rounded thighs are like jewels,
the work of a master hand.
2 Your navel is a rounded bowl
that never lacks mixed wine.
Your belly is a heap of wheat,
encircled with lilies.
3 Your two breasts are like two fawns,
twins of a gazelle.
4 Your neck is like an ivory tower.
Your eyes are pools in Heshbon,
by the gate of Bath-rabbim.
Your nose is like a tower of Lebanon,
overlooking Damascus.
5 Your head crowns you like Carmel,
and your flowing locks are like purple;
a king is held captive in the tresses.
6 How fair and pleasant you are,
O loved one, delectable maiden!
7 You are stately as a palm tree,
and your breasts are like its clusters.
8 I say I will climb the palm tree
and lay hold of its branches.
O may your breasts be like clusters of the vine,
and the scent of your breath like apples,
9 and your kisses like the best wine
that goes down smoothly,
gliding over lips and teeth.
10 I am my beloved's,
and his desire is for me.
11 Come, my beloved,
let us go forth into the fields,
and lodge in the villages;

1320

SONG OF SOLOMON 1321

12 let us go out early to the vineyards,
and see whether the vines have budded,
whether the grape blossoms have opened
and the pomegranates are in bloom.
There I will give you my love.
13 The mandrakes give forth fragrance,
and over our doors are all choice fruits,
new as well as old,
which I have laid up for you, O my beloved.
[Song of Solomon 8]
A poem of yearning
1 O that you were like a brother to me,
who nursed at my mother's breast!
If I met you outside, I would kiss you,
and no one would despise me.
2 I would lead you and bring you
into the house of my mother,
and into the chamber of the one who bore me.
I would give you spiced wine to drink,
the juice of my pomegranates.
3 O that his left hand were under my head,
and that his right hand embraced me!
4 I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem,
do not stir up or awaken love
until it is ready!
Lyrical ending
5 Who is that coming up from the wilderness,
leaning upon her beloved?
Under the apple tree I awakened you.
There your mother was in labor with you;
there she who bore you was in labor.

1321

SONG OF SOLOMON 1322

6 Set me as a seal upon your heart,
as a seal upon your arm;
for love is strong as death,
passion fierce as the grave.
Its flashes are flashes of fire,
a raging flame.
7 Many waters cannot quench love,
neither can floods drown it.
If one offered for love
all the wealth of one's house,
it would be utterly scorned.
8 We have a little sister,
and she has no breasts.
What shall we do for our sister,
on the day when she is spoken for?
9 If she is a wall,
we will build upon her a battlement of silver;
but if she is a door,
we will enclose her with boards of cedar.
10 I was a wall,
and my breasts were like towers;
then I was in his eyes
as one who brings peace.
11 Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon;
he entrusted the vineyard to keepers;
each one was to bring for its fruit a thousand pieces of silver.
12 My vineyard, my very own, is for myself;
you, O Solomon, may have the thousand,
and the keepers of the fruit two hundred!
13 O you who dwell in the gardens,
my companions are listening for your voice;
let me hear it.

1322

SONG OF SOLOMON 1323

14 Make haste, my beloved,
and be like a gazelle
or a young stag
upon the mountains of spices!

1323

INTRO TO THE PROPHETIC BOOKS 1324

INTRODUCTION TO THE
PROPHETIC BOOKS
The Nature and Composition of the Prophetic Books
The Prophetic Books are unusual and complex compositions. With the
exception of Jonah, which is a story about a prophet, these books all
contain extended sayings and speeches that purport to come from the
prophet whose name the book bears. While the books undoubtedly do
preserve authentic words of the prophets in question, we should not
think of the prophetic books simply as transcriptions of the words of
prophets. Although much remains unknown about the composition of
the prophetic books, it is possible to reconstruct a general picture.
Scholars generally agree that the poetic materials in the prophetic
books originated as oral pronouncements by the prophet to a public
audience. These oral sayings were subsequently written down, perhaps
by the prophet or an associate. The circumstances that led to these
original written collections were certainly various. A reference in Isaiah
suggest that oracles might be written down as a form of
authentication (Isa 30.8). The book of Jeremiah describes a situation in
which Jeremiah, having been banned from speaking publicly at the
Temple, had his assistant Baruch write down a selection of his
prophetic words so that they could be taken into the Temple and read
to the people (Jer 36.5-6). When King Jehoiakim destroyed the scroll,
Jeremiah had Baruch write another copy, to which they added
additional material (Jer 36.27-32). This collection may have formed the
nucleus of the book of Jeremiah. (Unlike most of the other prophetic
books, Ezekiel may have been composed as a written document from
the beginning.) Elsewhere in the Bible there is further evidence of
prophetic collections; see 1 Chr 29.29; 2 Chr 9.29.

1324

INTRO TO THE PROPHETIC BOOKS 1325

Once small collections of prophetic oracles and pronouncements were
made, they were subject to further editing, rearranging, annotating,
and expansion. In some cases narratives about the prophet were
added; these are both autobiographical (e.g., Isa 6; 8; Jer 1.2-19; 13.1-11;
Hos 1-2; Am 7.1-7) and biographical (e.g., Isa 7; 36-39; Jer 26; 36-44; Hos
3; Am 7.10-17). The occasions for such editorial activity will have
differed, but national crises may have prompted some of this process.
Most likely, written collections of the oracles of Amos and Hosea,
which were originally addressed to the Northern Kingdom (Israel),
were brought to Judah after the fall of the Northern Kingdom in 721
BCE, and then edited and circulated there. Isaiah of Jerusalem seems to
have knowledge of Amos's oracles, and Jeremiah is unquestionably
influenced by Hosea. Many of the prophetic book originating before
the fall of Judah to the Babylonians in 586 BCE show evidence of
editorial additions and reorganizations that reflect the circumstances
of exilic and postexilic times. The book of Amos, for example, now
includes material that presupposes the fall of Judah (9.11-15). The most
dramatic example of the expansion and reworking of prophetic
materials is the book of Isaiah. Although it contains extensive material
from the eighth-century prophet, chs 40-55 clearly reflect the situation
of the Babylonian exile, and chs 56-66 the period of the restoration of
the Judean community after the exile. Yet even though the book
contains materials dating from seveal centuries, it is unified by a
number of motifs, themes, and topics that recur throughout the work.
The complex activity of preserving and developing the prophetic oracle
collections reflects a conviction that the prophet's words were not only
significant for the circumstance in which they were originally
pronounced but potentially relevant for later ones as well. At the same
time, the freedom with which later generations could rework the
prophetic oracles indicates that the prophets' words did not at first
possess the kind of fixed authority that is later associated with
"scripture." Although the processes by which the prophetic books
came to assume a relatively final form and canonical status are difficult
to trace, this probably occurred during the Persian and early Hellenistic
periods (the fifth through the third centuries BCE). Most likely, during
this tie scribal editors added the superscriptions that introduce most of
the books, indicating the identity of the prophet (name, father's name,
and occasionally other information) and often the kings of Israel or

1325

INTRO TO THE PROPHETIC BOOKS 1326

Judah during whose reigns the prophets were active (e.g., Isa 1.1; Jer
1.1-3; Hos 1.1). In addition to editorial additions to the individual
prophetic books, the smaller prophetic books (Hosea-Malachi) were
arranged and edited to form a group known as "the book of the
Twelve," which was copied on a single scroll. By the beginning of the
second century BCE Ben Sira refers to these prophets as "the twelve"
(Sir 49.10). The number twelve is symbolic of the twelve sons of Jacob
and the twelve tribes of Israel, and considerable editorial work was
required to organize these prophetic materials into a grouping of
twelve. In fact, the book of Zechariah consists of three separate
collections (chs 1-8, 9-11, 12-14) grouped together editorially. Only the
first of these comes from the prophet Zechariah, whereas the other
two are anonymous. The final book of the collection, Malachi, is also
an anonymous piece, since "Malachi" is not a personal name but a
phrase meaning "my messenger," picked up from 3.1 to serve as the
name of the prophet in the superscription.
The Phenomenon of Prophecy
The phenomenon of prophecy was widespread in the ancient Near
East, and many important themes and genres familiar from biblical
prophecy have parallels there. Moreover, many more prophets were
active in ancient Israel and Judah than those whose work is
represented in the prophetic books of the Bible, and their activities
were more varied than these writings suggest. The books of Samuel
and Kings provide important additional information. Since our sources
are limited, it is difficult to reconstruct the history of prophecy. Some
of the features are clear, however. The prophet was essentially an
intermediary between God and the people, and one of the major
functions was that of messenger. Often prophets introduced their
communications with a version of the formula typically used by
messengers, "thus says the Lord." But prophets might also carry
inquiries from the people to God or make intercession on behalf of the
people In contrast to the priesthood, which was exclusively male, both
women and men could be prophets. Women prophets included
Deborah (Judg 4.4) and Huldah (2 Kings 22.14); see also Joel 2.28.
Additional aspects of the prophetic role are suggested by the various
terms used to identify them. In addition to "prophet" (Heb nabi',

1326

INTRO TO THE PROPHETIC BOOKS 1327

perhaps meaning "one who is called"), the prophets are identified as
seers (Heb ro'eh), visionaries (Heb hozeh), and holy men (Heb
ish'elohim, lit. "man of God").
The religious phenomenon of Israelite prophecy can be traced for more
than a thousand years, from the premonarchical period to the turn of
the era. As one would expect, over such a long period of time the
nature and function of prophecy adjusted in response to changing
historical, social, and religious circumstances. Four periods define the
major epochs of prophecy: the early monarchical period (eleventh
through ninth centuries), the Assyrian crisis (eight century), the
Babylonian crisis (late seventh through early-sixth centuries), and the
postexilic restoration (mid-sixth through mid-fifth centuries).
In the earliest period prophets may have been local or itinerant holy
men and women who were revered for their special religious powers
and who might be consulted for a variety of private inquiries, from
locating lost property (1 Sam 9.1-10) to learning whether a sick child
would live or die (1 Kings 14.1-18). Some lived in prophetic communities
that cultivated ecstatic forms of religious experience (1 Sam 19.18-24; 2
Kings 6.1-7). Prophets also had the public function of declaring God's
will concerning whether the people should go to war (Judg 4.4-10). The
emergence of monarchy in ancient Israel may have changed aspects of
the prophets' role. Prophets appear as king-makers and king-breakers,
as they announce that God has designated an individual to become
king or has rejected a reigning king (1 Sam 10.1; 15.23; 1 Kings 11.29-39;
14.1-18). Though prophets continued their role in advising about
matters of war (1 Kings 22), they also served as critics of the king in
religious and social affairs. The consolidation of royal power and the
foreign religious practices introduced through royal marriages often
threatened old tribal institutions and values. The conflict between
Elijah, the prophet, and Ahab and Jezebel, the king and queen,
illustrates these tensions between prophet and king (1 Kings 18-21).
Prophecy appears to have undergone a dramatic change during the
eighth century, although this impression may be affected by the
change in the nature of the sources of information. From the eighth
century onward, collections of prophetic oracles are preserved, yet,

1327

INTRO TO THE PROPHETIC BOOKS 1328

with the exception of Jeremiah, few extended narratives about
prophets exist. However, it does appear that in this period prophets
began to function less as private counselors and critics of kings and
more as public figures who influenced opinion through their
pronouncements in the Temple courts and in other public places.
Prophets of the eighth century (Amos, Hosea, Isaiah, Micah)
interpreted international affairs, critiqued complacent religious
practices, and condemned the abuses of social justice that accompanied
the increasing urbanization and centralization of state power
characteristic of the eighth century. The prophetic careers of Hosea,
Micah, and Isaiah too place in the shadow of the expansionist Assyrian
Empire, which eventually put an end to the Northern Kingdom of Israel
and subjected Judah to the condition of vassalage. They interpreted
these events, however, in terms of the judgment of the Lord, not
simply as the success of a powerful Assyrian Empire. This perspective
allowed Isaiah, for example, to anticipate the ultimate downfall of
Assyria because of its overweening arrogance.
The third major period of prophecy occurred during the Babylonian
crisis. The prophet Nahum celebrated the defeat of Assyria (612-609
BCE), but the excitement he expressed was soon turned to confusion as
Babylon succeeded Assyria as the dominant empire (see Habakkuk).
Jeremiah's prophetic career (ca. 627-586) spanned the time from the
decline of Assyria through the Babylonian overlordship of Judah, to the
revolt and destruction of Judah and the exile of a portion of its
population. Although it is difficult to correlate many of his poetic
oracles with specific events in this period, the narratives about
Jeremiah give a vivid picture of a nation and its leadership deeply
conflicted about what political course to follow and the religious
significance of the choices that were forced upon it. Even the prophetic
community was bitterly divided and gave contradictory advice to the
king concerning the will of the Lord (Jer 26-29; 36-44). Overlapping the
career of Jeremiah, the prophet Ezekiel (active 593-ca. 571 BCE) was
among the Judeans exiled to Babylon after the revolt of 597 BCE, a
decade before the final revolt and the destruction of Jerusalem.
Ezekiel's prophetic work was first to persuade the exiled Judeans of the
inevitability of Jerusalem's destruction, and, following the fall of the
city, to begin to articulate the theological grounds for conceiving a

1328

INTRO TO THE PROPHETIC BOOKS 1329

possible future, including a return of the exiles and a rebuilding of the
destroyed Temple. In contrast to the prophets who preceded him,
Ezekiel drew strongly on priestly traditions for his categories of
thought, forms of speech, and evocative symbols.
The defeat of the Babylonian Empire by the Persian king Cyrus altered
political conditions dramatically. Although Judah did not regain its
independence but became a part of the Persian Empire, Cyrus and his
successors authorized the rebuilding of the Temple and of Jerusalem,
allowing members of the exiled community in Babylon who so desired
to return to Judah. Thus the prophetic task during this period largely
concerned issues of the restoration of the community and its
institutions in a context significantly different from that which
prevailed during the Israelite and Judean monarchy. The anonymous
prophet whose work is found in Isa 40-55 (often called "Second
Isaiah") addressed the Babylonian exiles just at the time that Cyrus was
engaged in the conquest of Babylon. Second Isaiah had to persuade
the exilic community that unfolding event represented God's action in
history, to interpret the significance of Cyrus (God's "anointed" who
would rebuild Jerusalem), and to encourage the exiles to return to
Jerusalem. The process of rebuilding the Temple (520-515 BCE) provides
the context for the prophets Haggai and Zechariah. Zechariah's work in
particular suggests this was a time of expectation that perhaps the
monarchy might be restored, an event that did not occur. Issues
concerning reorganization of the Judean community and tensions
regarding economic justice, institutional corruption, and the
boundaries of the community are variously reflected in Zechariah, Isa
56-66, and Malachi, prophets who were active in roughly the period
525-475 BCE.
Although prophets in all periods might speak of the dramatic
intervention of God in historical events and the consequent
transformation of the conditions of life, this type of language seems to
have become more common and more vivid in the postexilic prophets
(e.g., Isa 56-66, Zechariah, Malachi, Joel, and postexilic additions to
earlier prophetic books, such as Isa 24-27). Some of the passages
anticipate a war or other cataclysmic event of cosmic proportions that
will precede a time of deliverance, peace, and virtual re-creation of the

1329

INTRO TO THE PROPHETIC BOOKS 1330

world. Such imagery and the expectations it expresses suggest to some
scholars that apocalypticism emerges out of postexilic prophecy.
Though it is true that apocalyptic literature is influenced by these
prophetic writings and their imagery, apocalyptic writing cannot simply
be understood as an outgrowth of the phenomenon of prophecy.
The book of Daniel, the only book in the Hebrew Bible that could be
called an apocalypse, illustrates the complexity of the matter. Although
Christian tradition groups Daniel with the prophetic books, Jewish
tradition places it in the Writings (see below). The first part of the book
consists of a cycle of narratives in which Daniel and his friends are
portrayed as sages trained in the technical skills of Babylonian scribal
wisdom. Like Joseph, Daniel is able to interpret dreams sent by God. He
is not presented as a prophet. In the latter part of the book, however,
Daniel is the recipient of visions that disclose the future. These vision
reports do bear significant similarities to those found in Ezekiel and
especially in Zechariah, though their almost allegorical style is quite
different. Similarly, although general claims about God's
foreknowledge of historical events can be found in Second Isaiah,
Daniels' representation of history as predetermined both with respect
to its epochal structure and its specific events is strikingly different
from the representation of history by the prophets. A clue to the
relationship of apocalyptic writing to prophecy may be found in Dan 9,
where Daniel is presented as studying the book of Jeremiah and
receiving an angelic interpretation of its significance. As suggested by
the representation of Daniel as a technically trained sage, the authors
of apocalyptic books were perhaps themselves learned scribes who
studied and appropriated aspects of the prophetic tradition and
combined them with other influences in their attempts to understand
the nature of the cosmos and the course of history.
Canonical Placement and Contents
In both the Jewish and Christian canons the prophetic books form a
distinct section of the Bible. The two traditions differ, however, with
respect to the number, sequence, and placement of the prophetic
books. Jewish tradition divides the canon into three parts: the Torah
(i.e., Genesis-Deuteronomy), the Prophets, and the Writings. The term

1330

INTRO TO THE PROPHETIC BOOKS 1331

"former prophets" is used to designate the historical books Joshua-2
Kings (perhaps reflecting a tradition that these books were written by
prophets), and the term "latter prophets" is used for those books that
bear the name of a particular prophet (i.e., Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
and the twelve minor prophets). In Christian Bibles, the prophetic
books form the last section of the Old Testament canon, following the
Pentateuch, the Historical Books, and the Poetical Books. Christian
tradition includes Daniel among the prophetic books, in contrast to
Judaism, which groups Daniel with the Writings. Also, Christian Bibles
place Lamentations, which is not a book of prophecy, immediately
after the book of Jeremiah, reflecting the tradition of the Septuagint
(the ancient Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible) that Jeremiah was
the author of Lamentations. Likewise, in some Christian canons, the
Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical
book
of
Baruch
comes
after
Lamentations, because of the connection between the prophet
Jeremiah and his scribe, Baruch.

Copyright ©2001, New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha: New Revised Standard
Version. Ed. Michael D. Coogan. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001. Used by
permission. All rights reserved.

1331

The Latter Prophets
1. Isaiah
2. Jeremiah
3. Lamentations
4. Ezekiel
5. Daniel

ISAIAH 1332

ISAIAH
Introduction
The book of Isaiah in its current form was written and assembled over
the course of several centuries. This process began in the eighth
century BCE, with the collection of the prophecies of Isaiah son of
Amoz, who was active in the Southern Kingdom of Judah during the
reigns of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah (1.1). It was completed
no later than the second century BCE, since a complete Isaiah scroll
dating from that time has been found among the Dead Sea Scrolls at
Qumran (1QIsaa), and the Septuagint (LXX), the ancient Greek
translation of the Hebrew Scriptures from around the same time,
contains the complete book as we know it. The author of Sirach, who
write in the early second century BCE as well, was familiar with chs 3639 and 40-55 (Sir 48.22-25), showing that a version of Isaiah containing
at least these sections was in general circulation by then.
P

P

There is no record of the editing and compilation process that the book
of Isaiah went through, but there are explanations for the
characteristics of the text as it now stands. The most obvious of these
characteristics, and the first one to be noticed, is the division after chs
1-39, which refer mostly to events of the eighth century BCE. Chs 40-66
cannot be earlier than the sixth century, since they clearly address a
situation reflecting the fall of Jerusalem and the deportations of large
parts of the population of Judah to Babylon. Within chs 40-66
moreover, chs 56-66 (or possibly 55-66) may date from even later
period, after the return of some of the people from the Babylonian
exile. These three divisions of the book are usually labeled First,
Second, and Third Isaiah. In addition, chs 1-39 are also composed of
smaller units dating from a variety of times (see below). But it is
important to look beyond these divisions of the book for structural and
thematic interconnection between the different parts, such as its first
and last chapters. These interconnections make clear that Isaiah
1332

ISAIAH 1333

reached its present form not as the result of a haphazard accumulation
of a variety of material, but as the outcome of a cumulative series of
interpretations that reapplied and expanded older parts of Isaiah to
meet the needs of later periods and situations.
The Background to Isaiah
Four pivotal moments in the history of the Israelite people form the
background to the various parts of Isaiah.
(1) The Syro-Ephraimite War and its aftermath. After a period of
relative peace between Israel (the Northern Kingdom, often called
"Ephraim" in Isaiah after its most important tribe) and Judah (the
Southern Kingdom), international tensions rose after Tiglath-pileser III
become king of the Assyrian Empire in 745 BCE and began an effort to
conquer the lands to the west of Assyria, including Syria, Israel, and
Judah. Uzziah, the king of Judah whose reign began during the
peaceful era, died in 733 (6.1), and was succeeded first by Jotham (759)
and then by Ahaz (743/735; the chronology is disputed). Pekah, king of
Israel, and Rezin, king of Syria (Damascus or Aram) tried, beginning in
735, to enlist Ahaz in an alliance against Assyria, and when that effort
failed, they attacked Judah to replace Ahaz with a king more
amenable to their policies (ch 7). This conflict is known as the SyroEphraimite war, since it was a war of Syria and Ephraim against Judah.
Ahaz successfully turned to Assyria for help in fending off Israel and
Syria. The price he paid was steep: Judah became a vassal of Assyria.
(2) The Assyrian invasion. During the decades following the SyroEphraimite war, the Assyrians expanded their influence in the area,
taking over Syria and then attacking the Northern Kingdom, which fell
in 722 BCE. When the Assyrian ruler of the time, Sargon II, died in 705,
Hezekiah, the king of Judah and son of Ahaz, rebelled against Assyria.
Hezekiah had thought to take advantage of the confusion at the
change of rulers, and in addition sought support from Egypt that was
not forthcoming (36.6). The new Assyrian king, Sennacherib, retaliated
and conquered the cities surrounding Jerusalem in 701 BCE. Hezekiah
was able to avert the conquest of Jerusalem itself only by paying
tribute.

1333

ISAIAH 1334

(3) The conquest of Jerusalem and the exile. During the century
following these events, the Assyrian empire gradually weakened. In 612
BCE, the rising Babylonian Empire conquered the Assyrian capital,
Nineveh, and the international power struggle become one between
Babylon and Egypt, with Judah caught between. In 605 the Babylonian
king, Nebuchadnezzar, defeated the Egyptian Pharaoh, Neco, at the
battle of Carchemish, and Babylon became the leading empire of the
day. Judah came under Babylon's control, and when the last king of
Judah, Zedekiah, rebelled against Babylon, the result was an invasion
by Nebuchadnezzar. In 586, he destroyed Jerusalem and its Temple and
deported a good deal of the population to Babylon, an event referred
to as the exile.
(4) The return. During the sixth century BCE, the Babylonians were
increasingly challenged by the rise of another great empire, the
Persians. In 539 Cyrus, the Persian king, defeated the Babylonians at
the battle of Opis. Cyrus, who was tolerant and (by the standards of
the time) benevolent, allowed the Jews to return to Judah, and many
(though not all) eventually did so. The returning exiles rebuilt
Jerusalem and the Temple.
The Relation of Isaiah and His Successors to the Historical Background
Isaiah of Jerusalem, the eighth-century prophet whose work forms the
basis of the book, was involved with the first two of these four
moments: the Syro-Ephraimite war and the Assyrian invasion. In the
first, he counseled against reliance on Assyria *7.7-9); in the second, he
counseled against reliance on Egypt (31.1). In each case, the warnings
against participating in the international power politics of the day
were part of Isaiah's clear teaching that only by relying on the Lord
would Judah ultimately prevail.
Two themes dominate the book of Isaiah as it now exists. The first is
the proclamation that God is behind all historical events, including the
actions of the great empires of the day (10.5; 41.25). The second is the
importance and centrality of Jerusalem for Israel, which includes an
emphasis on both the kingship and the right worship of God centered
in Jerusalem (2.1-4).

1334

ISAIAH 1335

These themes reappear in one form or another, adapted to fit the
changing historical circumstances, but refashioned with the aim of
making earlier pronouncements relevant to a different, later situation.
The proclamation that God is behind the events of current history, that
God is in control even of the actions of the hated empires of Assyria
and Babylon, meant that the prophet's words at the time of the
Assyrian threat could be reapplied to the time of the Babylonian
invasion. The importance of Jerusalem, and along with it the monarchy
and the Temple, attained tremendous resonance at the time of exile
and return, when the vision of a restored city carried with it an
idealized portrait of the "anointed," the restored king who in later
tradition became the paradigm of the messiah. The restoration of
Temple worship is set in the context of the worship that includes all
people, even those formerly excluded (56.3-5).
Chapters 1-39: Context and Arrangement
The first part of the book of Isaiah can be divided into sections, in part
guided by headings that have been inserted in the text and by brief
passages (usually prose) that mark their endings. Ch 1 may stand by
itself as a general introduction; chs 2-4 consist of judgment on and
promise to Jerusalem; chs 5-12 contain further warnings, including
some to the kings of Judah; chs 13-23 consist largely of judgment on
Babylon and other foreign peoples; chs 24-27 contrast the two cities,
the city under judgment and the future Jerusalem; chs 28-33 once
again warn Judah, and especially condemn Hezekiah's reliance on
Egypt; chs 34-35 particularly condemn Edom, which took advantage of
the Judean troubles to expand its territory; chs 36-39 form an appendix
of historical materials (excerpted from the book of Kings) from the
time of Hezekiah.
The title (1.1) describes the book as a vision that came to Isaiah, who
was active during the reigns of four Judean kings, thus assigning him a
prophetic career of about forty years. The second title (2.1) suggests
that the first chapter was intended as an introduction to the message
of judgment which takes up so much of the book. In addition, the last
stanza of this first poem (1.27-31) has linguistic and thematic links wit
the last chapter of the book. Chs 2-4 pronounce judgment on Israel and

1335

ISAIAH 1336

on Jerusalem in ways reminiscent of Amos, but these sayings are
bracketed by the prospect of a future restored and purified land and
city (2.2-5; 4.2-6). Judgment, therefore, is not the last word.
The vineyard love song (5.1-7) serves as a transition to the account of
Isaiah's involvement in the crisis of the Syro-Ephraimite war (734 BCE).
This account begins with a vision narrated in the first person (6.1-13),
continues with a third-person narrative (7.1-25), and concludes by
returning to the first-person narration (8.1-22). It is filled with poems
threatening divine judgment (5.8-25; 9.8-10.19) balanced by two poems
about the future kingdom of peace and justice (9.1-7; 11.1-9), and it
concludes with a psalm of thanksgiving which plays on the names of
the principal protagonists, Isaiah and the Holy One of Israel (12.1-6).
Collections of sayings directed against hostile foreign nations form a
significant component of several prophetic books. This is a type of
saying particularly liable to be "recycled" to fit different historical
situations; hence it is not surprising that much of chs 13-23 — the
nucleus of which is a series of nine oracles against foreign nations —
dates from long after the lifetime of Isaiah. Beginning with 13.1-14.27,
the focus shifts from the Assyrians to the Babylonians as the dominant
world power. The prophet's engagement with events at the time of
Ahaz and Assyrian ascendancy provides the key for those who came
later to the theological understanding of events in the following
centuries, when the Babylonians and after them the Persians succeeded
the Assyrians as the major international powers.
The next section of the book, chs 24-27, is often referred to as "the
Isaiah apocalypse" though much of it has little in common with any
apocalyptic event. Of uncertain date, its principal theme is the contrast
between an unnamed city, condemned for destruction (24.10-13; 25.2;
26.5-6; 27.10-11), and Jerusalem, destined for a glorious future (26.1-4).
The connection with the previous section may be that the unnamed
city is understood as a symbolic Babylon or a composite image of the
cities placed under judgment in chs 13-23.
Chapters 28-33, much of which derive from eight-century materials,
take up once again the theme of judgment on the civil and religious

1336

ISAIAH 1337

leadership of the two kingdoms, with a special condemnation for
Judean overtures to Egypt during the troubled reign of Hezekiah.
With chs 34-35 the focus shifts to the post-disaster period, with Edom
taking the place of Babylon as the enemy. The contrast between the
devastated land of Edom and the restored and fertile land of Judah in
these chapters is clearly intentional, and it makes a fitting conclusion to
the alternation of judgment and salvation throughout the book up to
this point. The final paragraph or stanza (35.8-10), referring to a way
through the wilderness, provides a smooth transition to chs 40-48.
This transition has been interrupted by the historical account of events
in Hezekiah's reign in chs 36-39, drawn from the Deuteronomistic
History (2 Kings 18.13, 17-20.19) and inserted at this point. The insertion
does, however, provide the structure of a contrast between Hezekiah's
reaction to political crisis (chs 36-39) and that of Ahaz a generation
earlier (chs 1-12).
Chapters 40-66: Content and Arrangement
The background of chs 40-55 (or for some scholars 40-54) is the
international situation during the reign of the last Babylonian ruler,
Nabonidus (556-539 BCE). It is most likely that the prophetic author was
among those deported to Babylon, through a Judean location is also
possible.
The centerpiece of chs 40-48 is a prophetic oracle designating the
Persian Cyrus II (the Great) as the instrument for the repatriation of
dispersed Israelites and their reestablishment in the Judean homeland
in the hands of the God of Israel, the one, true God and creator of the
world. The author confidently predicts the imminent fall of Babylon
and polemicizes against the Babylonian religious and intellectual
tradition.
The note of consolation and hope continues in chs 49-55, though there
are also signs of dissatisfaction, anxiety, and internal tension in the
community on whose behalf the prophet is speaking and writing (e.g.,
in the third and fourth of the "Servant Songs," 50.4-11 and 52.13-53.12).

1337

ISAIAH 1338

While the third major segment of the book (chs 56-66) has connections
with the chs 40-55, and also with chs 1-39 by virtue of its concern with
the destiny of Jerusalem, the situation is in several important respects
quite different. These texts seem to focus exclusively on the internal
affairs of the community in the early Persian period (late sixth century
BCE). The disappointment of expectations aroused by the conquests of
Cyrus has led to a resurgence of non-Yahwistic religious practices (57.113; 65.1-7; 66.3-4) and deep religious, social, and economic divisions
within the Judean community (e.g., 56.1-8; 58.1-12; 59.1-8). Attention is
directed increasingly away from an unsatisfactory present to the
projection of a future intervention of God in judgment and salvation,
an apocalyptic vision of a purified people and Jerusalem as the
religious capital of the world.
The Overall Unity of Isaiah
An understanding of the lengthy process that resulted in the book of
Isaiah should not leave the impression that it is simply a collection of
fragments or an anthology whose parts have no organic relation to
each other. The unity of the book comes in large part from the
development and deepening of major themes: the centrality of
Jerusalem; the importance of the "anointed" ruler; and the contrast
between God's people and the political and military machinations of
the great world empires. The image of Jerusalem in later books of the
Bible, particularly in the book of Revelation in the New Testament,
cannot be fully understood without grasping the development of the
idea of Jerusalem in Isaiah. The image of a new ruler who will usher in
a new age of justice, righteousness, and peace, and its development
into a concept of a "messiah" in early Jewish and early Christian
writings, also cannot be fully appreciated without an understanding of
how Isaiah developed the concept of the anointed ruler from its
historical reality as the Davidic line of Judean rulers to the hoped-for
restoration of an idealized king for a purified nation. And the notion
of God's people surviving and triumphing even when all the world's
great powers are arrayed against them echoes through the later
writings of the Hebrew Scriptures, the Jewish writings of the Diaspora
contained in the Apocrypha/Deuterocanonical Books, and the New
Testament.

1338

ISAIAH 1339

[Isaiah 1]
Superscription
1 The vision of Isaiah son of Amoz, which he saw concerning Judah and
Jerusalem in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of
Judah.
An introductory poem
2 Hear, O heavens, and listen, O earth;
for the LORD has spoken:
I reared children and brought them up,
but they have rebelled against me.
3 The ox knows its owner,
and the donkey its master's crib;
but Israel does not know,
my people do not understand.
4 Ah, sinful nation,
people laden with iniquity,
offspring who do evil,
children who deal corruptly,
who have forsaken the LORD,
who have despised the Holy One of Israel,
who are utterly estranged!
5 Why do you seek further beatings?
Why do you continue to rebel?
The whole head is sick,
and the whole heart faint.
6 From the sole of the foot even to the head,
there is no soundness in it,
but bruises and sores
and bleeding wounds;
they have not been drained, or bound up,
or softened with oil.

1339

ISAIAH 1340

7 Your country lies desolate,
your cities are burned with fire;
in your very presence
aliens devour your land;
it is desolate, as overthrown by foreigners.
8 And daughter Zion is left
like a booth in a vineyard,
like a shelter in a cucumber field,
like a besieged city.
9 If the LORD of hosts
had not left us a few survivors,
we would have been like Sodom,
and become like Gomorrah.
10 Hear the word of the LORD,
you rulers of Sodom!
Listen to the teaching of our God,
you people of Gomorrah!
11 What to me is the multitude of your sacrifices?
says the LORD;
I have had enough of burnt offerings of rams
and the fat of fed beasts;
I do not delight in the blood of bulls,
or of lambs, or of goats.
12 When you come to appear before me,
who asked this from your hand?
Trample my courts no more;
13 bringing offerings is futile;
incense is an abomination to me.
New moon and sabbath and calling of convocation —
I cannot endure solemn assemblies with iniquity.
14 Your new moons and your appointed festivals
my soul hates;
they have become a burden to me,
I am weary of bearing them.

1340

ISAIAH 1341

15 When you stretch out your hands,
I will hide my eyes from you;
even though you make many prayers,
I will not listen;
your hands are full of blood.
16 Wash yourselves; make yourselves clean;
remove the evil of your doings
from before my eyes;
cease to do evil,
17
learn to do good;
seek justice,
rescue the oppressed,
defend the orphan,
plead for the widow.
18 Come now, let us argue it out,
says the LORD:
though your sins are like scarlet,
they shall be like snow;
though they are red like crimson,
they shall become like wool.
19 If you are willing and obedient,
you shall eat the good of the land;
20 but if you refuse and rebel,
you shall be devoured by the sword;
for the mouth of the LORD has spoken.
21 How the faithful city
has become a whore!
She that was full of justice,
righteousness lodged in her —
but now murderers!
22 Your silver has become dross,
your wine is mixed with water.

1341

ISAIAH 1342

23 Your princes are rebels
and companions of thieves.
Everyone loves a bribe
and runs after gifts.
They do not defend the orphan,
and the widow's cause does not come before them.
24 Therefore says the Sovereign, the LORD of hosts, the Mighty One of
Israel:
Ah, I will pour out my wrath on my enemies,
and avenge myself on my foes!
25 I will turn my hand against you;
I will smelt away your dross as with lye
and remove all your alloy.
26 And I will restore your judges as at the first,
and your counselors as at the beginning.
Afterward you shall be called the city of righteousness,
the faithful city.
27 Zion shall be redeemed by justice,
and those in her who repent, by righteousness.
28 But rebels and sinners shall be destroyed together,
and those who forsake the LORD shall be consumed.
29 For you shall be ashamed of the oaks
in which you delighted;
and you shall blush for the gardens
that you have chosen.
30 For you shall be like an oak
whose leaf withers,
and like a garden without water.
31 The strong shall become like tinder,
and their work like a spark;
they and their work shall burn together,
with no one to quench them.

1342

ISAIAH 1343

[Isaiah 2]
A second superscription
1 The word that Isaiah son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and
Jerusalem.
2 In days to come
the mountain of the LORD's house
shall be established as the highest of the mountains,
and shall be raised above the hills;
all the nations shall stream to it.
3
Many peoples shall come and say,
"Come, let us go up to the mountain of the LORD,
to the house of the God of Jacob;
that he may teach us his ways
and that we may walk in his paths."
For out of Zion shall go forth instruction,
and the word of the LORD from Jerusalem.
4 He shall judge between the nations,
and shall arbitrate for many peoples;
they shall beat their swords into plowshares,
and their spears into pruning hooks;
nation shall not lift up sword against nation,
neither shall they learn war any more.
Indictment of Israel
5 O house of Jacob,
come, let us walk
in the light of the LORD!
6 For you have forsaken the ways of your people,
O house of Jacob.
Indeed they are full of diviners from the east
and of soothsayers like the Philistines,
and they clasp hands with foreigners.

1343

ISAIAH 1344

7 Their land is filled with silver and gold,
and there is no end to their treasures;
their land is filled with horses,
and there is no end to their chariots.
8 Their land is filled with idols;
they bow down to the work of their hands,
to what their own fingers have made.
9 And so people are humbled,
and everyone is brought low —
do not forgive them!
10 Enter into the rock,
and hide in the dust
from the terror of the LORD,
and from the glory of his majesty.
11 The haughty eyes of people shall be brought low,
and the pride of everyone shall be humbled;
and the LORD alone will be exalted on that day.
12 For the LORD of hosts has a day
against all that is proud and lofty,
against all that is lifted up and high;
13 against all the cedars of Lebanon,
lofty and lifted up;
and against all the oaks of Bashan;
14 against all the high mountains,
and against all the lofty hills;
15 against every high tower,
and against every fortified wall;
16 against all the ships of Tarshish,
and against all the beautiful craft.
17 The haughtiness of people shall be humbled,
and the pride of everyone shall be brought low;
and the LORD alone will be exalted on that day.
18 The idols shall utterly pass away.
19 Enter the caves of the rocks
and the holes of the ground,
from the terror of the LORD,
and from the glory of his majesty,
when he rises to terrify the earth.

1344

ISAIAH 1345

20 On that day people will throw away
to the moles and to the bats
their idols of silver and their idols of gold,
which they made for themselves to worship,
21 to enter the caverns of the rocks
and the clefts in the crags,
from the terror of the LORD,
and from the glory of his majesty,
when he rises to terrify the earth.
22 Turn away from mortals,
who have only breath in their nostrils,
for of what account are they?
[Isaiah 3]
Social and moral chaos
1 For now the Sovereign, the LORD of hosts,
is taking away from Jerusalem and from Judah
support and staff —
all support of bread,
and all support of water —
2 warrior and soldier,
judge and prophet,
diviner and elder,
3 captain of fifty
and dignitary,
counselor and skillful magician
and expert enchanter.
4 And I will make boys their princes,
and babes shall rule over them.
5 The people will be oppressed,
everyone by another
and everyone by a neighbor;
the youth will be insolent to the elder,
and the base to the honorable.

1345

ISAIAH 1346

6 Someone will even seize a relative,
a member of the clan, saying,
"You have a cloak;
you shall be our leader,
and this heap of ruins
shall be under your rule."
7 But the other will cry out on that day, saying,
"I will not be a healer;
in my house there is neither bread nor cloak;
you shall not make me
leader of the people."
8 For Jerusalem has stumbled
and Judah has fallen,
because their speech and their deeds are against the LORD,
defying his glorious presence.
9 The look on their faces bears witness against them;
they proclaim their sin like Sodom,
they do not hide it.
Woe to them!
For they have brought evil on themselves.
10 Tell the innocent how fortunate they are,
for they shall eat the fruit of their labors.
11 Woe to the guilty! How unfortunate they are,
for what their hands have done shall be done to them.
12 My people — children are their oppressors,
and women rule over them.
O my people, your leaders mislead you,
and confuse the course of your paths.
13 The LORD rises to argue his case;
he stands to judge the peoples.
14 The LORD enters into judgment
with the elders and princes of his people:
It is you who have devoured the vineyard;
the spoil of the poor is in your houses.
15 What do you mean by crushing my people,
by grinding the face of the poor? says the Lord GOD of hosts.

1346

ISAIAH 1347

The fate of the court ladies of Jerusalem
16 The LORD said:
Because the daughters of Zion are haughty
and walk with outstretched necks,
glancing wantonly with their eyes,
mincing along as they go,
tinkling with their feet;
17 the Lord will afflict with scabs
the heads of the daughters of Zion,
and the LORD will lay bare their secret parts.
18 In that day the Lord will take away the finery of the anklets, the
headbands, and the crescents; 19 the pendants, the bracelets, and the
scarfs; 20 the headdresses, the armlets, the sashes, the perfume boxes,
and the amulets; 21 the signet rings and nose rings; 22 the festal robes,
the mantles, the cloaks, and the handbags; 23 the garments of gauze,
the linen garments, the turbans, and the veils.
24 Instead of perfume there will be a stench;
and instead of a sash, a rope;
and instead of well-set hair, baldness;
and instead of a rich robe, a binding of sackcloth;
instead of beauty, shame.
25 Your men shall fall by the sword
and your warriors in battle.
26 And her gates shall lament and mourn;
ravaged, she shall sit upon the ground.
[Isaiah 4]
1 Seven women shall take hold of one man in that day, saying,
"We will eat our own bread and wear our own clothes;
just let us be called by your name;
take away our disgrace."

1347

ISAIAH 1348

Jerusalem renewed
2 On that day the branch of the LORD shall be beautiful and glorious,
and the fruit of the land shall be the pride and glory of the survivors of
Israel. 3 Whoever is left in Zion and remains in Jerusalem will be called
holy, everyone who has been recorded for life in Jerusalem, 4 once the
Lord has washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion and cleansed
the bloodstains of Jerusalem from its midst by a spirit of judgment and
by a spirit of burning. 5 Then the LORD will create over the whole site of
Mount Zion and over its places of assembly a cloud by day and smoke
and the shining of a flaming fire by night. Indeed over all the glory
there will be a canopy. 6 It will serve as a pavilion, a shade by day from
the heat, and a refuge and a shelter from the storm and rain.
[Isaiah 5]
The love song about the vineyard
1 Let me sing for my beloved
my love-song concerning his vineyard:
My beloved had a vineyard
on a very fertile hill.
2 He dug it and cleared it of stones,
and planted it with choice vines;
he built a watchtower in the midst of it,
and hewed out a wine vat in it;
he expected it to yield grapes,
but it yielded wild grapes.
3 And now, inhabitants of Jerusalem
and people of Judah,
judge between me
and my vineyard.
4 What more was there to do for my vineyard
that I have not done in it?
When I expected it to yield grapes,
why did it yield wild grapes?

1348

ISAIAH 1349

5 And now I will tell you
what I will do to my vineyard.
I will remove its hedge,
and it shall be devoured;
I will break down its wall,
and it shall be trampled down.
6 I will make it a waste;
it shall not be pruned or hoed,
and it shall be overgrown with briers and thorns;
I will also command the clouds
that they rain no rain upon it.
7 For the vineyard of the LORD of hosts
is the house of Israel,
and the people of Judah
are his pleasant planting;
he expected justice,
but saw bloodshed;
righteousness,
but heard a cry!
Seven woes
8 Ah, you who join house to house,
who add field to field,
until there is room for no one but you,
and you are left to live alone
in the midst of the land!
9 The LORD of hosts has sworn in my hearing:
Surely many houses shall be desolate,
large and beautiful houses, without inhabitant.
10 For ten acres of vineyard shall yield but one bath,
and a homer of seed shall yield a mere ephah.
11 Ah, you who rise early in the morning
in pursuit of strong drink,
who linger in the evening
to be inflamed by wine,

1349

ISAIAH 1350

12 whose feasts consist of lyre and harp,
tambourine and flute and wine,
but who do not regard the deeds of the LORD,
or see the work of his hands!
13 Therefore my people go into exile without knowledge;
their nobles are dying of hunger,
and their multitude is parched with thirst.
14 Therefore Sheol has enlarged its appetite
and opened its mouth beyond measure;
the nobility of Jerusalem and her multitude go down,
her throng and all who exult in her.
15 People are bowed down, everyone is brought low,
and the eyes of the haughty are humbled.
16 But the LORD of hosts is exalted by justice,
and the Holy God shows himself holy by righteousness.
17 Then the lambs shall graze as in their pasture,
fatlings and kids shall feed among the ruins.
18 Ah, you who drag iniquity along with cords of falsehood,
who drag sin along as with cart ropes,
19 who say, "Let him make haste,
let him speed his work
that we may see it;
let the plan of the Holy One of Israel hasten to fulfillment,
that we may know it!"
20 Ah, you who call evil good
and good evil,
who put darkness for light
and light for darkness,
who put bitter for sweet
and sweet for bitter!
21 Ah, you who are wise in your own eyes,
and shrewd in your own sight!
22 Ah, you who are heroes in drinking wine
and valiant at mixing drink,
23 who acquit the guilty for a bribe,
and deprive the innocent of their rights!

1350

ISAIAH 1351

24 Therefore, as the tongue of fire devours the stubble,
and as dry grass sinks down in the flame,
so their root will become rotten,
and their blossom go up like dust;
for they have rejected the instruction of the LORD of hosts,
and have despised the word of the Holy One of Israel.
A displaced stanza
25 Therefore the anger of the LORD was kindled against his people,
and he stretched out his hand against them and struck them;
the mountains quaked,
and their corpses were like refuse in the streets.
For all this his anger has not turned away,
and his hand is stretched out still.
The threat of a double blow
26 He will raise a signal for a nation far away,
and whistle for a people at the ends of the earth;
Here they come, swiftly, speedily!
27 None of them is weary, none stumbles,
none slumbers or sleeps,
not a loincloth is loose,
not a sandal-thong broken;
28 their arrows are sharp,
all their bows bent,
their horses' hoofs seem like flint,
and their wheels like the whirlwind.
29 Their roaring is like a lion,
like young lions they roar;
they growl and seize their prey,
they carry it off, and no one can rescue.

1351

ISAIAH 1352

30 They will roar over it on that day,
like the roaring of the sea.
And if one look to the land —
only darkness and distress;
and the light grows dark with clouds.
[Isaiah 6]
The vision of the heavenly throne room
1 In the year that King Uzziah died, I saw the Lord sitting on a throne,
high and lofty; and the hem of his robe filled the temple. 2 Seraphs
were in attendance above him; each had six wings: with two they
covered their faces, and with two they covered their feet, and with two
they flew. 3 And one called to another and said:
"Holy, holy, holy is the LORD of hosts;
the whole earth is full of his glory."
4 The pivots on the thresholds shook at the voices of those who called,
and the house filled with smoke. 5 And I said: "Woe is me! I am lost,
for I am a man of unclean lips, and I live among a people of unclean
lips; yet my eyes have seen the King, the LORD of hosts!"
6 Then one of the seraphs flew to me, holding a live coal that had been
taken from the altar with a pair of tongs. 7 The seraph touched my
mouth with it and said: "Now that this has touched your lips, your guilt
has departed and your sin is blotted out." 8 Then I heard the voice of
the Lord saying, "Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?" And I
said, "Here am I; send me!" 9 And he said, "Go and say to this people:
'Keep listening, but do not comprehend;
keep looking, but do not understand.'
10 Make the mind of this people dull,
and stop their ears,
and shut their eyes,
so that they may not look with their eyes,
and listen with their ears,
and comprehend with their minds,
and turn and be healed."

1352

ISAIAH 1353

11 Then I said, "How long, O Lord?" And he said:
"Until cities lie waste
without inhabitant,
and houses without people,
and the land is utterly desolate;
12 until the LORD sends everyone far away,
and vast is the emptiness in the midst of the land.
13 Even if a tenth part remain in it,
it will be burned again,
like a terebinth or an oak
whose stump remains standing
when it is felled."
The holy seed is its stump.
[Isaiah 7]
Isaiah's intervention in the Syro-Ephraimite war
1 In the days of Ahaz son of Jotham son of Uzziah, king of Judah, King
Rezin of Aram and King Pekah son of Remaliah of Israel went up to
attack Jerusalem, but could not mount an attack against it. 2 When the
house of David heard that Aram had allied itself with Ephraim, the
heart of Ahaz and the heart of his people shook as the trees of the
forest shake before the wind.
3 Then the LORD said to Isaiah, Go out to meet Ahaz, you and your son
Shear-jashub, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool on the
highway to the Fuller's Field, 4 and say to him, Take heed, be quiet, do
not fear, and do not let your heart be faint because of these two
smoldering stumps of firebrands, because of the fierce anger of Rezin
and Aram and the son of Remaliah. 5 Because Aram — with Ephraim
and the son of Remaliah — has plotted evil against you, saying, 6 Let us
go up against Judah and cut off Jerusalem and conquer it for ourselves
and make the son of Tabeel king in it; 7 therefore thus says the Lord
GOD:
It shall not stand,
and it shall not come to pass.
8 For the head of Aram is Damascus,
and the head of Damascus is Rezin.

1353

ISAIAH 1354

(Within sixty-five years Ephraim will be shattered, no longer a people.)
9 The head of Ephraim is Samaria,
and the head of Samaria is the son of Remaliah.
If you do not stand firm in faith,
you shall not stand at all.
10 Again the LORD spoke to Ahaz, saying, 11 Ask a sign of the LORD your
God; let it be deep as Sheol or high as heaven. 12 But Ahaz said, I will
not ask, and I will not put the LORD to the test. 13 Then Isaiah said:
"Hear then, O house of David! Is it too little for you to weary mortals,
that you weary my God also? 14 Therefore the Lord himself will give
you a sign. Look, the young woman is with child and shall bear a son,
and shall name him Immanuel. 15 He shall eat curds and honey by the
time he knows how to refuse the evil and choose the good. 16 For
before the child knows how to refuse the evil and choose the good,
the land before whose two kings you are in dread will be deserted. 17
The LORD will bring on you and on your people and on your ancestral
house such days as have not come since the day that Ephraim departed
from Judah — the king of Assyria."
Four additions
18 On that day the LORD will whistle for the fly that is at the sources of
the streams of Egypt, and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria. 19
And they will all come and settle in the steep ravines, and in the clefts
of the rocks, and on all the thornbushes, and on all the pastures.
20 On that day the Lord will shave with a razor hired beyond the River
— with the king of Assyria — the head and the hair of the feet, and it
will take off the beard as well.
21 On that day one will keep alive a young cow and two sheep, 22 and
will eat curds because of the abundance of milk that they give; for
everyone that is left in the land shall eat curds and honey.
23 On that day every place where there used to be a thousand vines,
worth a thousand shekels of silver, will become briers and thorns. 24
With bow and arrows one will go there, for all the land will be briers

1354

ISAIAH 1355

and thorns; 25 and as for all the hills that used to be hoed with a hoe,
you will not go there for fear of briers and thorns; but they will
become a place where cattle are let loose and where sheep tread.
[Isaiah 8]
The sign of Maher-shalal-hash-baz
1 Then the LORD said to me, Take a large tablet and write on it in
common characters, "Belonging to Maher-shalal-hash-baz," 2 and have
it attested for me by reliable witnesses, the priest Uriah and Zechariah
son of Jeberechiah. 3 And I went to the prophetess, and she conceived
and bore a son. Then the LORD said to me, Name him Maher-shalalhash-baz; 4 for before the child knows how to call "My father" or "My
mother," the wealth of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria will be
carried away by the king of Assyria.
5 The LORD spoke to me again: 6 Because this people has refused the
waters of Shiloah that flow gently, and melt in fear before Rezin and
the son of Remaliah; 7 therefore, the Lord is bringing up against it the
mighty flood waters of the River, the king of Assyria and all his glory; it
will rise above all its channels and overflow all its banks; 8 it will sweep
on into Judah as a flood, and, pouring over, it will reach up to the
neck; and its outspread wings will fill the breadth of your land, O
Immanuel.
9 Band together, you peoples, and be dismayed;
listen, all you far countries;
gird yourselves and be dismayed;
gird yourselves and be dismayed!
10 Take counsel together, but it shall be brought to naught;
speak a word, but it will not stand,
for God is with us.
Isaiah and his co-conspirators
11 For the LORD spoke thus to me while his hand was strong upon me,
and warned me not to walk in the way of this people, saying: 12 Do not
call conspiracy all that this people calls conspiracy, and do not fear

1355

ISAIAH 1356

what it fears, or be in dread. 13 But the LORD of hosts, him you shall
regard as holy; let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. 14 He
will become a sanctuary, a stone one strikes against; for both houses of
Israel he will become a rock one stumbles over — a trap and a snare for
the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 15 And many among them shall stumble;
they shall fall and be broken; they shall be snared and taken.
Preserving the record
16 Bind up the testimony, seal the teaching among my disciples. 17 I will
wait for the LORD, who is hiding his face from the house of Jacob, and I
will hope in him. 18 See, I and the children whom the LORD has given
me are signs and portents in Israel from the LORD of hosts, who dwells
on Mount Zion. 19 Now if people say to you, "Consult the ghosts and
the familiar spirits that chirp and mutter; should not a people consult
their gods, the dead on behalf of the living, 20 for teaching and for
instruction?" surely, those who speak like this will have no dawn! 21
They will pass through the land, greatly distressed and hungry; when
they are hungry, they will be enraged and will curse their king and
their gods. They will turn their faces upward, 22 or they will look to the
earth, but will see only distress and darkness, the gloom of anguish;
and they will be thrust into thick darkness.
[Isaiah 9]
New age, new ruler
1 But there will be no gloom for those who were in anguish. In the
former time he brought into contempt the land of Zebulun and the
land of Naphtali, but in the latter time he will make glorious the way
of the sea, the land beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the nations.
2 The people who walked in darkness
have seen a great light;
those who lived in a land of deep darkness —
on them light has shined.

1356

ISAIAH 1357

3 You have multiplied the nation,
you have increased its joy;
they rejoice before you
as with joy at the harvest,
as people exult when dividing plunder.
4 For the yoke of their burden,
and the bar across their shoulders,
the rod of their oppressor,
you have broken as on the day of Midian.
5 For all the boots of the tramping warriors
and all the garments rolled in blood
shall be burned as fuel for the fire.
6 For a child has been born for us,
a son given to us;
authority rests upon his shoulders;
and he is named
Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God,
Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace.
7 His authority shall grow continually,
and there shall be endless peace
for the throne of David and his kingdom.
He will establish and uphold it
with justice and with righteousness
from this time onward and forevermore.
The zeal of the LORD of hosts will do this.
Judgment on Israel
8 The Lord sent a word against Jacob,
and it fell on Israel;
9 and all the people knew it —
Ephraim and the inhabitants of Samaria —
but in pride and arrogance of heart they said:
10 "The bricks have fallen,
but we will build with dressed stones;
the sycamores have been cut down,
but we will put cedars in their place."

1357

ISAIAH 1358

11 So the LORD raised adversaries against them,
and stirred up their enemies,
12 the Arameans on the east and the Philistines on the west,
and they devoured Israel with open mouth.
For all this his anger has not turned away;
his hand is stretched out still.
A further stage in judgment on Israel
13 The people did not turn to him who struck them,
or seek the LORD of hosts.
14 So the LORD cut off from Israel head and tail,
palm branch and reed in one day —
15 elders and dignitaries are the head,
and prophets who teach lies are the tail;
16 for those who led this people led them astray,
and those who were led by them were left in confusion.
17 That is why the Lord did not have pity on their young people,
or compassion on their orphans and widows;
for everyone was godless and an evildoer,
and every mouth spoke folly.
For all this his anger has not turned away;
his hand is stretched out still.
Social breakdown
18 For wickedness burned like a fire,
consuming briers and thorns;
it kindled the thickets of the forest,
and they swirled upward in a column of smoke.
19 Through the wrath of the LORD of hosts
the land was burned,
and the people became like fuel for the fire;
no one spared another.
20 They gorged on the right, but still were hungry,
and they devoured on the left, but were not satisfied;
they devoured the flesh of their own kindred;

1358

ISAIAH 1359

21 Manasseh devoured Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasseh,
and together they were against Judah.
For all this his anger has not turned away;
his hand is stretched out still.
[Isaiah 10]
Judgment against aggressors
1 Ah, you who make iniquitous decrees,
who write oppressive statutes,
2 to turn aside the needy from justice
and to rob the poor of my people of their right,
that widows may be your spoil,
and that you may make the orphans your prey!
3 What will you do on the day of punishment,
in the calamity that will come from far away?
To whom will you flee for help,
and where will you leave your wealth,
4 so as not to crouch among the prisoners
or fall among the slain?
For all this his anger has not turned away;
his hand is stretched out still.
Woe to Assyria
5 Ah, Assyria, the rod of my anger —
the club in their hands is my fury!
6 Against a godless nation I send him,
and against the people of my wrath I command him,
to take spoil and seize plunder,
and to tread them down like the mire of the streets.
7 But this is not what he intends,
nor does he have this in mind;
but it is in his heart to destroy,
and to cut off nations not a few.
8 For he says:
"Are not my commanders all kings?

1359

ISAIAH 1360

9 Is not Calno like Carchemish?
Is not Hamath like Arpad?
Is not Samaria like Damascus?
10 As my hand has reached to the kingdoms of the idols
whose images were greater than those of Jerusalem and Samaria,
11 shall I not do to Jerusalem and her idols
what I have done to Samaria and her images?"
12 When the Lord has finished all his work on Mount Zion and on
Jerusalem, he will punish the arrogant boasting of the king of Assyria
and his haughty pride. 13 For he says:
"By the strength of my hand I have done it,
and by my wisdom, for I have understanding;
I have removed the boundaries of peoples,
and have plundered their treasures;
like a bull I have brought down those who sat on thrones.
14 My hand has found, like a nest,
the wealth of the peoples;
and as one gathers eggs that have been forsaken,
so I have gathered all the earth;
and there was none that moved a wing,
or opened its mouth, or chirped."
15 Shall the ax vaunt itself over the one who wields it,
or the saw magnify itself against the one who handles it?
As if a rod should raise the one who lifts it up,
or as if a staff should lift the one who is not wood!
16 Therefore the Sovereign, the LORD of hosts,
will send wasting sickness among his stout warriors,
and under his glory a burning will be kindled,
like the burning of fire.
17 The light of Israel will become a fire,
and his Holy One a flame;
and it will burn and devour
his thorns and briers in one day.
18 The glory of his forest and his fruitful land
the LORD will destroy, both soul and body,
and it will be as when an invalid wastes away.

1360

ISAIAH 1361

19 The remnant of the trees of his forest will be so few
that a child can write them down.
A prose comment
20 On that day the remnant of Israel and the survivors of the house of
Jacob will no more lean on the one who struck them, but will lean on
the LORD, the Holy One of Israel, in truth. 21 A remnant will return, the
remnant of Jacob, to the mighty God. 22 For though your people Israel
were like the sand of the sea, only a remnant of them will return.
Destruction is decreed, overflowing with righteousness. 23 For the Lord
GOD of hosts will make a full end, as decreed, in all the earth.
24 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD of hosts: O my people, who live in
Zion, do not be afraid of the Assyrians when they beat you with a rod
and lift up their staff against you as the Egyptians did. 25 For in a very
little while my indignation will come to an end, and my anger will be
directed to their destruction. 26 The LORD of hosts will wield a whip
against them, as when he struck Midian at the rock of Oreb; his staff
will be over the sea, and he will lift it as he did in Egypt. 27 On that day
his burden will be removed from your shoulder, and his yoke will be
destroyed from your neck.
An invasion
He has gone up from Rimmon,
28 he has come to Aiath;
he has passed through Migron,
at Michmash he stores his baggage;
29 they have crossed over the pass,
at Geba they lodge for the night;
Ramah trembles,
Gibeah of Saul has fled.
30 Cry aloud, O daughter Gallim!
Listen, O Laishah!
Answer her, O Anathoth!
31 Madmenah is in flight,
the inhabitants of Gebim flee for safety.

1361

ISAIAH 1362

32 This very day he will halt at Nob,
he will shake his fist
at the mount of daughter Zion,
the hill of Jerusalem.
Further judgments
33 Look, the Sovereign, the LORD of hosts,
will lop the boughs with terrifying power;
the tallest trees will be cut down,
and the lofty will be brought low.
34 He will hack down the thickets of the forest with an ax,
and Lebanon with its majestic trees will fall.
[Isaiah 11]
The future peaceful kingdom
1 A shoot shall come out from the stump of Jesse,
and a branch shall grow out of his roots.
2 The spirit of the LORD shall rest on him,
the spirit of wisdom and understanding,
the spirit of counsel and might,
the spirit of knowledge and the fear of the LORD.
3 His delight shall be in the fear of the LORD.
He shall not judge by what his eyes see,
or decide by what his ears hear;
4 but with righteousness he shall judge the poor,
and decide with equity for the meek of the earth;
he shall strike the earth with the rod of his mouth,
and with the breath of his lips he shall kill the wicked.
5 Righteousness shall be the belt around his waist,
and faithfulness the belt around his loins.
6 The wolf shall live with the lamb,
the leopard shall lie down with the kid,
the calf and the lion and the fatling together,
and a little child shall lead them.

1362

ISAIAH 1363

7 The cow and the bear shall graze,
their young shall lie down together;
and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.
8 The nursing child shall play over the hole of the asp,
and the weaned child shall put its hand on the adder's den.
9 They will not hurt or destroy
on all my holy mountain;
for the earth will be full of the knowledge of the LORD
as the waters cover the sea.
Three appendices
10 On that day the root of Jesse shall stand as a signal to the peoples;
the nations shall inquire of him, and his dwelling shall be glorious.
11 On that day the Lord will extend his hand yet a second time to
recover the remnant that is left of his people, from Assyria, from Egypt,
from Pathros, from Ethiopia, from Elam, from Shinar, from Hamath,
and from the coastlands of the sea.
12 He will raise a signal for the nations,
and will assemble the outcasts of Israel,
and gather the dispersed of Judah
from the four corners of the earth.
13 The jealousy of Ephraim shall depart,
the hostility of Judah shall be cut off;
Ephraim shall not be jealous of Judah,
and Judah shall not be hostile towards Ephraim.
14 But they shall swoop down on the backs of the Philistines in the
west, together they shall plunder the people of the east.
They shall put forth their hand against Edom and Moab,
and the Ammonites shall obey them.
15 And the LORD will utterly destroy
the tongue of the sea of Egypt;
and will wave his hand over the River
with his scorching wind;
and will split it into seven channels,
and make a way to cross on foot;

1363

ISAIAH 1364

16 so there shall be a highway from Assyria
for the remnant that is left of his people,
as there was for Israel
when they came up from the land of Egypt.
[Isaiah 12]
Two short hymns
1 You will say in that day:
I will give thanks to you, O LORD,
for though you were angry with me,
your anger turned away,
and you comforted me.
2 Surely God is my salvation;
I will trust, and will not be afraid,
for the LORD GOD is my strength and my might;
he has become my salvation.
3 With joy you will draw water from the wells of salvation. 4 And you
will say in that day:
Give thanks to the LORD,
call on his name;
make known his deeds among the nations;
proclaim that his name is exalted.
5 Sing praises to the LORD, for he has done gloriously;
let this be known in all the earth.
6 Shout aloud and sing for joy, O royal Zion,
for great in your midst is the Holy One of Israel.

1364

ISAIAH 1365

[Isaiah 13]
Oracles against foreign nations; oracle concerning Babylon
1 The oracle concerning Babylon that Isaiah son of Amoz saw.
2 On a bare hill raise a signal,
cry aloud to them;
wave the hand for them to enter
the gates of the nobles.
3 I myself have commanded my consecrated ones,
have summoned my warriors, my proudly exulting ones,
to execute my anger.
4 Listen, a tumult on the mountains
as of a great multitude!
Listen, an uproar of kingdoms,
of nations gathering together!
The LORD of hosts is mustering
an army for battle.
5 They come from a distant land,
from the end of the heavens,
the LORD and the weapons of his indignation,
to destroy the whole earth.
6 Wail, for the day of the LORD is near;
it will come like destruction from the Almighty!
7 Therefore all hands will be feeble,
and every human heart will melt,
8
and they will be dismayed.
Pangs and agony will seize them;
they will be in anguish like a woman in labor.
They will look aghast at one another;
their faces will be aflame.
9 See, the day of the LORD comes,
cruel, with wrath and fierce anger,
to make the earth a desolation,
and to destroy its sinners from it.

1365

ISAIAH 1366

10 For the stars of the heavens and their constellations
will not give their light;
the sun will be dark at its rising,
and the moon will not shed its light.
11 I will punish the world for its evil,
and the wicked for their iniquity;
I will put an end to the pride of the arrogant,
and lay low the insolence of tyrants.
12 I will make mortals more rare than fine gold,
and humans than the gold of Ophir.
13 Therefore I will make the heavens tremble,
and the earth will be shaken out of its place,
at the wrath of the LORD of hosts
in the day of his fierce anger.
14 Like a hunted gazelle,
or like sheep with no one to gather them,
all will turn to their own people,
and all will flee to their own lands.
15 Whoever is found will be thrust through,
and whoever is caught will fall by the sword.
16 Their infants will be dashed to pieces
before their eyes;
their houses will be plundered,
and their wives ravished.
17 See, I am stirring up the Medes against them,
who have no regard for silver
and do not delight in gold.
18 Their bows will slaughter the young men;
they will have no mercy on the fruit of the womb;
their eyes will not pity children.
19 And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms,
the splendor and pride of the Chaldeans,
will be like Sodom and Gomorrah
when God overthrew them.
20 It will never be inhabited
or lived in for all generations;
Arabs will not pitch their tents there,
shepherds will not make their flocks lie down there.

1366

ISAIAH 1367

21 But wild animals will lie down there,
and its houses will be full of howling creatures;
there ostriches will live,
and there goat-demons will dance.
22 Hyenas will cry in its towers,
and jackals in the pleasant palaces;
its time is close at hand,
and its days will not be prolonged.
[Isaiah 14]
Israel will be restored to its land
1 But the LORD will have compassion on Jacob and will again choose
Israel, and will set them in their own land; and aliens will join them
and attach themselves to the house of Jacob. 2 And the nations will
take them and bring them to their place, and the house of Israel will
possess the nations as male and female slaves in the LORD's land; they
will take captive those who were their captors, and rule over those
who oppressed them.
The king of Babylon in the underworld
3 When the LORD has given you rest from your pain and turmoil and
the hard service with which you were made to serve, 4 you will take up
this taunt against the king of Babylon:
How the oppressor has ceased!
How his insolence has ceased!
5 The LORD has broken the staff of the wicked,
the scepter of rulers,
6 that struck down the peoples in wrath
with unceasing blows,
that ruled the nations in anger
with unrelenting persecution.
7 The whole earth is at rest and quiet;
they break forth into singing.

1367

ISAIAH 1368

8 The cypresses exult over you,
the cedars of Lebanon, saying,
"Since you were laid low,
no one comes to cut us down."
9 Sheol beneath is stirred up
to meet you when you come;
it rouses the shades to greet you,
all who were leaders of the earth;
it raises from their thrones
all who were kings of the nations.
10 All of them will speak
and say to you:
"You too have become as weak as we!
You have become like us!"
11 Your pomp is brought down to Sheol,
and the sound of your harps;
maggots are the bed beneath you,
and worms are your covering.
12 How you are fallen from heaven,
O Day Star, son of Dawn!
How you are cut down to the ground,
you who laid the nations low!
13 You said in your heart,
"I will ascend to heaven;
I will raise my throne
above the stars of God;
I will sit on the mount of assembly
on the heights of Zaphon;
14 I will ascend to the tops of the clouds,
I will make myself like the Most High."
15 But you are brought down to Sheol,
to the depths of the Pit.
16 Those who see you will stare at you,
and ponder over you:
"Is this the man who made the earth tremble,
who shook kingdoms,

1368

ISAIAH 1369

17 who made the world like a desert
and overthrew its cities,
who would not let his prisoners go home?"
18 All the kings of the nations lie in glory,
each in his own tomb;
19 but you are cast out, away from your grave,
like loathsome carrion,
clothed with the dead, those pierced by the sword,
who go down to the stones of the Pit,
like a corpse trampled underfoot.
20 You will not be joined with them in burial,
because you have destroyed your land,
you have killed your people.
May the descendants of evildoers
nevermore be named!
21 Prepare slaughter for his sons
because of the guilt of their father.
Let them never rise to possess the earth
or cover the face of the world with cities.
22 I will rise up against them, says the LORD of hosts, and will cut off
from Babylon name and remnant, offspring and posterity, says the
LORD. 23 And I will make it a possession of the hedgehog, and pools of
water, and I will sweep it with the broom of destruction, says the LORD
of hosts.
Judgment on the Assyrians
24 The LORD of hosts has sworn:
As I have designed,
so shall it be;
and as I have planned,
so shall it come to pass:
25 I will break the Assyrian in my land,
and on my mountains trample him under foot;
his yoke shall be removed from them,
and his burden from their shoulders.

1369

ISAIAH 1370

26 This is the plan that is planned
concerning the whole earth;
and this is the hand that is stretched out
over all the nations.
27 For the LORD of hosts has planned,
and who will annul it?
His hand is stretched out,
and who will turn it back?
The revolt of Ashdod
28 In the year that King Ahaz died this oracle came:
29 Do not rejoice, all you Philistines,
that the rod that struck you is broken,
for from the root of the snake will come forth an adder,
and its fruit will be a flying fiery serpent.
30 The firstborn of the poor will graze,
and the needy lie down in safety;
but I will make your root die of famine,
and your remnant I will kill.
31 Wail, O gate; cry, O city;
melt in fear, O Philistia, all of you!
For smoke comes out of the north,
and there is no straggler in its ranks.
32 What will one answer the messengers of the nation?
"The LORD has founded Zion,
and the needy among his people
will find refuge in her."

1370

ISAIAH 1371

[Isaiah 15]
Judgment on Moab
1 An oracle concerning Moab.
Because Ar is laid waste in a night,
Moab is undone;
because Kir is laid waste in a night,
Moab is undone.
2 Dibon has gone up to the temple,
to the high places to weep;
over Nebo and over Medeba
Moab wails.
On every head is baldness,
every beard is shorn;
3 in the streets they bind on sackcloth;
on the housetops and in the squares
everyone wails and melts in tears.
4 Heshbon and Elealeh cry out,
their voices are heard as far as Jahaz;
therefore the loins of Moab quiver;
his soul trembles.
5 My heart cries out for Moab;
his fugitives flee to Zoar,
to Eglath-shelishiyah.
For at the ascent of Luhith
they go up weeping;
on the road to Horonaim
they raise a cry of destruction;
6 the waters of Nimrim
are a desolation;
the grass is withered, the new growth fails,
the verdure is no more.
7 Therefore the abundance they have gained
and what they have laid up
they carry away
over the Wadi of the Willows.

1371

ISAIAH 1372

8 For a cry has gone
around the land of Moab;
the wailing reaches to Eglaim,
the wailing reaches to Beer-elim.
9 For the waters of Dibon are full of blood;
yet I will bring upon Dibon even more —
a lion for those of Moab who escape,
for the remnant of the land.
[Isaiah 16]
1 Send lambs
to the ruler of the land,
from Sela, by way of the desert,
to the mount of daughter Zion.
2 Like fluttering birds,
like scattered nestlings,
so are the daughters of Moab
at the fords of the Arnon.
3 "Give counsel,
grant justice;
make your shade like night
at the height of noon;
hide the outcasts,
do not betray the fugitive;
4 let the outcasts of Moab
settle among you;
be a refuge to them
from the destroyer."
When the oppressor is no more,
and destruction has ceased,
and marauders have vanished from the land,
5 then a throne shall be established in steadfast love
in the tent of David,
and on it shall sit in faithfulness
a ruler who seeks justice
and is swift to do what is right.

1372

ISAIAH 1373

6 We have heard of the pride of Moab
— how proud he is! —
of his arrogance, his pride, and his insolence;
his boasts are false.
7 Therefore let Moab wail,
let everyone wail for Moab.
Mourn, utterly stricken,
for the raisin cakes of Kir-hareseth.
8 For the fields of Heshbon languish,
and the vines of Sibmah,
whose clusters once made drunk
the lords of the nations,
reached to Jazer
and strayed to the desert;
their shoots once spread abroad
and crossed over the sea.
9 Therefore I weep with the weeping of Jazer
for the vines of Sibmah;
I drench you with my tears,
O Heshbon and Elealeh;
for the shout over your fruit harvest
and your grain harvest has ceased.
10 Joy and gladness are taken away
from the fruitful field;
and in the vineyards no songs are sung,
no shouts are raised;
no treader treads out wine in the presses;
the vintage-shout is hushed.
11 Therefore my heart throbs like a harp for Moab,
and my very soul for Kir-heres.
12 When Moab presents himself, when he wearies himself upon the
high place, when he comes to his sanctuary to pray, he will not prevail.
13 This was the word that the LORD spoke concerning Moab in the past.
14 But now the LORD says, In three years, like the years of a hired
worker, the glory of Moab will be brought into contempt, in spite of

1373

ISAIAH 1374

all its great multitude; and those who survive will be very few and
feeble.
[Isaiah 17]
The fate of Syria and Israel
1 An oracle concerning Damascus.
See, Damascus will cease to be a city,
and will become a heap of ruins.
2 Her towns will be deserted forever;
they will be places for flocks,
which will lie down, and no one will make them afraid.
3 The fortress will disappear from Ephraim,
and the kingdom from Damascus;
and the remnant of Aram will be
like the glory of the children of Israel,
says the LORD of hosts.
4 On that day
the glory of Jacob will be brought low,
and the fat of his flesh will grow lean.
5 And it shall be as when reapers gather standing grain
and their arms harvest the ears,
and as when one gleans the ears of grain
in the Valley of Rephaim.
6 Gleanings will be left in it,
as when an olive tree is beaten —
two or three berries
in the top of the highest bough,
four or five
on the branches of a fruit tree,
says the LORD God of Israel.
7 On that day people will regard their Maker, and their eyes will look
to the Holy One of Israel; 8 they will not have regard for the altars, the
work of their hands, and they will not look to what their own fingers
have made, either the sacred poles or the altars of incense.

1374

ISAIAH 1375

9 On that day their strong cities will be like the deserted places of the
Hivites and the Amorites, which they deserted because of the children
of Israel, and there will be desolation.
10 For you have forgotten the God of your salvation,
and have not remembered the Rock of your refuge;
therefore, though you plant pleasant plants
and set out slips of an alien god,
11 though you make them grow on the day that you plant them,
and make them blossom in the morning that you sow;
yet the harvest will flee away
in a day of grief and incurable pain.
An end to political oppression
12 Ah, the thunder of many peoples,
they thunder like the thundering of the sea!
Ah, the roar of nations,
they roar like the roaring of mighty waters!
13 The nations roar like the roaring of many waters,
but he will rebuke them, and they will flee far away,
chased like chaff on the mountains before the wind
and whirling dust before the storm.
14 At evening time, lo, terror!
Before morning, they are no more.
This is the fate of those who despoil us,
and the lot of those who plunder us.

1375

ISAIAH 1376

[Isaiah 18]
Against Egypt and Nubia
1 Ah, land of whirring wings
beyond the rivers of Ethiopia,
2 sending ambassadors by the Nile
in vessels of papyrus on the waters!
Go, you swift messengers,
to a nation tall and smooth,
to a people feared near and far,
a nation mighty and conquering,
whose land the rivers divide.
3 All you inhabitants of the world,
you who live on the earth,
when a signal is raised on the mountains, look!
When a trumpet is blown, listen!
4 For thus the LORD said to me:
I will quietly look from my dwelling
like clear heat in sunshine,
like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.
5 For before the harvest, when the blossom is over
and the flower becomes a ripening grape,
he will cut off the shoots with pruning hooks,
and the spreading branches he will hew away.
6 They shall all be left
to the birds of prey of the mountains
and to the animals of the earth.
And the birds of prey will summer on them,
and all the animals of the earth will winter on them.
7 At that time gifts will be brought to the LORD of hosts from a people
tall and smooth, from a people feared near and far, a nation mighty
and conquering, whose land the rivers divide, to Mount Zion, the place
of the name of the LORD of hosts.

1376

ISAIAH 1377

[Isaiah 19]
Judgment on Egypt
1 An oracle concerning Egypt.
See, the LORD is riding on a swift cloud
and comes to Egypt;
the idols of Egypt will tremble at his presence,
and the heart of the Egyptians will melt within them.
2 I will stir up Egyptians against Egyptians,
and they will fight, one against the other,
neighbor against neighbor,
city against city, kingdom against kingdom;
3 the spirit of the Egyptians within them will be emptied out,
and I will confound their plans;
they will consult the idols and the spirits of the dead
and the ghosts and the familiar spirits;
4 I will deliver the Egyptians
into the hand of a hard master;
a fierce king will rule over them,
says the Sovereign, the LORD of hosts.
5 The waters of the Nile will be dried up,
and the river will be parched and dry;
6 its canals will become foul,
and the branches of Egypt's Nile will diminish and dry up,
reeds and rushes will rot away.
7 There will be bare places by the Nile,
on the brink of the Nile;
and all that is sown by the Nile will dry up,
be driven away, and be no more.
8 Those who fish will mourn;
all who cast hooks in the Nile will lament,
and those who spread nets on the water will languish.
9 The workers in flax will be in despair,
and the carders and those at the loom will grow pale.
10 Its weavers will be dismayed,
and all who work for wages will be grieved.

1377

ISAIAH 1378

11 The princes of Zoan are utterly foolish;
the wise counselors of Pharaoh give stupid counsel.
How can you say to Pharaoh,
"I am one of the sages,
a descendant of ancient kings"?
12 Where now are your sages?
Let them tell you and make known
what the LORD of hosts has planned against Egypt.
13 The princes of Zoan have become fools,
and the princes of Memphis are deluded;
those who are the cornerstones of its tribes
have led Egypt astray.
14 The LORD has poured into them
a spirit of confusion;
and they have made Egypt stagger in all its doings
as a drunkard staggers around in vomit.
15 Neither head nor tail, palm branch or reed,
will be able to do anything for Egypt.
Five addenda
16 On that day the Egyptians will be like women, and tremble with fear
before the hand that the LORD of hosts raises against them. 17 And the
land of Judah will become a terror to the Egyptians; everyone to whom
it is mentioned will fear because of the plan that the LORD of hosts is
planning against them.
18 On that day there will be five cities in the land of Egypt that speak
the language of Canaan and swear allegiance to the LORD of hosts. One
of these will be called the City of the Sun.
19 On that day there will be an altar to the LORD in the center of the
land of Egypt, and a pillar to the LORD at its border. 20 It will be a sign
and a witness to the LORD of hosts in the land of Egypt; when they cry
to the LORD because of oppressors, he will send them a savior, and will
defend and deliver them. 21 The LORD will make himself known to the
Egyptians; and the Egyptians will know the LORD on that day, and will
worship with sacrifice and burnt offering, and they will make vows to

1378

ISAIAH 1379

the LORD and perform them. 22 The LORD will strike Egypt, striking and
healing; they will return to the LORD, and he will listen to their
supplications and heal them.
23 On that day there will be a highway from Egypt to Assyria, and the
Assyrian will come into Egypt, and the Egyptian into Assyria, and the
Egyptians will worship with the Assyrians.
24 On that day Israel will be the third with Egypt and Assyria, a blessing
in the midst of the earth, 25 whom the LORD of hosts has blessed,
saying, "Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my
hands, and Israel my heritage."
[Isaiah 20]
A sign
1 In the year that the commander-in-chief, who was sent by King
Sargon of Assyria, came to Ashdod and fought against it and took it —
2 at that time the LORD had spoken to Isaiah son of Amoz, saying, "Go,
and loose the sackcloth from your loins and take your sandals off your
feet," and he had done so, walking naked and barefoot. 3 Then the
LORD said, "Just as my servant Isaiah has walked naked and barefoot
for three years as a sign and a portent against Egypt and Ethiopia, 4 so
shall the king of Assyria lead away the Egyptians as captives and the
Ethiopians as exiles, both the young and the old, naked and barefoot,
with buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Egypt. 5 And they shall be
dismayed and confounded because of Ethiopia their hope and of Egypt
their boast. 6 In that day the inhabitants of this coastland will say, 'See,
this is what has happened to those in whom we hoped and to whom
we fled for help and deliverance from the king of Assyria! And we,
how shall we escape?'"

1379

ISAIAH 1380

[Isaiah 21]
Judgment on Babylon
1 The oracle concerning the wilderness of the sea.
As whirlwinds in the Negeb sweep on,
it comes from the desert,
from a terrible land.
2 A stern vision is told to me;
the betrayer betrays,
and the destroyer destroys.
Go up, O Elam,
lay siege, O Media;
all the sighing she has caused
I bring to an end.
3 Therefore my loins are filled with anguish;
pangs have seized me,
like the pangs of a woman in labor;
I am bowed down so that I cannot hear,
I am dismayed so that I cannot see.
4 My mind reels, horror has appalled me;
the twilight I longed for
has been turned for me into trembling.
5 They prepare the table,
they spread the rugs,
they eat, they drink.
Rise up, commanders,
oil the shield!
6 For thus the Lord said to me:
"Go, post a lookout,
let him announce what he sees.
7 When he sees riders, horsemen in pairs,
riders on donkeys, riders on camels,
let him listen diligently,
very diligently."

1380

ISAIAH 1381

8 Then the watcher called out:
"Upon a watchtower I stand, O Lord,
continually by day,
and at my post I am stationed
throughout the night.
9 Look, there they come, riders,
horsemen in pairs!"
Then he responded,
"Fallen, fallen is Babylon;
and all the images of her gods
lie shattered on the ground."
10 O my threshed and winnowed one,
what I have heard from the LORD of hosts,
the God of Israel, I announce to you.
Two oracular sayings about Arabian peoples
11 The oracle concerning Dumah.
One is calling to me from Seir,
"Sentinel, what of the night?
Sentinel, what of the night?"
12 The sentinel says:
"Morning comes, and also the night.
If you will inquire, inquire;
come back again."
13 The oracle concerning the desert plain.
In the scrub of the desert plain you will lodge,
O caravans of Dedanites.
14 Bring water to the thirsty,
meet the fugitive with bread,
O inhabitants of the land of Tema.
15 For they have fled from the swords,
from the drawn sword,
from the bent bow,
and from the stress of battle.

1381

ISAIAH 1382

16 For thus the Lord said to me: Within a year, according to the years of
a hired worker, all the glory of Kedar will come to an end; 17 and the
remaining bows of Kedar's warriors will be few; for the LORD, the God
of Israel, has spoken.
[Isaiah 22]
The eight oracle in the series
1 The oracle concerning the valley of vision.
What do you mean that you have gone up,
all of you, to the housetops,
2 you that are full of shoutings,
tumultuous city, exultant town?
Your slain are not slain by the sword,
nor are they dead in battle.
3 Your rulers have all fled together;
they were captured without the use of a bow.
All of you who were found were captured,
though they had fled far away.
4 Therefore I said:
Look away from me,
let me weep bitter tears;
do not try to comfort me
for the destruction of my beloved people.
5 For the Lord GOD of hosts has a day
of tumult and trampling and confusion
in the valley of vision,
a battering down of walls
and a cry for help to the mountains.
6 Elam bore the quiver
with chariots and cavalry,
and Kir uncovered the shield.
7 Your choicest valleys were full of chariots,
and the cavalry took their stand at the gates.
8 He has taken away the covering of Judah.

1382

ISAIAH 1383

On that day you looked to the weapons of the House of the Forest, 9
and you saw that there were many breaches in the city of David, and
you collected the waters of the lower pool. 10 You counted the houses
of Jerusalem, and you broke down the houses to fortify the wall. 11
You made a reservoir between the two walls for the water of the old
pool. But you did not look to him who did it, or have regard for him
who planned it long ago.
12 In that day the Lord GOD of hosts
called to weeping and mourning,
to baldness and putting on sackcloth;
13 but instead there was joy and festivity,
killing oxen and slaughtering sheep,
eating meat and drinking wine.
"Let us eat and drink,
for tomorrow we die."
14 The LORD of hosts has revealed himself in my ears:
Surely this iniquity will not be forgiven you until you die,
says the Lord GOD of hosts.
Shebna and Eliakim
15 Thus says the Lord GOD of hosts: Come, go to this steward, to
Shebna, who is master of the household, and say to him: 16 What right
do you have here? Who are your relatives here, that you have cut out a
tomb here for yourself, cutting a tomb on the height, and carving a
habitation for yourself in the rock? 17 The LORD is about to hurl you
away violently, my fellow. He will seize firm hold on you, 18 whirl you
round and round, and throw you like a ball into a wide land; there you
shall die, and there your splendid chariots shall lie, O you disgrace to
your master's house! 19 I will thrust you from your office, and you will
be pulled down from your post.
20 On that day I will call my servant Eliakim son of Hilkiah, 21 and will
clothe him with your robe and bind your sash on him. I will commit
your authority to his hand, and he shall be a father to the inhabitants
of Jerusalem and to the house of Judah. 22 I will place on his shoulder
the key of the house of David; he shall open, and no one shall shut; he

1383

ISAIAH 1384

shall shut, and no one shall open. 23 I will fasten him like a peg in a
secure place, and he will become a throne of honor to his ancestral
house. 24 And they will hang on him the whole weight of his ancestral
house, the offspring and issue, every small vessel, from the cups to all
the flagons. 25 On that day, says the LORD of hosts, the peg that was
fastened in a secure place will give way; it will be cut down and fall,
and the load that was on it will perish, for the LORD has spoken.
[Isaiah 23]
The last of the oracles
1 The oracle concerning Tyre.
Wail, O ships of Tarshish,
for your fortress is destroyed.
When they came in from Cyprus
they learned of it.
2 Be still, O inhabitants of the coast,
O merchants of Sidon,
your messengers crossed over the sea
3
and were on the mighty waters;
your revenue was the grain of Shihor,
the harvest of the Nile;
you were the merchant of the nations.
4 Be ashamed, O Sidon, for the sea has spoken,
the fortress of the sea, saying:
"I have neither labored nor given birth,
I have neither reared young men
nor brought up young women."
5 When the report comes to Egypt,
they will be in anguish over the report about Tyre.
6 Cross over to Tarshish —
wail, O inhabitants of the coast!
7 Is this your exultant city
whose origin is from days of old,
whose feet carried her
to settle far away?

1384

ISAIAH 1385

8 Who has planned this
against Tyre, the bestower of crowns,
whose merchants were princes,
whose traders were the honored of the earth?
9 The LORD of hosts has planned it —
to defile the pride of all glory,
to shame all the honored of the earth.
10 Cross over to your own land,
O ships of Tarshish;
this is a harbor no more.
11 He has stretched out his hand over the sea,
he has shaken the kingdoms;
the LORD has given command concerning Canaan
to destroy its fortresses.
12 He said:
You will exult no longer,
O oppressed virgin daughter Sidon;
rise, cross over to Cyprus —
even there you will have no rest.
13 Look at the land of the Chaldeans! This is the people; it was not
Assyria. They destined Tyre for wild animals. They erected their siege
towers, they tore down her palaces, they made her a ruin.
14 Wail, O ships of Tarshish,
for your fortress is destroyed.
15 From that day Tyre will be forgotten for seventy years, the lifetime
of one king. At the end of seventy years, it will happen to Tyre as in
the song about the prostitute:
16 Take a harp,
go about the city,
you forgotten prostitute!
Make sweet melody,
sing many songs,
that you may be remembered.
17 At the end of seventy years, the LORD will visit Tyre, and she will
return to her trade, and will prostitute herself with all the kingdoms of
the world on the face of the earth. 18 Her merchandise and her wages
will be dedicated to the LORD; her profits will not be stored or hoarded,

1385

ISAIAH 1386

but her merchandise will supply abundant food and fine clothing for
those who live in the presence of the LORD.
[Isaiah 24]
Judgment on enemies; impending judgment on the earth
1 Now the LORD is about to lay waste the earth and make it desolate,
and he will twist its surface and scatter its inhabitants.
2 And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest;
as with the slave, so with his master;
as with the maid, so with her mistress;
as with the buyer, so with the seller;
as with the lender, so with the borrower;
as with the creditor, so with the debtor.
3 The earth shall be utterly laid waste and utterly despoiled;
for the LORD has spoken this word.
4 The earth dries up and withers,
the world languishes and withers;
the heavens languish together with the earth.
5 The earth lies polluted
under its inhabitants;
for they have transgressed laws,
violated the statutes,
broken the everlasting covenant.
6 Therefore a curse devours the earth,
and its inhabitants suffer for their guilt;
therefore the inhabitants of the earth dwindled,
and few people are left.
7 The wine dries up,
the vine languishes,
all the merry-hearted sigh.
8 The mirth of the timbrels is stilled,
the noise of the jubilant has ceased,
the mirth of the lyre is stilled.
9 No longer do they drink wine with singing;
strong drink is bitter to those who drink it.

1386

ISAIAH 1387

10 The city of chaos is broken down,
every house is shut up so that no one can enter.
11 There is an outcry in the streets for lack of wine;
all joy has reached its eventide;
the gladness of the earth is banished.
12 Desolation is left in the city,
the gates are battered into ruins.
13 For thus it shall be on the earth
and among the nations,
as when an olive tree is beaten,
as at the gleaning when the grape harvest is ended.
Joy and condemnation
14 They lift up their voices, they sing for joy;
they shout from the west over the majesty of the LORD.
15 Therefore in the east give glory to the LORD;
in the coastlands of the sea glorify the name of the LORD, the
God of Israel.
16 From the ends of the earth we hear songs of praise,
of glory to the Righteous One.
But I say, I pine away,
I pine away. Woe is me!
For the treacherous deal treacherously,
the treacherous deal very treacherously.
17 Terror, and the pit, and the snare
are upon you, O inhabitant of the earth!
18 Whoever flees at the sound of the terror
shall fall into the pit;
and whoever climbs out of the pit
shall be caught in the snare.
For the windows of heaven are opened,
and the foundations of the earth tremble.
19 The earth is utterly broken,
the earth is torn asunder,
the earth is violently shaken.

1387

ISAIAH 1388

20 The earth staggers like a drunkard,
it sways like a hut;
its transgression lies heavy upon it,
and it falls, and will not rise again.
21 On that day the LORD will punish
the host of heaven in heaven,
and on earth the kings of the earth.
22 They will be gathered together
like prisoners in a pit;
they will be shut up in a prison,
and after many days they will be punished.
23 Then the moon will be abashed,
and the sun ashamed;
for the LORD of hosts will reign
on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem,
and before his elders he will manifest his glory.
[Isaiah 25]
The first of three psalms of praise
1 O LORD, you are my God;
I will exalt you, I will praise your name;
for you have done wonderful things,
plans formed of old, faithful and sure.
2 For you have made the city a heap,
the fortified city a ruin;
the palace of aliens is a city no more,
it will never be rebuilt.
3 Therefore strong peoples will glorify you;
cities of ruthless nations will fear you.
4 For you have been a refuge to the poor,
a refuge to the needy in their distress,
a shelter from the rainstorm and a shade from the heat.
When the blast of the ruthless was like a winter rainstorm,
5
the noise of aliens like heat in a dry place,
you subdued the heat with the shade of clouds;
the song of the ruthless was stilled.

1388

ISAIAH 1389

The banquet
6 On this mountain the LORD of hosts will make for all peoples
a feast of rich food, a feast of well-aged wines,
of rich food filled with marrow, of well-aged wines strained clear.
7 And he will destroy on this mountain
the shroud that is cast over all peoples,
the sheet that is spread over all nations;
8
he will swallow up death forever.
Then the Lord GOD will wipe away the tears from all faces,
and the disgrace of his people he will take away from
all the earth, for the LORD has spoken.
9 It will be said on that day,
Lo, this is our God; we have waited for him, so that he
might save us.
This is the LORD for whom we have waited;
let us be glad and rejoice in his salvation.
10 For the hand of the LORD will rest on this mountain.
Doom in Moab
The Moabites shall be trodden down in their place
as straw is trodden down in a dung-pit.
11 Though they spread out their hands in the midst of it,
as swimmers spread out their hands to swim,
their pride will be laid low despite the struggle of their hands.
12 The high fortifications of his walls will be brought down,
laid low, cast to the ground, even to the dust.
[Isaiah 26]
A psalm of praise of Zion
1 On that day this song will be sung in the land of Judah:
We have a strong city;
he sets up victory
like walls and bulwarks.

1389

ISAIAH 1390

2 Open the gates,
so that the righteous nation that keeps faith
may enter in.
3 Those of steadfast mind you keep in peace —
in peace because they trust in you.
4 Trust in the LORD forever,
for in the LORD GOD
you have an everlasting rock.
5 For he has brought low
the inhabitants of the height;
the lofty city he lays low.
He lays it low to the ground,
casts it to the dust.
6 The foot tramples it,
the feet of the poor,
the steps of the needy.
An apocalyptic psalm
7 The way of the righteous is level;
O Just One, you make smooth the path of the righteous.
8 In the path of your judgments,
O LORD, we wait for you;
your name and your renown
are the soul's desire.
9 My soul yearns for you in the night,
my spirit within me earnestly seeks you.
For when your judgments are in the earth,
the inhabitants of the world learn righteousness.
10 If favor is shown to the wicked,
they do not learn righteousness;
in the land of uprightness they deal perversely
and do not see the majesty of the LORD.
11 O LORD, your hand is lifted up,
but they do not see it.
Let them see your zeal for your people, and be ashamed.
Let the fire for your adversaries consume them.

1390

ISAIAH 1391

12 O LORD, you will ordain peace for us,
for indeed, all that we have done, you have done for us.
13 O LORD our God,
other lords besides you have ruled over us,
but we acknowledge your name alone.
14 The dead do not live;
shades do not rise —
because you have punished and destroyed them,
and wiped out all memory of them.
15 But you have increased the nation, O LORD,
you have increased the nation; you are glorified;
you have enlarged all the borders of the land.
16 O LORD, in distress they sought you,
they poured out a prayer
when your chastening was on them.
17 Like a woman with child,
who writhes and cries out in her pangs
when she is near her time,
so were we because of you, O LORD;
18
we were with child, we writhed,
but we gave birth only to wind.
We have won no victories on earth,
and no one is born to inhabit the world.
19 Your dead shall live, their corpses shall rise.
O dwellers in the dust, awake and sing for joy!
For your dew is a radiant dew,
and the earth will give birth to those long dead.
20 Come, my people, enter your chambers,
and shut your doors behind you;
hide yourselves for a little while
until the wrath is past.
21 For the LORD comes out from his place
to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity;
the earth will disclose the blood shed on it,
and will no longer cover its slain.

1391

ISAIAH 1392

[Isaiah 27]
1 On that day the LORD with his cruel and great and strong sword will
punish Leviathan the fleeing serpent, Leviathan the twisting serpent,
and he will kill the dragon that is in the sea.
The vineyard, Israel, will be restored
2 On that day:
A pleasant vineyard, sing about it!
3
I, the LORD, am its keeper;
every moment I water it.
I guard it night and day
so that no one can harm it;
4
I have no wrath.
If it gives me thorns and briers,
I will march to battle against it.
I will burn it up.
5 Or else let it cling to me for protection,
let it make peace with me,
let it make peace with me.
6 In days to come Jacob shall take root,
Israel shall blossom and put forth shoots,
and fill the whole world with fruit.
Idolatry denounced
7 Has he struck them down as he struck down those who struck them?
Or have they been killed as their killers were killed?
8 By expulsion, by exile you struggled against them;
with his fierce blast he removed them in the day of the east wind.
9 Therefore by this the guilt of Jacob will be expiated,
and this will be the full fruit of the removal of his sin:
when he makes all the stones of the altars
like chalkstones crushed to pieces,
no sacred poles or incense altars will remain standing.

1392

ISAIAH 1393

10 For the fortified city is solitary,
a habitation deserted and forsaken, like the wilderness;
the calves graze there,
there they lie down, and strip its branches.
11 When its boughs are dry, they are broken;
women come and make a fire of them.
For this is a people without understanding;
therefore he that made them will not have compassion on them,
he that formed them will show them no favor.
12 On that day the LORD will thresh from the channel of the Euphrates
to the Wadi of Egypt, and you will be gathered one by one, O people
of Israel. 13 And on that day a great trumpet will be blown, and those
who were lost in the land of Assyria and those who were driven out to
the land of Egypt will come and worship the LORD on the holy
mountain at Jerusalem.
[Isaiah 28]
Judgment on Israel and Judah; oracles against Israel (Ephraim) and
Judah
1 Ah, the proud garland of the drunkards of Ephraim,
and the fading flower of its glorious beauty,
which is on the head of those bloated with rich food,
of those overcome with wine!
2 See, the Lord has one who is mighty and strong;
like a storm of hail, a destroying tempest,
like a storm of mighty, overflowing waters;
with his hand he will hurl them down to the earth.
3 Trampled under foot will be
the proud garland of the drunkards of Ephraim.
4 And the fading flower of its glorious beauty,
which is on the head of those bloated with rich food,
will be like a first-ripe fig before the summer;
whoever sees it, eats it up
as soon as it comes to hand.

1393

ISAIAH 1394

5 In that day the LORD of hosts will be a garland of glory,
and a diadem of beauty, to the remnant of his people;
6 and a spirit of justice to the one who sits in judgment,
and strength to those who turn back the battle at the gate.
7 These also reel with wine
and stagger with strong drink;
the priest and the prophet reel with strong drink,
they are confused with wine,
they stagger with strong drink;
they err in vision,
they stumble in giving judgment.
8 All tables are covered with filthy vomit;
no place is clean.
9 "Whom will he teach knowledge,
and to whom will he explain the message?
Those who are weaned from milk,
those taken from the breast?
10 For it is precept upon precept, precept upon precept,
line upon line, line upon line,
here a little, there a little."
11 Truly, with stammering lip
and with alien tongue
he will speak to this people,
12
to whom he has said,
"This is rest;
give rest to the weary;
and this is repose";
yet they would not hear.
13 Therefore the word of the LORD will be to them,
"Precept upon precept, precept upon precept,
line upon line, line upon line,
here a little, there a little;"
in order that they may go, and fall backward,
and be broken, and snared, and taken.

1394

ISAIAH 1395

14 Therefore hear the word of the LORD, you scoffers
who rule this people in Jerusalem.
15 Because you have said, "We have made a covenant with death,
and with Sheol we have an agreement;
when the overwhelming scourge passes through
it will not come to us;
for we have made lies our refuge,
and in falsehood we have taken shelter";
16 therefore thus says the Lord GOD,
See, I am laying in Zion a foundation stone,
a tested stone,
a precious cornerstone, a sure foundation:
"One who trusts will not panic."
17 And I will make justice the line,
and righteousness the plummet;
hail will sweep away the refuge of lies,
and waters will overwhelm the shelter.
18 Then your covenant with death will be annulled,
and your agreement with Sheol will not stand;
when the overwhelming scourge passes through
you will be beaten down by it.
19 As often as it passes through, it will take you;
for morning by morning it will pass through,
by day and by night;
and it will be sheer terror to understand the message.
20 For the bed is too short to stretch oneself on it,
and the covering too narrow to wrap oneself in it.
21 For the LORD will rise up as on Mount Perazim,
he will rage as in the valley of Gibeon
to do his deed — strange is his deed! —
and to work his work — alien is his work!
22 Now therefore do not scoff,
or your bonds will be made stronger;
for I have heard a decree of destruction
from the Lord GOD of hosts upon the whole land.
23 Listen, and hear my voice;
Pay attention, and hear my speech.

1395

ISAIAH 1396

24 Do those who plow for sowing plow continually?
Do they continually open and harrow their ground?
25 When they have leveled its surface,
do they not scatter dill, sow cummin,
and plant wheat in rows
and barley in its proper place,
and spelt as the border?
26 For they are well instructed;
their God teaches them.
27 Dill is not threshed with a threshing sledge,
nor is a cart wheel rolled over cummin;
but dill is beaten out with a stick,
and cummin with a rod.
28 Grain is crushed for bread,
but one does not thresh it forever;
one drives the cart wheel and horses over it,
but does not pulverize it.
29 This also comes from the LORD of hosts;
he is wonderful in counsel,
and excellent in wisdom.
[Isaiah 29]
Siege of Jerusalem
1 Ah, Ariel, Ariel,
the city where David encamped!
Add year to year;
let the festivals run their round.
2 Yet I will distress Ariel,
and there shall be moaning and lamentation,
and Jerusalem shall be to me like an Ariel.
3 And like David I will encamp against you;
I will besiege you with towers
and raise siegeworks against you.

1396

ISAIAH 1397

4 Then deep from the earth you shall speak,
from low in the dust your words shall come;
your voice shall come from the ground like the voice of a ghost,
and your speech shall whisper out of the dust.
5 But the multitude of your foes shall be like small dust,
and the multitude of tyrants like flying chaff.
And in an instant, suddenly,
6
you will be visited by the LORD of hosts
with thunder and earthquake and great noise,
with whirlwind and tempest, and the flame of a devouring fire.
7 And the multitude of all the nations that fight against Ariel,
all that fight against her and her stronghold, and who
distress her, shall be like a dream, a vision of the night.
8 Just as when a hungry person dreams of eating
and wakes up still hungry,
or a thirsty person dreams of drinking
and wakes up faint, still thirsty,
so shall the multitude of all the nations be
that fight against Mount Zion.
Failure of the warning
9 Stupefy yourselves and be in a stupor,
blind yourselves and be blind!
Be drunk, but not from wine;
stagger, but not from strong drink!
10 For the LORD has poured out upon you
a spirit of deep sleep;
he has closed your eyes, you prophets,
and covered your heads, you seers.
11 The vision of all this has become for you like the words of a sealed
document. If it is given to those who can read, with the command,
"Read this," they say, "We cannot, for it is sealed." 12 And if it is given
to those who cannot read, saying, "Read this," they say, "We cannot
read."

1397

ISAIAH 1398

13 The Lord said:
Because these people draw near with their mouths
and honor me with their lips,
while their hearts are far from me,
and their worship of me is a human commandment
learned by rote;
14 so I will again do
amazing things with this people,
shocking and amazing.
The wisdom of their wise shall perish,
and the discernment of the discerning shall be hidden.
15 Ha! You who hide a plan too deep for the LORD,
whose deeds are in the dark,
and who say, "Who sees us? Who knows us?"
16 You turn things upside down!
Shall the potter be regarded as the clay?
Shall the thing made say of its maker,
"He did not make me";
or the thing formed say of the one who formed it,
"He has no understanding"?
A later assurance of a hopeful future
17 Shall not Lebanon in a very little while
become a fruitful field,
and the fruitful field be regarded as a forest?
18 On that day the deaf shall hear
the words of a scroll,
and out of their gloom and darkness
the eyes of the blind shall see.
19 The meek shall obtain fresh joy in the LORD,
and the neediest people shall exult in the Holy One of Israel.
20 For the tyrant shall be no more,
and the scoffer shall cease to be;
all those alert to do evil shall be cut off —
21 those who cause a person to lose a lawsuit,
who set a trap for the arbiter in the gate,
and without grounds deny justice to the one in the right.

1398

ISAIAH 1399

22 Therefore thus says the LORD, who redeemed Abraham, concerning
the house of Jacob:
No longer shall Jacob be ashamed,
no longer shall his face grow pale.
23 For when he sees his children,
the work of my hands, in his midst,
they will sanctify my name;
they will sanctify the Holy One of Jacob,
and will stand in awe of the God of Israel.
24 And those who err in spirit will come to understanding,
and those who grumble will accept instruction.
[Isaiah 30]
Negotiations with Egypt are condemned
1 Oh, rebellious children, says the LORD,
who carry out a plan, but not mine;
who make an alliance, but against my will,
adding sin to sin;
2 who set out to go down to Egypt
without asking for my counsel,
to take refuge in the protection of Pharaoh,
and to seek shelter in the shadow of Egypt;
3 Therefore the protection of Pharaoh shall become your shame,
and the shelter in the shadow of Egypt your humiliation.
4 For though his officials are at Zoan
and his envoys reach Hanes,
5 everyone comes to shame
through a people that cannot profit them,
that brings neither help nor profit,
but shame and disgrace.

1399

ISAIAH 1400

6 An oracle concerning the animals of the Negeb.
Through a land of trouble and distress,
of lioness and roaring lion,
of viper and flying serpent,
they carry their riches on the backs of donkeys,
and their treasures on the humps of camels,
to a people that cannot profit them.
7 For Egypt's help is worthless and empty,
therefore I have called her,
"Rahab who sits still."
The record of rejection
8 Go now, write it before them on a tablet,
and inscribe it in a book,
so that it may be for the time to come
as a witness forever.
9 For they are a rebellious people,
faithless children,
children who will not hear
the instruction of the LORD;
10 who say to the seers, "Do not see";
and to the prophets, "Do not prophesy to us what is right;
speak to us smooth things,
prophesy illusions,
11 leave the way, turn aside from the path,
let us hear no more about the Holy One of Israel."
12 Therefore thus says the Holy One of Israel:
Because you reject this word,
and put your trust in oppression and deceit,
and rely on them;
13 therefore this iniquity shall become for you
like a break in a high wall, bulging out, and about to collapse,
whose crash comes suddenly, in an instant;

1400

ISAIAH 1401

14 its breaking is like that of a potter's vessel
that is smashed so ruthlessly
that among its fragments not a shard is found
for taking fire from the hearth,
or dipping water out of the cistern.
15 For thus said the Lord GOD, the Holy One of Israel:
In returning and rest you shall be saved;
in quietness and in trust shall be your strength.
But you refused 16 and said,
"No! We will flee upon horses" —
therefore you shall flee!
and, "We will ride upon swift steeds" —
therefore your pursuers shall be swift!
17 A thousand shall flee at the threat of one,
at the threat of five you shall flee,
until you are left
like a flagstaff on the top of a mountain,
like a signal on a hill.
An oracle of promise followed by two prose comments
18 Therefore the LORD waits to be gracious to you;
therefore he will rise up to show mercy to you.
For the LORD is a God of justice;
blessed are all those who wait for him.
19 Truly, O people in Zion, inhabitants of Jerusalem, you shall weep no
more. He will surely be gracious to you at the sound of your cry; when
he hears it, he will answer you. 20 Though the Lord may give you the
bread of adversity and the water of affliction, yet your Teacher will not
hide himself any more, but your eyes shall see your Teacher. 21 And
when you turn to the right or when you turn to the left, your ears shall
hear a word behind you, saying, "This is the way; walk in it." 22 Then
you will defile your silver-covered idols and your gold-plated images.
You will scatter them like filthy rags; you will say to them, "Away with
you!"

1401

ISAIAH 1402

23 He will give rain for the seed with which you sow the ground, and
grain, the produce of the ground, which will be rich and plenteous. On
that day your cattle will graze in broad pastures; 24 and the oxen and
donkeys that till the ground will eat silage, which has been winnowed
with shovel and fork. 25 On every lofty mountain and every high hill
there will be brooks running with water — on a day of the great
slaughter, when the towers fall. 26 Moreover the light of the moon will
be like the light of the sun, and the light of the sun will be sevenfold,
like the light of seven days, on the day when the LORD binds up the
injuries of his people, and heals the wounds inflicted by his blow.
The destruction of Assyria
27 See, the name of the LORD comes from far away,
burning with his anger, and in thick rising smoke;
his lips are full of indignation,
and his tongue is like a devouring fire;
28 his breath is like an overflowing stream
that reaches up to the neck —
to sift the nations with the sieve of destruction,
and to place on the jaws of the peoples a bridle
that leads them astray.
29 You shall have a song as in the night when a holy festival is kept;
and gladness of heart, as when one sets out to the sound of the flute
to go to the mountain of the LORD, to the Rock of Israel. 30 And the
LORD will cause his majestic voice to be heard and the descending blow
of his arm to be seen, in furious anger and a flame of devouring fire,
with a cloudburst and tempest and hailstones. 31 The Assyrian will be
terror-stricken at the voice of the LORD, when he strikes with his rod. 32
And every stroke of the staff of punishment that the LORD lays upon
him will be to the sound of timbrels and lyres; battling with brandished
arm he will fight with him. 33 For his burning place has long been
prepared; truly it is made ready for the king, its pyre made deep and
wide, with fire and wood in abundance; the breath of the LORD, like a
stream of sulfur, kindles it.

1402

ISAIAH 1403

[Isaiah 31]
Another denunciation of the Egyptian alliance
1 Alas for those who go down to Egypt for help
and who rely on horses,
who trust in chariots because they are many
and in horsemen because they are very strong,
but do not look to the Holy One of Israel
or consult the LORD!
2 Yet he too is wise and brings disaster;
he does not call back his words,
but will rise against the house of the evildoers,
and against the helpers of those who work iniquity.
3 The Egyptians are human, and not God;
their horses are flesh, and not spirit.
When the LORD stretches out his hand,
the helper will stumble, and the one helped will fall,
and they will all perish together.
God's deliverance of Jerusalem from Assyria
4 For thus the LORD said to me,
As a lion or a young lion growls over its prey,
and — when a band of shepherds is called out against it —
is not terrified by their shouting
or daunted at their noise,
so the LORD of hosts will come down
to fight upon Mount Zion and upon its hill.
5 Like birds hovering overhead, so the LORD of hosts
will protect Jerusalem;
he will protect and deliver it,
he will spare and rescue it.

1403

ISAIAH 1404

6 Turn back to him whom you have deeply betrayed, O people of
Israel. 7 For on that day all of you shall throw away your idols of silver
and idols of gold, which your hands have sinfully made for you.
8 "Then the Assyrian shall fall by a sword, not of mortals;
and a sword, not of humans, shall devour him;
he shall flee from the sword,
and his young men shall be put to forced labor.
9 His rock shall pass away in terror,
and his officers desert the standard in panic,"
says the LORD, whose fire is in Zion,
and whose furnace is in Jerusalem.
[Isaiah 32]
The ideal commonwealth of the future
1 See, a king will reign in righteousness,
and princes will rule with justice.
2 Each will be like a hiding place from the wind,
a covert from the tempest,
like streams of water in a dry place,
like the shade of a great rock in a weary land.
3 Then the eyes of those who have sight will not be closed,
and the ears of those who have hearing will listen.
4 The minds of the rash will have good judgment,
and the tongues of stammerers will speak readily and distinctly.
5 A fool will no longer be called noble,
nor a villain said to be honorable.
6 For fools speak folly,
and their minds plot iniquity:
to practice ungodliness,
to utter error concerning the LORD,
to leave the craving of the hungry unsatisfied,
and to deprive the thirsty of drink.
7 The villainies of villains are evil;
they devise wicked devices
to ruin the poor with lying words,
even when the plea of the needy is right.

1404

ISAIAH 1405

8 But those who are noble plan noble things,
and by noble things they stand.
Failure of the harvest and restoration of nature
9 Rise up, you women who are at ease, hear my voice;
you complacent daughters, listen to my speech.
10 In little more than a year
you will shudder, you complacent ones;
for the vintage will fail,
the fruit harvest will not come.
11 Tremble, you women who are at ease,
shudder, you complacent ones;
strip, and make yourselves bare,
and put sackcloth on your loins.
12 Beat your breasts for the pleasant fields,
for the fruitful vine,
13 for the soil of my people
growing up in thorns and briers;
yes, for all the joyous houses
in the jubilant city.
14 For the palace will be forsaken,
the populous city deserted;
the hill and the watchtower
will become dens forever,
the joy of wild asses,
a pasture for flocks;
15 until a spirit from on high is poured out on us,
and the wilderness becomes a fruitful field,
and the fruitful field is deemed a forest.
The Peace of God's Reign
16 Then justice will dwell in the wilderness,
and righteousness abide in the fruitful field.
17 The effect of righteousness will be peace,
and the result of righteousness, quietness and trust forever.

1405

ISAIAH 1406

18 My people will abide in a peaceful habitation,
in secure dwellings, and in quiet resting places.
19 The forest will disappear completely,
and the city will be utterly laid low.
20 Happy will you be who sow beside every stream,
who let the ox and the donkey range freely.
[Isaiah 33]
A prophetic liturgy, consisting of entreaties and oracles
1 Ah, you destroyer,
who yourself have not been destroyed;
you treacherous one,
with whom no one has dealt treacherously!
When you have ceased to destroy,
you will be destroyed;
and when you have stopped dealing treacherously,
you will be dealt with treacherously.
2 O LORD, be gracious to us; we wait for you.
Be our arm every morning,
our salvation in the time of trouble.
3 At the sound of tumult, peoples fled;
before your majesty, nations scattered.
4 Spoil was gathered as the caterpillar gathers;
as locusts leap, they leaped upon it.
5 The LORD is exalted, he dwells on high;
he filled Zion with justice and righteousness;
6 he will be the stability of your times,
abundance of salvation, wisdom, and knowledge;
the fear of the LORD is Zion's treasure.
7 Listen! the valiant cry in the streets;
the envoys of peace weep bitterly.

1406

ISAIAH 1407

8 The highways are deserted,
travelers have quit the road.
The treaty is broken,
its oaths are despised,
its obligation is disregarded.
9 The land mourns and languishes;
Lebanon is confounded and withers away;
Sharon is like a desert;
and Bashan and Carmel shake off their leaves.
10 "Now I will arise," says the LORD,
"now I will lift myself up;
now I will be exalted.
11 You conceive chaff, you bring forth stubble;
your breath is a fire that will consume you.
12 And the peoples will be as if burned to lime,
like thorns cut down, that are burned in the fire."
13 Hear, you who are far away, what I have done;
and you who are near, acknowledge my might.
14 The sinners in Zion are afraid;
trembling has seized the godless:
"Who among us can live with the devouring fire?
Who among us can live with everlasting flames?"
15 Those who walk righteously and speak uprightly,
who despise the gain of oppression,
who wave away a bribe instead of accepting it,
who stop their ears from hearing of bloodshed
and shut their eyes from looking on evil,
16 they will live on the heights;
their refuge will be the fortresses of rocks;
their food will be supplied, their water assured.
17 Your eyes will see the king in his beauty;
they will behold a land that stretches far away.
18 Your mind will muse on the terror:
"Where is the one who counted?
Where is the one who weighed the tribute?
Where is the one who counted the towers?"

1407

ISAIAH 1408

19 No longer will you see the insolent people,
the people of an obscure speech that you cannot comprehend,
stammering in a language that you cannot understand.
20 Look on Zion, the city of our appointed festivals!
Your eyes will see Jerusalem,
a quiet habitation, an immovable tent,
whose stakes will never be pulled up,
and none of whose ropes will be broken.
21 But there the LORD in majesty will be for us
a place of broad rivers and streams,
where no galley with oars can go,
nor stately ship can pass.
22 For the LORD is our judge, the LORD is our ruler,
the LORD is our king; he will save us.
23 Your rigging hangs loose;
it cannot hold the mast firm in its place,
or keep the sail spread out.
Then prey and spoil in abundance will be divided;
even the lame will fall to plundering.
24 And no inhabitant will say, "I am sick";
the people who live there will be forgiven their iniquity.
[Isaiah 34]
Oracle against Edom
1 Draw near, O nations, to hear;
O peoples, give heed!
Let the earth hear, and all that fills it;
the world, and all that comes from it.
2 For the LORD is enraged against all the nations,
and furious against all their hordes;
he has doomed them, has given them over for slaughter.
3 Their slain shall be cast out,
and the stench of their corpses shall rise;
the mountains shall flow with their blood.

1408

ISAIAH 1409

4 All the host of heaven shall rot away,
and the skies roll up like a scroll.
All their host shall wither
like a leaf withering on a vine,
or fruit withering on a fig tree.
5 When my sword has drunk its fill in the heavens,
lo, it will descend upon Edom,
upon the people I have doomed to judgment.
6 The LORD has a sword; it is sated with blood,
it is gorged with fat,
with the blood of lambs and goats,
with the fat of the kidneys of rams.
For the LORD has a sacrifice in Bozrah,
a great slaughter in the land of Edom.
7 Wild oxen shall fall with them,
and young steers with the mighty bulls.
Their land shall be soaked with blood,
and their soil made rich with fat.
8 For the LORD has a day of vengeance,
a year of vindication by Zion's cause.
9 And the streams of Edom shall be turned into pitch,
and her soil into sulfur;
her land shall become burning pitch.
10 Night and day it shall not be quenched;
its smoke shall go up forever.
From generation to generation it shall lie waste;
no one shall pass through it forever and ever.
11 But the hawk and the hedgehog shall possess it;
the owl and the raven shall live in it.
He shall stretch the line of confusion over it,
and the plummet of chaos over its nobles.
12 They shall name it No Kingdom There,
and all its princes shall be nothing.

1409

ISAIAH 1410

13 Thorns shall grow over its strongholds,
nettles and thistles in its fortresses.
It shall be the haunt of jackals,
an abode for ostriches.
14 Wildcats shall meet with hyenas,
goat-demons shall call to each other;
there too Lilith shall repose,
and find a place to rest.
15 There shall the owl nest
and lay and hatch and brood in its shadow;
there too the buzzards shall gather,
each one with its mate.
16 Seek and read from the book of the LORD:
Not one of these shall be missing;
none shall be without its mate.
For the mouth of the LORD has commanded,
and his spirit has gathered them.
17 He has cast the lot for them,
his hand has portioned it out to them with the line;
they shall possess it forever,
from generation to generation they shall live in it.
[Isaiah 35]
A linking chapter that stands in contrast to ch 34
1 The wilderness and the dry land shall be glad,
the desert shall rejoice and blossom;
like the crocus 2 it shall blossom abundantly,
and rejoice with joy and singing.
The glory of Lebanon shall be given to it,
the majesty of Carmel and Sharon.
They shall see the glory of the LORD,
the majesty of our God.
3 Strengthen the weak hands,
and make firm the feeble knees.

1410

ISAIAH 1411

4 Say to those who are of a fearful heart,
"Be strong, do not fear!
Here is your God.
He will come with vengeance,
with terrible recompense.
He will come and save you."
5 Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened,
and the ears of the deaf unstopped;
6 then the lame shall leap like a deer,
and the tongue of the speechless sing for joy.
For waters shall break forth in the wilderness,
and streams in the desert;
7 the burning sand shall become a pool,
and the thirsty ground springs of water;
the haunt of jackals shall become a swamp,
the grass shall become reeds and rushes.
8 A highway shall be there,
and it shall be called the Holy Way;
the unclean shall not travel on it,
but it shall be for God's people;
no traveler, not even fools, shall go astray.
9 No lion shall be there,
nor shall any ravenous beast come up on it;
they shall not be found there,
but the redeemed shall walk there.
10 And the ransomed of the LORD shall return,
and come to Zion with singing;
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads;
they shall obtain joy and gladness,
and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.

1411

ISAIAH 1412

[Isaiah 36]
Historical appendix; The Assyrian army before Jerusalem
1 In the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah, King Sennacherib of Assyria
came up against all the fortified cities of Judah and captured them. 2
The king of Assyria sent the Rabshakeh from Lachish to King Hezekiah
at Jerusalem, with a great army. He stood by the conduit of the upper
pool on the highway to the Fuller's Field. 3 And there came out to him
Eliakim son of Hilkiah, who was in charge of the palace, and Shebna
the secretary, and Joah son of Asaph, the recorder.
4 The Rabshakeh said to them, "Say to Hezekiah: Thus says the great
king, the king of Assyria: On what do you base this confidence of
yours? 5 Do you think that mere words are strategy and power for
war? On whom do you now rely, that you have rebelled against me? 6
See, you are relying on Egypt, that broken reed of a staff, which will
pierce the hand of anyone who leans on it. Such is Pharaoh king of
Egypt to all who rely on him. 7 But if you say to me, 'We rely on the
LORD our God,' is it not he whose high places and altars Hezekiah has
removed, saying to Judah and to Jerusalem, 'You shall worship before
this altar'? 8 Come now, make a wager with my master the king of
Assyria: I will give you two thousand horses, if you are able on your
part to set riders on them. 9 How then can you repulse a single captain
among the least of my master's servants, when you rely on Egypt for
chariots and for horsemen? 10 Moreover, is it without the LORD that I
have come up against this land to destroy it? The LORD said to me, Go
up against this land, and destroy it."
11 Then Eliakim, Shebna, and Joah said to the Rabshakeh, "Please speak
to your servants in Aramaic, for we understand it; do not speak to us in
the language of Judah within the hearing of the people who are on
the wall." 12 But the Rabshakeh said, "Has my master sent me to speak
these words to your master and to you, and not to the people sitting
on the wall, who are doomed with you to eat their own dung and
drink their own urine?"

1412

ISAIAH 1413

13 Then the Rabshakeh stood and called out in a loud voice in the
language of Judah, "Hear the words of the great king, the king of
Assyria! 14 Thus says the king: 'Do not let Hezekiah deceive you, for he
will not be able to deliver you. 15 Do not let Hezekiah make you rely
on the LORD by saying, The LORD will surely deliver us; this city will not
be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.' 16 Do not listen to
Hezekiah; for thus says the king of Assyria: 'Make your peace with me
and come out to me; then everyone of you will eat from your own vine
and your own fig tree and drink water from your own cistern, 17 until I
come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of grain
and wine, a land of bread and vineyards. 18 Do not let Hezekiah
mislead you by saying, The LORD will save us. Has any of the gods of the
nations saved their land out of the hand of the king of Assyria? 19
Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? Where are the gods of
Sepharvaim? Have they delivered Samaria out of my hand? 20 Who
among all the gods of these countries have saved their countries out of
my hand, that the LORD should save Jerusalem out of my hand?'"
21 But they were silent and answered him not a word, for the king's
command was, "Do not answer him." 22 Then Eliakim son of Hilkiah,
who was in charge of the palace, and Shebna the secretary, and Joah
son of Asaph, the recorder, came to Hezekiah with their clothes torn,
and told him the words of the Rabshakeh.
[Isaiah 37]
The failure of the siege
1 When King Hezekiah heard it, he tore his clothes, covered himself
with sackcloth, and went into the house of the LORD. 2 And he sent
Eliakim, who was in charge of the palace, and Shebna the secretary,
and the senior priests, covered with sackcloth, to the prophet Isaiah
son of Amoz. 3 They said to him, "Thus says Hezekiah, This day is a day
of distress, of rebuke, and of disgrace; children have come to the birth,
and there is no strength to bring them forth. 4 It may be that the LORD
your God heard the words of the Rabshakeh, whom his master the king
of Assyria has sent to mock the living God, and will rebuke the words
that the LORD your God has heard; therefore lift up your prayer for the
remnant that is left."

1413

ISAIAH 1414

5 When the servants of King Hezekiah came to Isaiah, 6 Isaiah said to
them, "Say to your master, 'Thus says the LORD: Do not be afraid
because of the words that you have heard, with which the servants of
the king of Assyria have reviled me. 7 I myself will put a spirit in him, so
that he shall hear a rumor, and return to his own land; I will cause him
to fall by the sword in his own land.'"
8 The Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria fighting
against Libnah; for he had heard that the king had left Lachish. 9 Now
the king heard concerning King Tirhakah of Ethiopia, "He has set out
to fight against you." When he heard it, he sent messengers to
Hezekiah, saying, 10 "Thus shall you speak to King Hezekiah of Judah:
Do not let your God on whom you rely deceive you by promising that
Jerusalem will not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria. 11 See,
you have heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands,
destroying them utterly. Shall you be delivered? 12 Have the gods of
the nations delivered them, the nations that my predecessors
destroyed, Gozan, Haran, Rezeph, and the people of Eden who were in
Telassar? 13 Where is the king of Hamath, the king of Arpad, the king
of the city of Sepharvaim, the king of Hena, or the king of Ivvah?"
14 Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers and
read it; then Hezekiah went up to the house of the LORD and spread it
before the LORD. 15 And Hezekiah prayed to the LORD, saying: 16 "O
LORD of hosts, God of Israel, who are enthroned above the cherubim,
you are God, you alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth; you have
made heaven and earth. 17 Incline your ear, O LORD, and hear; open
your eyes, O LORD, and see; hear all the words of Sennacherib, which he
has sent to mock the living God. 18 Truly, O LORD, the kings of Assyria
have laid waste all the nations and their lands, 19 and have hurled their
gods into the fire, though they were no gods, but the work of human
hands — wood and stone — and so they were destroyed. 20 So now, O
LORD our God, save us from his hand, so that all the kingdoms of the
earth may know that you alone are the LORD."
21 Then Isaiah son of Amoz sent to Hezekiah, saying: "Thus says the
LORD, the God of Israel: Because you have prayed to me concerning

1414

ISAIAH 1415

King Sennacherib of Assyria, 22 this is the word that the LORD has
spoken concerning him:
She despises you, she scorns you —
virgin daughter Zion;
she tosses her head — behind your back,
daughter Jerusalem.
23 "Whom have you mocked and reviled?
Against whom have you raised your voice
and haughtily lifted your eyes?
Against the Holy One of Israel!
24 By your servants you have mocked the Lord,
and you have said, 'With my many chariots
I have gone up the heights of the mountains,
to the far recesses of Lebanon;
I felled its tallest cedars,
its choicest cypresses;
I came to its remotest height,
its densest forest.
25 I dug wells
and drank waters,
I dried up with the sole of my foot
all the streams of Egypt.'
26 "Have you not heard
that I determined it long ago?
I planned from days of old
what now I bring to pass,
that you should make fortified cities
crash into heaps of ruins,
27 while their inhabitants, shorn of strength,
are dismayed and confounded;
they have become like plants of the field
and like tender grass,
like grass on the housetops,
blighted before it is grown.

1415

ISAIAH 1416

28 "I know your rising up and your sitting down,
your going out and coming in,
and your raging against me.
29 Because you have raged against me
and your arrogance has come to my ears,
I will put my hook in your nose
and my bit in your mouth;
I will turn you back on the way
by which you came.
30 "And this shall be the sign for you: This year eat what grows of
itself, and in the second year what springs from that; then in the third
year sow, reap, plant vineyards, and eat their fruit. 31 The surviving
remnant of the house of Judah shall again take root downward, and
bear fruit upward; 32 for from Jerusalem a remnant shall go out, and
from Mount Zion a band of survivors. The zeal of the LORD of hosts will
do this.
33 "Therefore thus says the LORD concerning the king of Assyria: He
shall not come into this city, shoot an arrow there, come before it with
a shield, or cast up a siege ramp against it. 34 By the way that he came,
by the same he shall return; he shall not come into this city, says the
LORD. 35 For I will defend this city to save it, for my own sake and for
the sake of my servant David."
36 Then the angel of the LORD set out and struck down one hundred
eighty-five thousand in the camp of the Assyrians; when morning
dawned, they were all dead bodies. 37 Then King Sennacherib of
Assyria left, went home, and lived at Nineveh. 38 As he was worshiping
in the house of his god Nisroch, his sons Adrammelech and Sharezer
killed him with the sword, and they escaped into the land of Ararat.
His son Esar-haddon succeeded him.

1416

ISAIAH 1417

[Isaiah 38]
Hezekiah's sickness and recovery
1 In those days Hezekiah became sick and was at the point of death.
The prophet Isaiah son of Amoz came to him, and said to him, "Thus
says the LORD: Set your house in order, for you shall die; you shall not
recover." 2 Then Hezekiah turned his face to the wall, and prayed to
the LORD: 3 "Remember now, O LORD, I implore you, how I have walked
before you in faithfulness with a whole heart, and have done what is
good in your sight." And Hezekiah wept bitterly.
4 Then the word of the LORD came to Isaiah: 5 "Go and say to
Hezekiah, Thus says the LORD, the God of your ancestor David: I have
heard your prayer, I have seen your tears; I will add fifteen years to
your life. 6 I will deliver you and this city out of the hand of the king of
Assyria, and defend this city.
7 "This is the sign to you from the LORD, that the LORD will do this thing
that he has promised: 8 See, I will make the shadow cast by the
declining sun on the dial of Ahaz turn back ten steps." So the sun
turned back on the dial the ten steps by which it had declined.
9 A writing of King Hezekiah of Judah, after he had been sick and had
recovered from his sickness:
10 I said: In the noontide of my days
I must depart;
I am consigned to the gates of Sheol
for the rest of my years.
11 I said, I shall not see the LORD
in the land of the living;
I shall look upon mortals no more
among the inhabitants of the world.
12 My dwelling is plucked up and removed from me
like a shepherd's tent;
like a weaver I have rolled up my life;
he cuts me off from the loom;
from day to night you bring me to an end;

1417

ISAIAH 1418

13

I cry for help until morning;
like a lion he breaks all my bones;
from day to night you bring me to an end.

14 Like a swallow or a crane I clamor,
I moan like a dove.
My eyes are weary with looking upward.
O Lord, I am oppressed; be my security!
15 But what can I say? For he has spoken to me,
and he himself has done it.
All my sleep has fled
because of the bitterness of my soul.
16 O Lord, by these things people live,
and in all these is the life of my spirit.
Oh, restore me to health and make me live!
17 Surely it was for my welfare
that I had great bitterness;
but you have held back my life
from the pit of destruction,
for you have cast all my sins
behind your back.
18 For Sheol cannot thank you,
death cannot praise you;
those who go down to the Pit cannot hope
for your faithfulness.
19 The living, the living, they thank you,
as I do this day;
fathers make known to children
your faithfulness.
20 The LORD will save me,
and we will sing to stringed instruments
all the days of our lives,
at the house of the LORD.

1418

ISAIAH 1419

21 Now Isaiah had said, "Let them take a lump of figs, and apply it to
the boil, so that he may recover." 22 Hezekiah also had said, "What is
the sign that I shall go up to the house of the LORD?"
[Isaiah 39]
The Babylonian delegation
1 At that time King Merodach-baladan son of Baladan of Babylon sent
envoys with letters and a present to Hezekiah, for he heard that he
had been sick and had recovered. 2 Hezekiah welcomed them; he
showed them his treasure house, the silver, the gold, the spices, the
precious oil, his whole armory, all that was found in his storehouses.
There was nothing in his house or in all his realm that Hezekiah did not
show them. 3 Then the prophet Isaiah came to King Hezekiah and said
to him, "What did these men say? From where did they come to you?"
Hezekiah answered, "They have come to me from a far country, from
Babylon." 4 He said, "What have they seen in your house?" Hezekiah
answered, "They have seen all that is in my house; there is nothing in
my storehouses that I did not show them."
5 Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah, "Hear the word of the LORD of hosts: 6
Days are coming when all that is in your house, and that which your
ancestors have stored up until this day, shall be carried to Babylon;
nothing shall be left, says the LORD. 7 Some of your own sons who are
born to you shall be taken away; they shall be eunuchs in the palace of
the king of Babylon." 8 Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah, "The word of the
LORD that you have spoken is good." For he thought, "There will be
peace and security in my days."

1419

ISAIAH 1420

[Isaiah 40]
Chs 40-55: Book of the Consolation of Israel ("Second Isaiah");
a new epoch is announced
1 Comfort, O comfort my people,
says your God.
2 Speak tenderly to Jerusalem,
and cry to her
that she has served her term,
that her penalty is paid,
that she has received from the LORD's hand
double for all her sins.
3 A voice cries out:
"In the wilderness prepare the way of the LORD,
make straight in the desert a highway for our God.
4 Every valley shall be lifted up,
and every mountain and hill be made low;
the uneven ground shall become level,
and the rough places a plain.
5 Then the glory of the LORD shall be revealed,
and all people shall see it together,
for the mouth of the LORD has spoken."
6 A voice says, "Cry out!"
And I said, "What shall I cry?"
All people are grass,
their constancy is like the flower of the field.
7 The grass withers, the flower fades,
when the breath of the LORD blows upon it;
surely the people are grass.
8 The grass withers, the flower fades;
but the word of our God will stand forever.

1420

ISAIAH 1421

9 Get you up to a high mountain,
O Zion, herald of good tidings;
lift up your voice with strength,
O Jerusalem, herald of good tidings,
lift it up, do not fear;
say to the cities of Judah,
"Here is your God!"
10 See, the Lord GOD comes with might,
and his arm rules for him;
his reward is with him,
and his recompense before him.
11 He will feed his flock like a shepherd;
he will gather the lambs in his arms,
and carry them in his bosom,
and gently lead the mother sheep.
The incomparability of the Lord as creator deity
12 Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand
and marked off the heavens with a span,
enclosed the dust of the earth in a measure,
and weighed the mountains in scales
and the hills in a balance?
13 Who has directed the spirit of the LORD,
or as his counselor has instructed him?
14 Whom did he consult for his enlightenment,
and who taught him the path of justice?
Who taught him knowledge,
and showed him the way of understanding?
15 Even the nations are like a drop from a bucket,
and are accounted as dust on the scales;
see, he takes up the isles like fine dust.
16 Lebanon would not provide fuel enough,
nor are its animals enough for a burnt offering.
17 All the nations are as nothing before him;
they are accounted by him as less than nothing and emptiness.

1421

ISAIAH 1422

18 To whom then will you liken God,
or what likeness compare with him?
19 An idol? — A workman casts it,
and a goldsmith overlays it with gold,
and casts for it silver chains.
20 As a gift one chooses mulberry wood
— wood that will not rot —
then seeks out a skilled artisan
to set up an image that will not topple.
21 Have you not known? Have you not heard?
Has it not been told you from the beginning?
Have you not understood from the foundations of the earth?
22 It is he who sits above the circle of the earth,
and its inhabitants are like grasshoppers;
who stretches out the heavens like a curtain,
and spreads them like a tent to live in;
23 who brings princes to naught,
and makes the rulers of the earth as nothing.
24 Scarcely are they planted, scarcely sown,
scarcely has their stem taken root in the earth,
when he blows upon them, and they wither,
and the tempest carries them off like stubble.
25 To whom then will you compare me,
or who is my equal? says the Holy One.
26 Lift up your eyes on high and see:
Who created these?
He who brings out their host and numbers them,
calling them all by name;
because he is great in strength,
mighty in power,
not one is missing.

1422

ISAIAH 1423

27 Why do you say, O Jacob,
and speak, O Israel,
"My way is hidden from the LORD,
and my right is disregarded by my God"?
28 Have you not known? Have you not heard?
The LORD is the everlasting God,
the Creator of the ends of the earth.
He does not faint or grow weary;
his understanding is unsearchable.
29 He gives power to the faint,
and strengthens the powerless.
30 Even youths will faint and be weary,
and the young will fall exhausted;
31 but those who wait for the LORD shall renew their strength,
they shall mount up with wings like eagles,
they shall run and not be weary,
they shall walk and not faint.
[Isaiah 41]
A challenge issued to the nations
1 Listen to me in silence, O coastlands;
let the peoples renew their strength;
let them approach, then let them speak;
let us together draw near for judgment.
2 Who has roused a victor from the east,
summoned him to his service?
He delivers up nations to him,
and tramples kings under foot;
he makes them like dust with his sword,
like driven stubble with his bow.
3 He pursues them and passes on safely,
scarcely touching the path with his feet.
4 Who has performed and done this,
calling the generations from the beginning?
I, the LORD, am first,
and will be with the last.

1423

ISAIAH 1424

5 The coastlands have seen and are afraid,
the ends of the earth tremble;
they have drawn near and come.
6 Each one helps the other,
saying to one another, "Take courage!"
7 The artisan encourages the goldsmith,
and the one who smoothes with the hammer
encourages the one who strikes the anvil,
saying of the soldering, "It is good";
and they fasten it with nails so that it cannot be moved.
8 But you, Israel, my servant,
Jacob, whom I have chosen,
the offspring of Abraham, my friend;
9 you whom I took from the ends of the earth,
and called from its farthest corners,
saying to you, "You are my servant,
I have chosen you and not cast you off";
10 do not fear, for I am with you,
do not be afraid, for I am your God;
I will strengthen you, I will help you,
I will uphold you with my victorious right hand.
Israel is assured of God's help
11 Yes, all who are incensed against you
shall be ashamed and disgraced;
those who strive against you
shall be as nothing and shall perish.
12 You shall seek those who contend with you,
but you shall not find them;
those who war against you
shall be as nothing at all.
13 For I, the LORD your God,
hold your right hand;
it is I who say to you, "Do not fear,
I will help you."

1424

ISAIAH 1425

14 Do not fear, you worm Jacob,
you insect Israel!
I will help you, says the LORD;
your Redeemer is the Holy One of Israel.
15 Now, I will make of you a threshing sledge,
sharp, new, and having teeth;
you shall thresh the mountains and crush them,
and you shall make the hills like chaff.
16 You shall winnow them and the wind shall carry them away,
and the tempest shall scatter them.
Then you shall rejoice in the LORD;
in the Holy One of Israel you shall glory.
17 When the poor and needy seek water,
and there is none,
and their tongue is parched with thirst,
I the LORD will answer them,
I the God of Israel will not forsake them.
18 I will open rivers on the bare heights,
and fountains in the midst of the valleys;
I will make the wilderness a pool of water,
and the dry land springs of water.
19 I will put in the wilderness the cedar,
the acacia, the myrtle, and the olive;
I will set in the desert the cypress,
the plane and the pine together,
20 so that all may see and know,
all may consider and understand,
that the hand of the LORD has done this,
the Holy One of Israel has created it.
A challenge addressed to the gods of other lands
21 Set forth your case, says the LORD;
bring your proofs, says the King of Jacob.

1425

ISAIAH 1426

22 Let them bring them, and tell us
what is to happen.
Tell us the former things, what they are,
so that we may consider them,
and that we may know their outcome;
or declare to us the things to come.
23 Tell us what is to come hereafter,
that we may know that you are gods;
do good, or do harm,
that we may be afraid and terrified.
24 You, indeed, are nothing
and your work is nothing at all;
whoever chooses you is an abomination.
25 I stirred up one from the north, and he has come,
from the rising of the sun he was summoned by name.
He shall trample on rulers as on mortar,
as the potter treads clay.
26 Who declared it from the beginning, so that we might know,
and beforehand, so that we might say, "He is right"?
There was no one who declared it, none who proclaimed,
none who heard your words.
27 I first have declared it to Zion,
and I give to Jerusalem a herald of good tidings.
28 But when I look there is no one;
among these there is no counselor
who, when I ask, gives an answer.
29 No, they are all a delusion;
their works are nothing;
their images are empty wind.
[Isaiah 42]
The LORD's servant
1 Here is my servant, whom I uphold,
my chosen, in whom my soul delights;
I have put my spirit upon him;
he will bring forth justice to the nations.

1426

ISAIAH 1427

2 He will not cry or lift up his voice,
or make it heard in the street;
3 a bruised reed he will not break,
and a dimly burning wick he will not quench;
he will faithfully bring forth justice.
4 He will not grow faint or be crushed
until he has established justice in the earth;
and the coastlands wait for his teaching.
5 Thus says God, the LORD,
who created the heavens and stretched them out,
who spread out the earth and what comes from it,
who gives breath to the people upon it
and spirit to those who walk in it:
6 I am the LORD, I have called you in righteousness,
I have taken you by the hand and kept you;
I have given you as a covenant to the people,
a light to the nations,
7
to open the eyes that are blind,
to bring out the prisoners from the dungeon,
from the prison those who sit in darkness.
8 I am the LORD, that is my name;
my glory I give to no other,
nor my praise to idols.
9 See, the former things have come to pass,
and new things I now declare;
before they spring forth,
I tell you of them.
A psalm of praise
10 Sing to the LORD a new song,
his praise from the end of the earth!
Let the sea roar and all that fills it,
the coastlands and their inhabitants.
11 Let the desert and its towns lift up their voice,
the villages that Kedar inhabits;
let the inhabitants of Sela sing for joy,
let them shout from the tops of the mountains.

1427

ISAIAH 1428

12 Let them give glory to the LORD,
and declare his praise in the coastlands.
13 The LORD goes forth like a soldier,
like a warrior he stirs up his fury;
he cries out, he shouts aloud,
he shows himself mighty against his foes.
14 For a long time I have held my peace,
I have kept still and restrained myself;
now I will cry out like a woman in labor,
I will gasp and pant.
15 I will lay waste mountains and hills,
and dry up all their herbage;
I will turn the rivers into islands,
and dry up the pools.
16 I will lead the blind
by a road they do not know,
by paths they have not known
I will guide them.
I will turn the darkness before them into light,
the rough places into level ground.
These are the things I will do,
and I will not forsake them.
17 They shall be turned back and utterly put to shame —
those who trust in carved images,
who say to cast images,
"You are our gods."
Spiritual imperceptions and obtuseness
18 Listen, you that are deaf;
and you that are blind, look up and see!
19 Who is blind but my servant,
or deaf like my messenger whom I send?
Who is blind like my dedicated one,
or blind like the servant of the LORD?
20 He sees many things, but does not observe them;
his ears are open, but he does not hear.

1428

ISAIAH 1429

21 The LORD was pleased, for the sake of his righteousness,
to magnify his teaching and make it glorious.
22 But this is a people robbed and plundered,
all of them are trapped in holes
and hidden in prisons;
they have become a prey with no one to rescue,
a spoil with no one to say, "Restore!"
23 Who among you will give heed to this,
who will attend and listen for the time to come?
24 Who gave up Jacob to the spoiler,
and Israel to the robbers?
Was it not the LORD, against whom we have sinned,
in whose ways they would not walk,
and whose law they would not obey?
25 So he poured upon him the heat of his anger
and the fury of war;
it set him on fire all around, but he did not understand;
it burned him, but he did not take it to heart.
[Isaiah 43]
Israel's redemption is at hand
1 But now thus says the LORD,
he who created you, O Jacob,
he who formed you, O Israel:
Do not fear, for I have redeemed you;
I have called you by name, you are mine.
2 When you pass through the waters, I will be with you;
and through the rivers, they shall not overwhelm you;
when you walk through fire you shall not be burned,
and the flame shall not consume you.
3 For I am the LORD your God,
the Holy One of Israel, your Savior.
I give Egypt as your ransom,
Ethiopia and Seba in exchange for you.

1429

ISAIAH 1430

4 Because you are precious in my sight,
and honored, and I love you,
I give people in return for you,
nations in exchange for your life.
5 Do not fear, for I am with you;
I will bring your offspring from the east,
and from the west I will gather you;
6 I will say to the north, "Give them up,"
and to the south, "Do not withhold;
bring my sons from far away
and my daughters from the end of the earth —
7 everyone who is called by my name,
whom I created for my glory,
whom I formed and made."
The Lord restores and redeems Israel; a judicial process is set up
8 Bring forth the people who are blind, yet have eyes,
who are deaf, yet have ears!
9 Let all the nations gather together,
and let the peoples assemble.
Who among them declared this,
and foretold to us the former things?
Let them bring their witnesses to justify them,
and let them hear and say, "It is true."
10 You are my witnesses, says the LORD,
and my servant whom I have chosen,
so that you may know and believe me
and understand that I am he.
Before me no god was formed,
nor shall there be any after me.
11 I, I am the LORD,
and besides me there is no savior.
12 I declared and saved and proclaimed,
when there was no strange god among you;
and you are my witnesses, says the LORD.

1430

ISAIAH 1431

13 I am God, and also henceforth I am He;
there is no one who can deliver from my hand;
I work and who can hinder it?
14 Thus says the LORD,
your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel:
For your sake I will send to Babylon
and break down all the bars,
and the shouting of the Chaldeans will be turned to lamentation.
15 I am the LORD, your Holy One,
the Creator of Israel, your King.
16 Thus says the LORD,
who makes a way in the sea,
a path in the mighty waters,
17 who brings out chariot and horse,
army and warrior;
they lie down, they cannot rise,
they are extinguished, quenched like a wick:
18 Do not remember the former things,
or consider the things of old.
19 I am about to do a new thing;
now it springs forth, do you not perceive it?
I will make a way in the wilderness
and rivers in the desert.
20 The wild animals will honor me,
the jackals and the ostriches;
for I give water in the wilderness,
rivers in the desert,
to give drink to my chosen people,
21
the people whom I formed for myself
so that they might declare my praise.
Ritual acts rendered ineffectual by a sinful way of life
22 Yet you did not call upon me, O Jacob;
but you have been weary of me, O Israel!

1431

ISAIAH 1432

23 You have not brought me your sheep for burnt offerings,
or honored me with your sacrifices.
I have not burdened you with offerings,
or wearied you with frankincense.
24 You have not bought me sweet cane with money,
or satisfied me with the fat of your sacrifices.
But you have burdened me with your sins;
you have wearied me with your iniquities.
25 I, I am He
who blots out your transgressions for my own sake,
and I will not remember your sins.
26 Accuse me, let us go to trial;
set forth your case, so that you may be proved right.
27 Your first ancestor sinned,
and your interpreters transgressed against me.
28 Therefore I profaned the princes of the sanctuary,
I delivered Jacob to utter destruction,
and Israel to reviling.
[Isaiah 44]
A word of assurance and salvation
1 But now hear, O Jacob my servant,
Israel whom I have chosen!
2 Thus says the LORD who made you,
who formed you in the womb and will help you:
Do not fear, O Jacob my servant,
Jeshurun whom I have chosen.
3 For I will pour water on the thirsty land,
and streams on the dry ground;
I will pour my spirit upon your descendants,
and my blessing on your offspring.
4 They shall spring up like a green tamarisk,
like willows by flowing streams.

1432

ISAIAH 1433

5 This one will say, "I am the LORD's,"
another will be called by the name of Jacob,
yet another will write on the hand, "The LORD's,"
and adopt the name of Israel.
6 Thus says the LORD, the King of Israel,
and his Redeemer, the LORD of hosts:
I am the first and I am the last;
besides me there is no god.
7 Who is like me? Let them proclaim it,
let them declare and set it forth before me.
Who has announced from of old the things to come?
Let them tell us what is yet to be.
8 Do not fear, or be afraid;
have I not told you from of old and declared it?
You are my witnesses!
Is there any god besides me?
There is no other rock; I know not one.
Polemic against idols
9 All who make idols are nothing, and the things they delight in do not
profit; their witnesses neither see nor know. And so they will be put to
shame. 10 Who would fashion a god or cast an image that can do no
good? 11 Look, all its devotees shall be put to shame; the artisans too
are merely human. Let them all assemble, let them stand up; they shall
be terrified, they shall all be put to shame.
12 The ironsmith fashions it and works it over the coals, shaping it with
hammers, and forging it with his strong arm; he becomes hungry and
his strength fails, he drinks no water and is faint. 13 The carpenter
stretches a line, marks it out with a stylus, fashions it with planes, and
marks it with a compass; he makes it in human form, with human
beauty, to be set up in a shrine. 14 He cuts down cedars or chooses a
holm tree or an oak and lets it grow strong among the trees of the
forest. He plants a cedar and the rain nourishes it. 15 Then it can be
used as fuel. Part of it he takes and warms himself; he kindles a fire
and bakes bread. Then he makes a god and worships it, makes it a

1433

ISAIAH 1434

carved image and bows down before it. 16 Half of it he burns in the
fire; over this half he roasts meat, eats it and is satisfied. He also warms
himself and says, "Ah, I am warm, I can feel the fire!" 17 The rest of it
he makes into a god, his idol, bows down to it and worships it; he prays
to it and says, "Save me, for you are my god!"
18 They do not know, nor do they comprehend; for their eyes are shut,
so that they cannot see, and their minds as well, so that they cannot
understand. 19 No one considers, nor is there knowledge or
discernment to say, "Half of it I burned in the fire; I also baked bread
on its coals, I roasted meat and have eaten. Now shall I make the rest
of it an abomination? Shall I fall down before a block of wood?" 20 He
feeds on ashes; a deluded mind has led him astray, and he cannot save
himself or say, "Is not this thing in my right hand a fraud?"
21 Remember these things, O Jacob,
and Israel, for you are my servant;
I formed you, you are my servant;
O Israel, you will not be forgotten by me.
22 I have swept away your transgressions like a cloud,
and your sins like mist;
return to me, for I have redeemed you.
23 Sing, O heavens, for the LORD has done it;
shout, O depths of the earth;
break forth into singing, O mountains,
O forest, and every tree in it!
For the LORD has redeemed Jacob,
and will be glorified in Israel.
The Cyrus oracle
24 Thus says the LORD, your Redeemer,
who formed you in the womb:
I am the LORD, who made all things,
who alone stretched out the heavens,
who by myself spread out the earth;

1434

ISAIAH 1435

25 who frustrates the omens of liars,
and makes fools of diviners;
who turns back the wise,
and makes their knowledge foolish;
26 who confirms the word of his servant,
and fulfills the prediction of his messengers;
who says of Jerusalem, "It shall be inhabited,"
and of the cities of Judah, "They shall be rebuilt,
and I will raise up their ruins";
27 who says to the deep, "Be dry —
I will dry up your rivers";
28 who says of Cyrus, "He is my shepherd,
and he shall carry out all my purpose";
and who says of Jerusalem, "It shall be rebuilt,"
and of the temple, "Your foundation shall be laid."
[Isaiah 45]
1 Thus says the LORD to his anointed, to Cyrus,
whose right hand I have grasped
to subdue nations before him
and strip kings of their robes,
to open doors before him —
and the gates shall not be closed:
2 I will go before you
and level the mountains,
I will break in pieces the doors of bronze
and cut through the bars of iron,
3 I will give you the treasures of darkness
and riches hidden in secret places,
so that you may know that it is I, the LORD,
the God of Israel, who call you by your name.
4 For the sake of my servant Jacob,
and Israel my chosen,
I call you by your name,
I surname you, though you do not know me.

1435

ISAIAH 1436

5 I am the LORD, and there is no other;
besides me there is no god.
I arm you, though you do not know me,
6 so that they may know, from the rising of the sun
and from the west, that there is no one besides me;
I am the LORD, and there is no other.
7 I form light and create darkness,
I make weal and create woe;
I the LORD do all these things.
8 Shower, O heavens, from above,
and let the skies rain down righteousness;
let the earth open, that salvation may spring up,
and let it cause righteousness to sprout up also;
I the LORD have created it.
A refutation of those who question Cyrus's mission
9 Woe to you who strive with your Maker,
earthen vessels with the potter!
Does the clay say to the one who fashions it,
"What are you making"?
or "Your work has no handles"?
10 Woe to anyone who says to a father, "What are you begetting?"
or to a woman, "With what are you in labor?"
11 Thus says the LORD,
the Holy One of Israel, and its Maker:
Will you question me about my children,
or command me concerning the work of my hands?
12 I made the earth,
and created humankind upon it;
it was my hands that stretched out the heavens,
and I commanded all their host.

1436

ISAIAH 1437

13 I have aroused Cyrus in righteousness,
and I will make all his paths straight;
he shall build my city
and set my exiles free,
not for price or reward,
says the LORD of hosts.
14 Thus says the LORD:
The wealth of Egypt and the merchandise of Ethiopia,
and the Sabeans, tall of stature,
shall come over to you and be yours,
they shall follow you;
they shall come over in chains and bow down to you.
They will make supplication to you, saying,
"God is with you alone, and there is no other;
there is no god besides him."
15 Truly, you are a God who hides himself,
O God of Israel, the Savior.
16 All of them are put to shame and confounded,
the makers of idols go in confusion together.
17 But Israel is saved by the LORD
with everlasting salvation;
you shall not be put to shame or confounded
to all eternity.
18 For thus says the LORD,
who created the heavens
(he is God!),
who formed the earth and made it
(he established it;
he did not create it a chaos,
he formed it to be inhabited!):
I am the LORD, and there is no other.
19 I did not speak in secret,
in a land of darkness;
I did not say to the offspring of Jacob,
"Seek me in chaos."
I the LORD speak the truth,
I declare what is right.

1437

ISAIAH 1438

An offer of salvation addressed to the nations
20 Assemble yourselves and come together,
draw near, you survivors of the nations!
They have no knowledge —
those who carry about their wooden idols,
and keep on praying to a god
that cannot save.
21 Declare and present your case;
let them take counsel together!
Who told this long ago?
Who declared it of old?
Was it not I, the LORD?
There is no other god besides me,
a righteous God and a Savior;
there is no one besides me.
22 Turn to me and be saved,
all the ends of the earth!
For I am God, and there is no other.
23 By myself I have sworn,
from my mouth has gone forth in righteousness
a word that shall not return:
"To me every knee shall bow,
every tongue shall swear."
24 Only in the LORD, it shall be said of me,
are righteousness and strength;
all who were incensed against him
shall come to him and be ashamed.
25 In the LORD all the offspring of Israel
shall triumph and glory.

1438

ISAIAH 1439

[Isaiah 46]
A contrast between the ineffectual Babylonian deities
and the God of Israel
1 Bel bows down, Nebo stoops,
their idols are on beasts and cattle;
these things you carry are loaded
as burdens on weary animals.
2 They stoop, they bow down together;
they cannot save the burden,
but themselves go into captivity.
3 Listen to me, O house of Jacob,
all the remnant of the house of Israel,
who have been borne by me from your birth,
carried from the womb;
4 even to your old age I am he,
even when you turn gray I will carry you.
I have made, and I will bear;
I will carry and will save.
5 To whom will you liken me and make me equal,
and compare me, as though we were alike?
6 Those who lavish gold from the purse,
and weigh out silver in the scales —
they hire a goldsmith, who makes it into a god;
then they fall down and worship!
7 They lift it to their shoulders, they carry it,
they set it in its place, and it stands there;
it cannot move from its place.
If one cries out to it, it does not answer
or save anyone from trouble.
8 Remember this and consider,
recall it to mind, you transgressors,
9
remember the former things of old;
for I am God, and there is no other;
I am God, and there is no one like me,

1439

ISAIAH 1440

10 declaring the end from the beginning
and from ancient times things not yet done,
saying, "My purpose shall stand,
and I will fulfill my intention,"
11 calling a bird of prey from the east,
the man for my purpose from a far country.
I have spoken, and I will bring it to pass;
I have planned, and I will do it.
12 Listen to me, you stubborn of heart,
you who are far from deliverance:
13 I bring near my deliverance, it is not far off,
and my salvation will not tarry;
I will put salvation in Zion,
for Israel my glory.
[Isaiah 47]
The end of Babylon
1 Come down and sit in the dust,
virgin daughter Babylon!
Sit on the ground without a throne,
daughter Chaldea!
For you shall no more be called
tender and delicate.
2 Take the millstones and grind meal,
remove your veil,
strip off your robe, uncover your legs,
pass through the rivers.
3 Your nakedness shall be uncovered,
and your shame shall be seen.
I will take vengeance,
and I will spare no one.
4 Our Redeemer — the LORD of hosts is his name —
is the Holy One of Israel.

1440

ISAIAH 1441

5 Sit in silence, and go into darkness,
daughter Chaldea!
For you shall no more be called
the mistress of kingdoms.
6 I was angry with my people,
I profaned my heritage;
I gave them into your hand,
you showed them no mercy;
on the aged you made your yoke
exceedingly heavy.
7 You said, "I shall be mistress forever,"
so that you did not lay these things to heart
or remember their end.
8 Now therefore hear this, you lover of pleasures,
who sit securely,
who say in your heart,
"I am, and there is no one besides me;
I shall not sit as a widow
or know the loss of children" —
9 both these things shall come upon you
in a moment, in one day:
the loss of children and widowhood
shall come upon you in full measure,
in spite of your many sorceries
and the great power of your enchantments.
10 You felt secure in your wickedness;
you said, "No one sees me."
Your wisdom and your knowledge
led you astray,
and you said in your heart,
"I am, and there is no one besides me."
11 But evil shall come upon you,
which you cannot charm away;
disaster shall fall upon you,
which you will not be able to ward off;
and ruin shall come on you suddenly,
of which you know nothing.

1441

ISAIAH 1442

12 Stand fast in your enchantments
and your many sorceries,
with which you have labored from your youth;
perhaps you may be able to succeed,
perhaps you may inspire terror.
13 You are wearied with your many consultations;
let those who study the heavens
stand up and save you,
those who gaze at the stars,
and at each new moon predict
what shall befall you.
14 See, they are like stubble,
the fire consumes them;
they cannot deliver themselves
from the power of the flame.
No coal for warming oneself is this,
no fire to sit before!
15 Such to you are those with whom you have labored,
who have trafficked with you from your youth;
they all wander about in their own paths;
there is no one to save you.
[Isaiah 48]
An address to the Israelite community
1 Hear this, O house of Jacob,
who are called by the name of Israel,
and who came forth from the loins of Judah;
who swear by the name of the LORD,
and invoke the God of Israel,
but not in truth or right.
2 For they call themselves after the holy city,
and lean on the God of Israel;
the LORD of hosts is his name.

1442

ISAIAH 1443

3 The former things I declared long ago,
they went out from my mouth and I made them known;
then suddenly I did them and they came to pass.
4 Because I know that you are obstinate,
and your neck is an iron sinew
and your forehead brass,
5 I declared them to you from long ago,
before they came to pass I announced them to you,
so that you would not say, "My idol did them,
my carved image and my cast image commanded them."
6 You have heard; now see all this;
and will you not declare it?
From this time forward I make you hear new things,
hidden things that you have not known.
7 They are created now, not long ago;
before today you have never heard of them,
so that you could not say, "I already knew them."
8 You have never heard, you have never known,
from of old your ear has not been opened.
For I knew that you would deal very treacherously,
and that from birth you were called a rebel.
9 For my name's sake I defer my anger,
for the sake of my praise I restrain it for you,
so that I may not cut you off.
10 See, I have refined you, but not like silver;
I have tested you in the furnace of adversity.
11 For my own sake, for my own sake, I do it,
for why should my name be profaned?
My glory I will not give to another.
12 Listen to me, O Jacob,
and Israel, whom I called:
I am He; I am the first,
and I am the last.
13 My hand laid the foundation of the earth,
and my right hand spread out the heavens;

1443

ISAIAH 1444

when I summon them,
they stand at attention.
Another statement of the divine purpose
14 Assemble, all of you, and hear!
Who among them has declared these things?
The LORD loves him;
he shall perform his purpose on Babylon,
and his arm shall be against the Chaldeans.
15 I, even I, have spoken and called him,
I have brought him, and he will prosper in his way.
16 Draw near to me, hear this!
From the beginning I have not spoken in secret,
from the time it came to be I have been there.
And now the Lord GOD has sent me and his spirit.
17 Thus says the LORD,
your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel:
I am the LORD your God,
who teaches you for your own good,
who leads you in the way you should go.
18 O that you had paid attention to my commandments!
Then your prosperity would have been like a river,
and your success like the waves of the sea;
19 your offspring would have been like the sand,
and your descendants like its grains;
their name would never be cut off
or destroyed from before me.
20 Go out from Babylon, flee from Chaldea,
declare this with a shout of joy, proclaim it,
send it forth to the end of the earth;
say, "The LORD has redeemed his servant Jacob!"
21 They did not thirst when he led them through the deserts;
he made water flow for them from the rock;
he split open the rock and the water gushed out.

1444

ISAIAH 1445

22 "There is no peace," says the LORD, "for the wicked."
[Isaiah 49]
The LORD's servant presents himself to foreign peoples
1 Listen to me, O coastlands,
pay attention, you peoples from far away!
The LORD called me before I was born,
while I was in my mother's womb he named me.
2 He made my mouth like a sharp sword,
in the shadow of his hand he hid me;
he made me a polished arrow,
in his quiver he hid me away.
3 And he said to me, "You are my servant,
Israel, in whom I will be glorified."
4 But I said, "I have labored in vain,
I have spent my strength for nothing and vanity;
yet surely my cause is with the LORD,
and my reward with my God."
5 And now the LORD says,
who formed me in the womb to be his servant,
to bring Jacob back to him,
and that Israel might be gathered to him,
for I am honored in the sight of the LORD,
and my God has become my strength —
6 he says,
"It is too light a thing that you should be my servant
to raise up the tribes of Jacob
and to restore the survivors of Israel;
I will give you as a light to the nations,
that my salvation may reach to the end of the earth."

1445

ISAIAH 1446

Return and restoration
7 Thus says the LORD,
the Redeemer of Israel and his Holy One,
to one deeply despised, abhorred by the nations,
the slave of rulers,
"Kings shall see and stand up,
princes, and they shall prostrate themselves,
because of the LORD, who is faithful,
the Holy One of Israel, who has chosen you."
8 Thus says the LORD:
In a time of favor I have answered you,
on a day of salvation I have helped you;
I have kept you and given you
as a covenant to the people,
to establish the land,
to apportion the desolate heritages;
9 saying to the prisoners, "Come out,"
to those who are in darkness, "Show yourselves."
They shall feed along the ways,
on all the bare heights shall be their pasture;
10 they shall not hunger or thirst,
neither scorching wind nor sun shall strike them down,
for he who has pity on them will lead them,
and by springs of water will guide them.
11 And I will turn all my mountains into a road,
and my highways shall be raised up.
12 Lo, these shall come from far away,
and lo, these from the north and from the west,
and these from the land of Syene.
13 Sing for joy, O heavens, and exult, O earth;
break forth, O mountains, into singing!
For the LORD has comforted his people,
and will have compassion on his suffering ones.

1446

ISAIAH 1447

God has not abandoned Israel
14 But Zion said, "The LORD has forsaken me,
my Lord has forgotten me."
15 Can a woman forget her nursing child,
or show no compassion for the child of her womb?
Even these may forget,
yet I will not forget you.
16 See, I have inscribed you on the palms of my hands;
your walls are continually before me.
17 Your builders outdo your destroyers,
and those who laid you waste go away from you.
18 Lift up your eyes all around and see;
they all gather, they come to you.
As I live, says the LORD,
you shall put all of them on like an ornament,
and like a bride you shall bind them on.
19 Surely your waste and your desolate places
and your devastated land —
surely now you will be too crowded for your inhabitants,
and those who swallowed you up will be far away.
20 The children born in the time of your bereavement
will yet say in your hearing:
"The place is too crowded for me;
make room for me to settle."
21 Then you will say in your heart,
"Who has borne me these?
I was bereaved and barren,
exiled and put away —
so who has reared these?
I was left all alone —
where then have these come from?"

1447

ISAIAH 1448

22 Thus says the Lord GOD:
I will soon lift up my hand to the nations,
and raise my signal to the peoples;
and they shall bring your sons in their bosom,
and your daughters shall be carried on their shoulders.
23 Kings shall be your foster fathers,
and their queens your nursing mothers.
With their faces to the ground they shall bow down to you,
and lick the dust of your feet.
Then you will know that I am the LORD;
those who wait for me shall not be put to shame.
24 Can the prey be taken from the mighty,
or the captives of a tyrant be rescued?
25 But thus says the LORD:
Even the captives of the mighty shall be taken,
and the prey of the tyrant be rescued;
for I will contend with those who contend with you,
and I will save your children.
26 I will make your oppressors eat their own flesh,
and they shall be drunk with their own blood as with wine.
Then all flesh shall know
that I am the LORD your Savior,
and your Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.
[Isaiah 50]
God is not responsible for the loss of statehood and exile
1 Thus says the LORD:
Where is your mother's bill of divorce
with which I put her away?
Or which of my creditors is it
to whom I have sold you?
No, because of your sins you were sold,
and for your transgressions your mother was put away.

1448

ISAIAH 1449

2 Why was no one there when I came?
Why did no one answer when I called?
Is my hand shortened, that it cannot redeem?
Or have I no power to deliver?
By my rebuke I dry up the sea,
I make the rivers a desert;
their fish stink for lack of water,
and die of thirst.
3 I clothe the heavens with blackness,
and make sackcloth their covering.
4 The Lord GOD has given me
the tongue of a teacher,
that I may know how to sustain
the weary with a word.
Morning by morning he wakens —
wakens my ear
to listen as those who are taught.
5 The Lord GOD has opened my ear,
and I was not rebellious,
I did not turn backward.
6 I gave my back to those who struck me,
and my cheeks to those who pulled out the beard;
I did not hide my face
from insult and spitting.
7 The Lord GOD helps me;
therefore I have not been disgraced;
therefore I have set my face like flint,
and I know that I shall not be put to shame;
8
he who vindicates me is near.
Who will contend with me?
Let us stand up together.
Who are my adversaries?
Let them confront me.

1449

ISAIAH 1450

9 It is the Lord GOD who helps me;
who will declare me guilty?
All of them will wear out like a garment;
the moth will eat them up.
A comment on vv. 4-9
10 Who among you fears the LORD
and obeys the voice of his servant,
who walks in darkness
and has no light,
yet trusts in the name of the LORD
and relies upon his God?
11 But all of you are kindlers of fire,
lighters of firebrands.
Walk in the flame of your fire,
and among the brands that you have kindled!
This is what you shall have from my hand:
you shall lie down in torment.
[Isaiah 51]
An announcement of future salvation
1 Listen to me, you that pursue righteousness,
you that seek the LORD.
Look to the rock from which you were hewn,
and to the quarry from which you were dug.
2 Look to Abraham your father
and to Sarah who bore you;
for he was but one when I called him,
but I blessed him and made him many.
3 For the LORD will comfort Zion;
he will comfort all her waste places,
and will make her wilderness like Eden,
her desert like the garden of the LORD;
joy and gladness will be found in her,
thanksgiving and the voice of song.

1450

ISAIAH 1451

4 Listen to me, my people,
and give heed to me, my nation;
for a teaching will go out from me,
and my justice for a light to the peoples.
5 I will bring near my deliverance swiftly,
my salvation has gone out
and my arms will rule the peoples;
the coastlands wait for me,
and for my arm they hope.
6 Lift up your eyes to the heavens,
and look at the earth beneath;
for the heavens will vanish like smoke,
the earth will wear out like a garment,
and those who live on it will die like gnats;
but my salvation will be forever,
and my deliverance will never be ended.
7 Listen to me, you who know righteousness,
you people who have my teaching in your hearts;
do not fear the reproach of others,
and do not be dismayed when they revile you.
8 For the moth will eat them up like a garment,
and the worm will eat them like wool;
but my deliverance will be forever,
and my salvation to all generations.
A plea for God's intervention
9 Awake, awake, put on strength,
O arm of the LORD!
Awake, as in days of old,
the generations of long ago!
Was it not you who cut Rahab in pieces,
who pierced the dragon?
10 Was it not you who dried up the sea,
the waters of the great deep;
who made the depths of the sea a way
for the redeemed to cross over?

1451

ISAIAH 1452

11 So the ransomed of the LORD shall return,
and come to Zion with singing;
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads;
they shall obtain joy and gladness,
and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.
A further word of assurance
12 I, I am he who comforts you;
why then are you afraid of a mere mortal who must die,
a human being who fades like grass?
13 You have forgotten the LORD, your Maker,
who stretched out the heavens
and laid the foundations of the earth.
You fear continually all day long
because of the fury of the oppressor,
who is bent on destruction.
But where is the fury of the oppressor?
14 The oppressed shall speedily be released;
they shall not die and go down to the Pit,
nor shall they lack bread.
15 For I am the LORD your God,
who stirs up the sea so that its waves roar —
the LORD of hosts is his name.
16 I have put my words in your mouth,
and hidden you in the shadow of my hand,
stretching out the heavens
and laying the foundations of the earth,
and saying to Zion, "You are my people."
The anger and mercy of God
17 Rouse yourself, rouse yourself!
Stand up, O Jerusalem,
you who have drunk at the hand of the LORD
the cup of his wrath,
who have drunk to the dregs
the bowl of staggering.

1452

ISAIAH 1453

18 There is no one to guide her
among all the children she has borne;
there is no one to take her by the hand
among all the children she has brought up.
19 These two things have befallen you
— who will grieve with you? —
devastation and destruction, famine and sword —
who will comfort you?
20 Your children have fainted,
they lie at the head of every street
like an antelope in a net;
they are full of the wrath of the LORD,
the rebuke of your God.
21 Therefore hear this, you who are wounded,
who are drunk, but not with wine:
22 Thus says your Sovereign, the LORD,
your God who pleads the cause of his people:
See, I have taken from your hand the cup of staggering;
you shall drink no more from the bowl of my wrath.
23 And I will put it into the hand of your tormentors,
who have said to you,
"Bow down, that we may walk on you";
and you have made your back like the ground
and like the street for them to walk on.
[Isaiah 52]
Jerusalem restored
1 Awake, awake,
put on your strength, O Zion!
Put on your beautiful garments,
O Jerusalem, the holy city;
for the uncircumcised and the unclean
shall enter you no more.

1453

ISAIAH 1454

2 Shake yourself from the dust, rise up,
O captive Jerusalem;
loose the bonds from your neck,
O captive daughter Zion!
3 For thus says the LORD: You were sold for nothing, and you shall be
redeemed without money. 4 For thus says the Lord GOD: Long ago, my
people went down into Egypt to reside there as aliens; the Assyrian,
too, has oppressed them without cause. 5 Now therefore what am I
doing here, says the LORD, seeing that my people are taken away
without cause? Their rulers howl, says the LORD, and continually, all day
long, my name is despised. 6 Therefore my people shall know my
name; therefore in that day they shall know that it is I who speak; here
am I.
The approach of the ruler
7 How beautiful upon the mountains
are the feet of the messenger who announces peace,
who brings good news,
who announces salvation,
who says to Zion, "Your God reigns."
8 Listen! Your sentinels lift up their voices,
together they sing for joy;
for in plain sight they see
the return of the LORD to Zion.
9 Break forth together into singing,
you ruins of Jerusalem;
for the LORD has comforted his people,
he has redeemed Jerusalem.
10 The LORD has bared his holy arm
before the eyes of all the nations;
and all the ends of the earth shall see
the salvation of our God.
11 Depart, depart, go out from there!
Touch no unclean thing;
go out from the midst of it, purify yourselves,
you who carry the vessels of the LORD.

1454

ISAIAH 1455

12 For you shall not go out in haste,
and you shall not go in flight;
for the LORD will go before you,
and the God of Israel will be your rear guard.
The mission and violent death of a servant of the Lord
13 See, my servant shall prosper;
he shall be exalted and lifted up,
and shall be very high.
14 Just as there were many who were astonished at him
— so marred was his appearance, beyond human semblance,
and his form beyond that of mortals —
15 so he shall startle many nations;
kings shall shut their mouths because of him;
for that which had not been told them they shall see,
and that which they had not heard they shall contemplate.
[Isaiah 53]
1 Who has believed what we have heard?
And to whom has the arm of the LORD been revealed?
2 For he grew up before him like a young plant,
and like a root out of dry ground;
he had no form or majesty that we should look at him,
nothing in his appearance that we should desire him.
3 He was despised and rejected by others;
a man of suffering and acquainted with infirmity;
and as one from whom others hide their faces
he was despised, and we held him of no account.
4 Surely he has borne our infirmities
and carried our diseases;
yet we accounted him stricken,
struck down by God, and afflicted.

1455

ISAIAH 1456

5 But he was wounded for our transgressions,
crushed for our iniquities;
upon him was the punishment that made us whole,
and by his bruises we are healed.
6 All we like sheep have gone astray;
we have all turned to our own way,
and the LORD has laid on him
the iniquity of us all.
7 He was oppressed, and he was afflicted,
yet he did not open his mouth;
like a lamb that is led to the slaughter,
and like a sheep that before its shearers is silent,
so he did not open his mouth.
8 By a perversion of justice he was taken away.
Who could have imagined his future?
For he was cut off from the land of the living,
stricken for the transgression of my people.
9 They made his grave with the wicked
and his tomb with the rich,
although he had done no violence,
and there was no deceit in his mouth.
10 Yet it was the will of the LORD to crush him with pain.
When you make his life an offering for sin,
he shall see his offspring, and shall prolong his days;
through him the will of the LORD shall prosper.
11
Out of his anguish he shall see light;
he shall find satisfaction through his knowledge.
The righteous one, my servant, shall make many righteous,
and he shall bear their iniquities.
12 Therefore I will allot him a portion with the great,
and he shall divide the spoil with the strong;
because he poured out himself to death,
and was numbered with the transgressors;
yet he bore the sin of many,
and made intercession for the transgressors.

1456

ISAIAH 1457

[Isaiah 54]
Apostrophe to Zion
1 Sing, O barren one who did not bear;
burst into song and shout,
you who have not been in labor!
For the children of the desolate woman will be more
than the children of her that is married, says the LORD.
2 Enlarge the site of your tent,
and let the curtains of your habitations be stretched out;
do not hold back; lengthen your cords
and strengthen your stakes.
3 For you will spread out to the right and to the left,
and your descendants will possess the nations
and will settle the desolate towns.
4 Do not fear, for you will not be ashamed;
do not be discouraged, for you will not suffer disgrace;
for you will forget the shame of your youth,
and the disgrace of your widowhood you will remember no more.
5 For your Maker is your husband,
the LORD of hosts is his name;
the Holy One of Israel is your Redeemer,
the God of the whole earth he is called.
6 For the LORD has called you
like a wife forsaken and grieved in spirit,
like the wife of a man's youth when she is cast off,
says your God.
7 For a brief moment I abandoned you,
but with great compassion I will gather you.
8 In overflowing wrath for a moment
I hid my face from you,
but with everlasting love I will have compassion on you,
says the LORD, your Redeemer.

1457

ISAIAH 1458

9 This is like the days of Noah to me:
Just as I swore that the waters of Noah
would never again go over the earth,
so I have sworn that I will not be angry with you
and will not rebuke you.
10 For the mountains may depart
and the hills be removed,
but my steadfast love shall not depart from you,
and my covenant of peace shall not be removed,
says the LORD, who has compassion on you.
11 O afflicted one, storm-tossed, and not comforted,
I am about to set your stones in antimony,
and lay your foundations with sapphires.
12 I will make your pinnacles of rubies,
your gates of jewels,
and all your wall of precious stones.
13 All your children shall be taught by the LORD,
and great shall be the prosperity of your children.
14 In righteousness you shall be established;
you shall be far from oppression, for you shall not fear;
and from terror, for it shall not come near you.
15 If anyone stirs up strife,
it is not from me;
whoever stirs up strife with you
shall fall because of you.
16 See it is I who have created the smith
who blows the fire of coals,
and produces a weapon fit for its purpose;
I have also created the ravager to destroy.
17
No weapon that is fashioned against you shall prosper,
and you shall confute every tongue that rises
against you in judgment.
This is the heritage of the servants of the LORD
and their vindication from me, says the LORD.

1458

ISAIAH 1459

[Isaiah 55]
An appeal to the prophet's audience to participate in the restoration
1 Ho, everyone who thirsts,
come to the waters;
and you that have no money,
come, buy and eat!
Come, buy wine and milk
without money and without price.
2 Why do you spend your money for that which is not bread,
and your labor for that which does not satisfy?
Listen carefully to me, and eat what is good,
and delight yourselves in rich food.
3 Incline your ear, and come to me;
listen, so that you may live.
I will make with you an everlasting covenant,
my steadfast, sure love for David.
4 See, I made him a witness to the peoples,
a leader and commander for the peoples.
5 See, you shall call nations that you do not know,
and nations that do not know you shall run to you,
because of the LORD your God, the Holy One of Israel,
for he has glorified you.
A call to repentance
6 Seek the LORD while he may be found,
call upon him while he is near;
7 let the wicked forsake their way,
and the unrighteous their thoughts;
let them return to the LORD, that he may have mercy on them,
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.
8 For my thoughts are not your thoughts,
nor are your ways my ways, says the LORD.
9 For as the heavens are higher than the earth,
so are my ways higher than your ways
and my thoughts than your thoughts.

1459

ISAIAH 1460

10 For as the rain and the snow come down from heaven,
and do not return there until they have watered the earth,
making it bring forth and sprout,
giving seed to the sower and bread to the eater,
11 so shall my word be that goes out from my mouth;
it shall not return to me empty,
but it shall accomplish that which I purpose,
and succeed in the thing for which I sent it.
Nature will rejoice at the return of the dispersed Israelites
12 For you shall go out in joy,
and be led back in peace;
the mountains and the hills before you
shall burst into song,
and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands.
13 Instead of the thorn shall come up the cypress;
instead of the brier shall come up the myrtle;
and it shall be to the LORD for a memorial,
for an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off.
[Isaiah 56]
Third Isaiah; all are worthy to join the community
1 Thus says the LORD:
Maintain justice, and do what is right,
for soon my salvation will come,
and my deliverance be revealed.
2 Happy is the mortal who does this,
the one who holds it fast,
who keeps the sabbath, not profaning it,
and refrains from doing any evil.
3 Do not let the foreigner joined to the LORD say,
"The LORD will surely separate me from his people";
and do not let the eunuch say,
"I am just a dry tree."

1460

ISAIAH 1461

4 For thus says the LORD:
To the eunuchs who keep my sabbaths,
who choose the things that please me
and hold fast my covenant,
5 I will give, in my house and within my walls,
a monument and a name
better than sons and daughters;
I will give them an everlasting name
that shall not be cut off.
6 And the foreigners who join themselves to the LORD,
to minister to him, to love the name of the LORD,
and to be his servants,
all who keep the sabbath, and do not profane it,
and hold fast my covenant —
7 these I will bring to my holy mountain,
and make them joyful in my house of prayer;
their burnt offerings and their sacrifices
will be accepted on my altar;
for my house shall be called a house of prayer
for all peoples.
8 Thus says the Lord GOD,
who gathers the outcasts of Israel,
I will gather others to them
besides those already gathered.
An invitation to wild animals (foreigners) to come and devour the
flock (the Judean community)
9 All you wild animals,
all you wild animals in the forest, come to devour!
10 Israel's sentinels are blind,
they are all without knowledge;
they are all silent dogs
that cannot bark;
dreaming, lying down,
loving to slumber.

1461

ISAIAH 1462

11 The dogs have a mighty appetite;
they never have enough.
The shepherds also have no understanding;
they have all turned to their own way,
to their own gain, one and all.
12 "Come," they say, "let us get wine;
let us fill ourselves with strong drink.
And tomorrow will be like today,
great beyond measure."
[Isaiah 57]
The death of the righteous
1 The righteous perish,
and no one takes it to heart;
the devout are taken away,
while no one understands.
For the righteous are taken away from calamity,
2
and they enter into peace;
those who walk uprightly
will rest on their couches.
Denunciation of the sorceress and her children
3 But as for you, come here,
you children of a sorceress,
you offspring of an adulterer and a whore.
4 Whom are you mocking?
Against whom do you open your mouth wide
and stick out your tongue?
Are you not children of transgression,
the offspring of deceit —
5 you that burn with lust among the oaks,
under every green tree;
you that slaughter your children in the valleys,
under the clefts of the rocks?

1462

ISAIAH 1463

6 Among the smooth stones of the valley is your portion;
they, they, are your lot;
to them you have poured out a drink offering,
you have brought a grain offering.
Shall I be appeased for these things?
7 Upon a high and lofty mountain
you have set your bed,
and there you went up to offer sacrifice.
8 Behind the door and the doorpost
you have set up your symbol;
for, in deserting me, you have uncovered your bed,
you have gone up to it,
you have made it wide;
and you have made a bargain for yourself with them,
you have loved their bed,
you have gazed on their nakedness.
9 You journeyed to Molech with oil,
and multiplied your perfumes;
you sent your envoys far away,
and sent down even to Sheol.
10 You grew weary from your many wanderings,
but you did not say, "It is useless."
You found your desire rekindled,
and so you did not weaken.
11 Whom did you dread and fear
so that you lied,
and did not remember me
or give me a thought?
Have I not kept silent and closed my eyes,
and so you do not fear me?
12 I will concede your righteousness and your works,
but they will not help you.
13 When you cry out, let your collection of idols deliver you!
The wind will carry them off,
a breath will take them away.
But whoever takes refuge in me shall possess the land
and inherit my holy mountain.

1463

ISAIAH 1464

A poem of consolation
14 It shall be said,
"Build up, build up, prepare the way,
remove every obstruction from my people's way."
15 For thus says the high and lofty one
who inhabits eternity, whose name is Holy:
I dwell in the high and holy place,
and also with those who are contrite and humble in spirit,
to revive the spirit of the humble,
and to revive the heart of the contrite.
16 For I will not continually accuse,
nor will I always be angry;
for then the spirits would grow faint before me,
even the souls that I have made.
17 Because of their wicked covetousness I was angry;
I struck them, I hid and was angry;
but they kept turning back to their own ways.
18 I have seen their ways, but I will heal them;
I will lead them and repay them with comfort,
creating for their mourners the fruit of the lips.
19 Peace, peace, to the far and the near, says the LORD;
and I will heal them.
20 But the wicked are like the tossing sea
that cannot keep still;
its waters toss up mire and mud.
21 There is no peace, says my God, for the wicked.
[Isaiah 58]
On genuine fasting
1 Shout out, do not hold back!
Lift up your voice like a trumpet!
Announce to my people their rebellion,
to the house of Jacob their sins.

1464

ISAIAH 1465

2 Yet day after day they seek me
and delight to know my ways,
as if they were a nation that practiced righteousness
and did not forsake the ordinance of their God;
they ask of me righteous judgments,
they delight to draw near to God.
3 "Why do we fast, but you do not see?
Why humble ourselves, but you do not notice?"
Look, you serve your own interest on your fast day,
and oppress all your workers.
4 Look, you fast only to quarrel and to fight
and to strike with a wicked fist.
Such fasting as you do today
will not make your voice heard on high.
5 Is such the fast that I choose,
a day to humble oneself?
Is it to bow down the head like a bulrush,
and to lie in sackcloth and ashes?
Will you call this a fast,
a day acceptable to the LORD?
6 Is not this the fast that I choose:
to loose the bonds of injustice,
to undo the thongs of the yoke,
to let the oppressed go free,
and to break every yoke?
7 Is it not to share your bread with the hungry,
and bring the homeless poor into your house;
when you see the naked, to cover them,
and not to hide yourself from your own kin?
8 Then your light shall break forth like the dawn,
and your healing shall spring up quickly;
your vindicator shall go before you,
the glory of the LORD shall be your rear guard.
9 Then you shall call, and the LORD will answer;
you shall cry for help, and he will say, Here I am.

1465

ISAIAH 1466

If you remove the yoke from among you,
the pointing of the finger, the speaking of evil,
10 if you offer your food to the hungry
and satisfy the needs of the afflicted,
then your light shall rise in the darkness
and your gloom be like the noonday.
11 The LORD will guide you continually,
and satisfy your needs in parched places,
and make your bones strong;
and you shall be like a watered garden,
like a spring of water,
whose waters never fail.
12 Your ancient ruins shall be rebuilt;
you shall raise up the foundations of many generations;
you shall be called the repairer of the breach,
the restorer of streets to live in.
13 If you refrain from trampling the sabbath,
from pursuing your own interests on my holy day;
if you call the sabbath a delight
and the holy day of the LORD honorable;
if you honor it, not going your own ways,
serving your own interests, or pursuing your own affairs;
14 then you shall take delight in the LORD,
and I will make you ride upon the heights of the earth;
I will feed you with the heritage of your ancestor Jacob,
for the mouth of the LORD has spoken.
[Isaiah 59]
Why prayers and fasting remain without effect
1 See, the LORD's hand is not too short to save,
nor his ear too dull to hear.
2 Rather, your iniquities have been barriers
between you and your God,
and your sins have hidden his face from you
so that he does not hear.

1466

ISAIAH 1467

3 For your hands are defiled with blood,
and your fingers with iniquity;
your lips have spoken lies,
your tongue mutters wickedness.
4 No one brings suit justly,
no one goes to law honestly;
they rely on empty pleas, they speak lies,
conceiving mischief and begetting iniquity.
5 They hatch adders' eggs,
and weave the spider's web;
whoever eats their eggs dies,
and the crushed egg hatches out a viper.
6 Their webs cannot serve as clothing;
they cannot cover themselves with what they make.
Their works are works of iniquity,
and deeds of violence are in their hands.
7 Their feet run to evil,
and they rush to shed innocent blood;
their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity,
desolation and destruction are in their highways.
8 The way of peace they do not know,
and there is no justice in their paths.
Their roads they have made crooked;
no one who walks in them knows peace.
A communal confession of sin
9 Therefore justice is far from us,
and righteousness does not reach us;
we wait for light, and lo! there is darkness;
and for brightness, but we walk in gloom.
10 We grope like the blind along a wall,
groping like those who have no eyes;
we stumble at noon as in the twilight,
among the vigorous as though we were dead.

1467

ISAIAH 1468

11 We all growl like bears;
like doves we moan mournfully.
We wait for justice, but there is none;
for salvation, but it is far from us.
12 For our transgressions before you are many,
and our sins testify against us.
Our transgressions indeed are with us,
and we know our iniquities:
13 transgressing, and denying the LORD,
and turning away from following our God,
talking oppression and revolt,
conceiving lying words and uttering them from the heart.
14 Justice is turned back,
and righteousness stands at a distance;
for truth stumbles in the public square,
and uprightness cannot enter.
15 Truth is lacking,
and whoever turns from evil is despoiled.
The Lord will punish and redeem
The LORD saw it, and it displeased him
that there was no justice.
16 He saw that there was no one,
and was appalled that there was no one to intervene;
so his own arm brought him victory,
and his righteousness upheld him.
17 He put on righteousness like a breastplate,
and a helmet of salvation on his head;
he put on garments of vengeance for clothing,
and wrapped himself in fury as in a mantle.
18 According to their deeds, so will he repay;
wrath to his adversaries, requital to his enemies;
to the coastlands he will render requital.
19 So those in the west shall fear the name of the LORD,
and those in the east, his glory;
for he will come like a pent-up stream
that the wind of the LORD drives on.

1468

ISAIAH 1469

20 And he will come to Zion as Redeemer,
to those in Jacob who turn from transgression, says the LORD.
21 And as for me, this is my covenant with them, says the LORD: my
spirit that is upon you, and my words that I have put in your mouth,
shall not depart out of your mouth, or out of the mouths of your
children, or out of the mouths of your children's children, says the
LORD, from now on and forever.
[Isaiah 60]
The glory and destiny of Zion; Jerusalem restored
1 Arise, shine; for your light has come,
and the glory of the LORD has risen upon you.
2 For darkness shall cover the earth,
and thick darkness the peoples;
but the LORD will arise upon you,
and his glory will appear over you.
3 Nations shall come to your light,
and kings to the brightness of your dawn.
4 Lift up your eyes and look around;
they all gather together, they come to you;
your sons shall come from far away,
and your daughters shall be carried on their nurses' arms.
5 Then you shall see and be radiant;
your heart shall thrill and rejoice,
because the abundance of the sea shall be brought to you,
the wealth of the nations shall come to you.
6 A multitude of camels shall cover you,
the young camels of Midian and Ephah;
all those from Sheba shall come.
They shall bring gold and frankincense,
and shall proclaim the praise of the LORD.
7 All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered to you,
the rams of Nebaioth shall minister to you;
they shall be acceptable on my altar,
and I will glorify my glorious house.

1469

ISAIAH 1470

8 Who are these that fly like a cloud,
and like doves to their windows?
9 For the coastlands shall wait for me,
the ships of Tarshish first,
to bring your children from far away,
their silver and gold with them,
for the name of the LORD your God,
and for the Holy One of Israel,
because he has glorified you.
10 Foreigners shall build up your walls,
and their kings shall minister to you;
for in my wrath I struck you down,
but in my favor I have had mercy on you.
11 Your gates shall always be open;
day and night they shall not be shut,
so that nations shall bring you their wealth,
with their kings led in procession.
12 For the nation and kingdom
that will not serve you shall perish;
those nations shall be utterly laid waste.
13 The glory of Lebanon shall come to you,
the cypress, the plane, and the pine,
to beautify the place of my sanctuary;
and I will glorify where my feet rest.
14 The descendants of those who oppressed you
shall come bending low to you,
and all who despised you
shall bow down at your feet;
they shall call you the City of the LORD,
the Zion of the Holy One of Israel.
15 Whereas you have been forsaken and hated,
with no one passing through,
I will make you majestic forever,
a joy from age to age.
16 You shall suck the milk of nations,
you shall suck the breasts of kings;
and you shall know that I, the LORD, am your Savior
and your Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.

1470

ISAIAH 1471

17 Instead of bronze I will bring gold,
instead of iron I will bring silver;
instead of wood, bronze,
instead of stones, iron.
I will appoint Peace as your overseer
and Righteousness as your taskmaster.
18 Violence shall no more be heard in your land,
devastation or destruction within your borders;
you shall call your walls Salvation,
and your gates Praise.
19 The sun shall no longer be
your light by day,
nor for brightness shall the moon
give light to you by night;
but the LORD will be your everlasting light,
and your God will be your glory.
20 Your sun shall no more go down,
or your moon withdraw itself;
for the LORD will be your everlasting light,
and your days of mourning shall be ended.
21 Your people shall all be righteous;
they shall possess the land forever.
They are the shoot that I planted, the work of my hands,
so that I might be glorified.
22 The least of them shall become a clan,
and the smallest one a mighty nation;
I am the LORD;
in its time I will accomplish it quickly.
[Isaiah 61]
The mission of the prophet
1 The spirit of the Lord GOD is upon me,
because the LORD has anointed me;
he has sent me to bring good news to the oppressed,
to bind up the brokenhearted,
to proclaim liberty to the captives,
and release to the prisoners;

1471

ISAIAH 1472

2 to proclaim the year of the LORD's favor,
and the day of vengeance of our God;
to comfort all who mourn;
3 to provide for those who mourn in Zion —
to give them a garland instead of ashes,
the oil of gladness instead of mourning,
the mantle of praise instead of a faint spirit.
They will be called oaks of righteousness,
the planting of the LORD, to display his glory.
4 They shall build up the ancient ruins,
they shall raise up the former devastations;
they shall repair the ruined cities,
the devastations of many generations.
Announcement of good news
5 Strangers shall stand and feed your flocks,
foreigners shall till your land and dress your vines;
6 but you shall be called priests of the LORD,
you shall be named ministers of our God;
you shall enjoy the wealth of the nations,
and in their riches you shall glory.
7 Because their shame was double,
and dishonor was proclaimed as their lot,
therefore they shall possess a double portion;
everlasting joy shall be theirs.
8 For I the LORD love justice,
I hate robbery and wrongdoing;
I will faithfully give them their recompense,
and I will make an everlasting covenant with them.
9 Their descendants shall be known among the nations,
and their offspring among the peoples;
all who see them shall acknowledge
that they are a people whom the LORD has blessed.

1472

ISAIAH 1473

10 I will greatly rejoice in the LORD,
my whole being shall exult in my God;
for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation,
he has covered me with the robe of righteousness,
as a bridegroom decks himself with a garland,
and as a bride adorns herself with her jewels.
11 For as the earth brings forth its shoots,
and as a garden causes what is sown in it to spring up,
so the Lord GOD will cause righteousness and praise
to spring up before all the nations.
[Isaiah 62]
Zion's destiny
1 For Zion's sake I will not keep silent,
and for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest,
until her vindication shines out like the dawn,
and her salvation like a burning torch.
2 The nations shall see your vindication,
and all the kings your glory;
and you shall be called by a new name
that the mouth of the LORD will give.
3 You shall be a crown of beauty in the hand of the LORD,
and a royal diadem in the hand of your God.
4 You shall no more be termed Forsaken,
and your land shall no more be termed Desolate;
but you shall be called My Delight Is in Her,
and your land Married;
for the LORD delights in you,
and your land shall be married.
5 For as a young man marries a young woman,
so shall your builder marry you,
and as the bridegroom rejoices over the bride,
so shall your God rejoice over you.

1473

ISAIAH 1474

6 Upon your walls, O Jerusalem,
I have posted sentinels;
all day and all night
they shall never be silent.
You who remind the LORD,
take no rest,
7 and give him no rest
until he establishes Jerusalem
and makes it renowned throughout the earth.
8 The LORD has sworn by his right hand
and by his mighty arm:
I will not again give your grain
to be food for your enemies,
and foreigners shall not drink the wine
for which you have labored;
9 but those who garner it shall eat it
and praise the LORD,
and those who gather it shall drink it
in my holy courts.
10 Go through, go through the gates,
prepare the way for the people;
build up, build up the highway,
clear it of stones,
lift up an ensign over the peoples.
11 The LORD has proclaimed
to the end of the earth:
Say to daughter Zion,
"See, your salvation comes;
his reward is with him,
and his recompense before him."
12 They shall be called, "The Holy People,
The Redeemed of the LORD";
and you shall be called, "Sought Out,
A City Not Forsaken."

1474

ISAIAH 1475

[Isaiah 63]
Vengeance on Edom
1 "Who is this that comes from Edom,
from Bozrah in garments stained crimson?
Who is this so splendidly robed,
marching in his great might?"
"It is I, announcing vindication,
mighty to save."
2 "Why are your robes red,
and your garments like theirs who tread the wine press?"
3 "I have trodden the wine press alone,
and from the peoples no one was with me;
I trod them in my anger
and trampled them in my wrath;
their juice spattered on my garments,
and stained all my robes.
4 For the day of vengeance was in my heart,
and the year for my redeeming work had come.
5 I looked, but there was no helper;
I stared, but there was no one to sustain me;
so my own arm brought me victory,
and my wrath sustained me.
6 I trampled down peoples in my anger,
I crushed them in my wrath,
and I poured out their lifeblood on the earth."
A psalm of communal lamentation
7 I will recount the gracious deeds of the LORD,
the praiseworthy acts of the LORD,
because of all that the LORD has done for us,
and the great favor to the house of Israel
that he has shown them according to his mercy,
according to the abundance of his steadfast love.

1475

ISAIAH 1476

8 For he said, "Surely they are my people,
children who will not deal falsely";
and he became their savior
9
in all their distress.
It was no messenger or angel
but his presence that saved them;
in his love and in his pity he redeemed them;
he lifted them up and carried them all the days of old.
10 But they rebelled
and grieved his holy spirit;
therefore he became their enemy;
he himself fought against them.
11 Then they remembered the days of old,
of Moses his servant.
Where is the one who brought them up out of the sea
with the shepherds of his flock?
Where is the one who put within them
his holy spirit,
12 who caused his glorious arm
to march at the right hand of Moses,
who divided the waters before them
to make for himself an everlasting name,
13 who led them through the depths?
Like a horse in the desert,
they did not stumble.
14 Like cattle that go down into the valley,
the spirit of the LORD gave them rest.
Thus you led your people,
to make for yourself a glorious name.
15 Look down from heaven and see,
from your holy and glorious habitation.
Where are your zeal and your might?
The yearning of your heart and your compassion?
They are withheld from me.

1476

ISAIAH 1477

16 For you are our father,
though Abraham does not know us
and Israel does not acknowledge us;
you, O LORD, are our father;
our Redeemer from of old is your name.
17 Why, O LORD, do you make us stray from your ways
and harden our heart, so that we do not fear you?
Turn back for the sake of your servants,
for the sake of the tribes that are your heritage.
18 Your holy people took possession for a little while;
but now our adversaries have trampled down your sanctuary.
19 We have long been like those whom you do not rule,
like those not called by your name.
[Isaiah 64]
1 O that you would tear open the heavens and come down,
so that the mountains would quake at your presence —
2 as when fire kindles brushwood
and the fire causes water to boil —
to make your name known to your adversaries,
so that the nations might tremble at your presence!
3 When you did awesome deeds that we did not expect,
you came down, the mountains quaked at your presence.
4 From ages past no one has heard,
no ear has perceived,
no eye has seen any God besides you,
who works for those who wait for him.
5 You meet those who gladly do right,
those who remember you in your ways.
But you were angry, and we sinned;
because you hid yourself we transgressed.
6 We have all become like one who is unclean,
and all our righteous deeds are like a filthy cloth.
We all fade like a leaf,
and our iniquities, like the wind, take us away.

1477

ISAIAH 1478

7 There is no one who calls on your name,
or attempts to take hold of you;
for you have hidden your face from us,
and have delivered us into the hand of our iniquity.
8 Yet, O LORD, you are our Father;
we are the clay, and you are our potter;
we are all the work of your hand.
9 Do not be exceedingly angry, O LORD,
and do not remember iniquity forever.
Now consider, we are all your people.
10 Your holy cities have become a wilderness,
Zion has become a wilderness,
Jerusalem a desolation.
11 Our holy and beautiful house,
where our ancestors praised you,
has been burned by fire,
and all our pleasant places have become ruins.
12 After all this, will you restrain yourself, O LORD?
Will you keep silent, and punish us so severely?
[Isaiah 65]
The answer
1 I was ready to be sought out by those who did not ask,
to be found by those who did not seek me.
I said, "Here I am, here I am,"
to a nation that did not call on my name.
2 I held out my hands all day long
to a rebellious people,
who walk in a way that is not good,
following their own devices;
3 a people who provoke me
to my face continually,
sacrificing in gardens
and offering incense on bricks;

1478

ISAIAH 1479

4 who sit inside tombs,
and spend the night in secret places;
who eat swine's flesh,
with broth of abominable things in their vessels;
5 who say, "Keep to yourself,
do not come near me, for I am too holy for you."
These are a smoke in my nostrils,
a fire that burns all day long.
6 See, it is written before me:
I will not keep silent, but I will repay;
I will indeed repay into their laps
7
their iniquities and their ancestors' iniquities together,
says the LORD;
because they offered incense on the mountains
and reviled me on the hills,
I will measure into their laps
full payment for their actions.
Division in the Judean community
8 Thus says the LORD:
As the wine is found in the cluster,
and they say, "Do not destroy it,
for there is a blessing in it,"
so I will do for my servants' sake,
and not destroy them all.
9 I will bring forth descendants from Jacob,
and from Judah inheritors of my mountains;
my chosen shall inherit it,
and my servants shall settle there.
10 Sharon shall become a pasture for flocks,
and the Valley of Achor a place for herds to lie down,
for my people who have sought me.
11 But you who forsake the LORD,
who forget my holy mountain,
who set a table for Fortune
and fill cups of mixed wine for Destiny;

1479

ISAIAH 1480

12 I will destine you to the sword,
and all of you shall bow down to the slaughter;
because, when I called, you did not answer,
when I spoke, you did not listen,
but you did what was evil in my sight,
and chose what I did not delight in.
Contrast between the destiny of God's servants and
that of the reprobate
13 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD:
My servants shall eat,
but you shall be hungry;
my servants shall drink,
but you shall be thirsty;
my servants shall rejoice,
but you shall be put to shame;
14 my servants shall sing for gladness of heart,
but you shall cry out for pain of heart,
and shall wail for anguish of spirit.
15 You shall leave your name to my chosen to use as a curse,
and the Lord GOD will put you to death;
but to his servants he will give a different name.
16 Then whoever invokes a blessing in the land
shall bless by the God of faithfulness,
and whoever takes an oath in the land
shall swear by the God of faithfulness;
because the former troubles are forgotten
and are hidden from my sight.
An apocalyptic interpolation
17 For I am about to create new heavens
and a new earth;
the former things shall not be remembered
or come to mind.

1480

ISAIAH 1481

18 But be glad and rejoice forever
in what I am creating;
for I am about to create Jerusalem as a joy,
and its people as a delight.
19 I will rejoice in Jerusalem,
and delight in my people;
no more shall the sound of weeping be heard in it,
or the cry of distress.
20 No more shall there be in it
an infant that lives but a few days,
or an old person who does not live out a lifetime;
for one who dies at a hundred years will be considered a youth,
and one who falls short of a hundred will be considered accursed.
21 They shall build houses and inhabit them;
they shall plant vineyards and eat their fruit.
22 They shall not build and another inhabit;
they shall not plant and another eat;
for like the days of a tree shall the days of my people be,
and my chosen shall long enjoy the work of their hands.
23 They shall not labor in vain,
or bear children for calamity;
for they shall be offspring blessed by the LORD —
and their descendants as well.
24 Before they call I will answer,
while they are yet speaking I will hear.
25 The wolf and the lamb shall feed together,
the lion shall eat straw like the ox;
but the serpent — its food shall be dust!
They shall not hurt or destroy
on all my holy mountain,
says the LORD.

1481

ISAIAH 1482

[Isaiah 66]
A community divided
1 Thus says the LORD:
Heaven is my throne
and the earth is my footstool;
what is the house that you would build for me,
and what is my resting place?
2 All these things my hand has made,
and so all these things are mine,
says the LORD.
But this is the one to whom I will look,
to the humble and contrite in spirit,
who trembles at my word.
3 Whoever slaughters an ox is like one who kills a human being;
whoever sacrifices a lamb, like one who breaks a dog's neck;
whoever presents a grain offering, like one who
offers swine's blood; whoever makes a memorial offering
of frankincense, like one who blesses an idol.
These have chosen their own ways,
and in their abominations they take delight;
4 I also will choose to mock them,
and bring upon them what they fear;
because, when I called, no one answered,
when I spoke, they did not listen;
but they did what was evil in my sight,
and chose what did not please me.
5 Hear the word of the LORD,
you who tremble at his word:
Your own people who hate you
and reject you for my name's sake
have said, "Let the LORD be glorified,
so that we may see your joy";
but it is they who shall be put to shame.

1482

ISAIAH 1483

6 Listen, an uproar from the city!
A voice from the temple!
The voice of the LORD,
dealing retribution to his enemies!
The destiny of Jerusalem
7 Before she was in labor
she gave birth;
before her pain came upon her
she delivered a son.
8 Who has heard of such a thing?
Who has seen such things?
Shall a land be born in one day?
Shall a nation be delivered in one moment?
Yet as soon as Zion was in labor
she delivered her children.
9 Shall I open the womb and not deliver?
says the LORD;
shall I, the one who delivers, shut the womb?
says your God.
10 Rejoice with Jerusalem, and be glad for her,
all you who love her;
rejoice with her in joy,
all you who mourn over her —
11 that you may nurse and be satisfied
from her consoling breast;
that you may drink deeply with delight
from her glorious bosom.
12 For thus says the LORD:
I will extend prosperity to her like a river,
and the wealth of the nations like an overflowing stream;
and you shall nurse and be carried on her arm,
and dandled on her knees.

1483

ISAIAH 1484

13 As a mother comforts her child,
so I will comfort you;
you shall be comforted in Jerusalem.
14 You shall see, and your heart shall rejoice;
your bodies shall flourish like the grass;
and it shall be known that the hand of the LORD
is with his servants,
and his indignation is against his enemies.
Homecoming, vindication, and final judgment
15 For the LORD will come in fire,
and his chariots like the whirlwind,
to pay back his anger in fury,
and his rebuke in flames of fire.
16 For by fire will the LORD execute judgment,
and by his sword, on all flesh;
and those slain by the LORD shall be many.
17 Those who sanctify and purify themselves to go into the gardens,
following the one in the center, eating the flesh of pigs, vermin, and
rodents, shall come to an end together, says the LORD.
18 For I know their works and their thoughts, and I am coming to
gather all nations and tongues; and they shall come and shall see my
glory, 19 and I will set a sign among them. From them I will send
survivors to the nations, to Tarshish, Put, and Lud — which draw the
bow — to Tubal and Javan, to the coastlands far away that have not
heard of my fame or seen my glory; and they shall declare my glory
among the nations. 20 They shall bring all your kindred from all the
nations as an offering to the LORD, on horses, and in chariots, and in
litters, and on mules, and on dromedaries, to my holy mountain
Jerusalem, says the LORD, just as the Israelites bring a grain offering in a
clean vessel to the house of the LORD. 21 And I will also take some of
them as priests and as Levites, says the LORD.

1484

ISAIAH 1485

22 For as the new heavens and the new earth,
which I will make,
shall remain before me, says the LORD;
so shall your descendants and your name remain.
23 From new moon to new moon,
and from sabbath to sabbath,
all flesh shall come to worship before me,
says the LORD.
24 And they shall go out and look at the dead bodies of the people
who have rebelled against me; for their worm shall not die, their fire
shall not be quenched, and they shall be an abhorrence to all flesh.

1485

JEREMIAH 1486

JEREMIAH
Introduction
Jeremiah was the son of Hilkiah, a priest at Anathoth (1.1); he may have
been a descendant of the priest Abiathar, who was banished by
Solomon to Anathoth (1 Kings 2.26, 27). The chronology of Jeremiah's
life suggested by the superscription (1.2-3) raised a number of
problems. If Jeremiah's ministry began in 627 BCE (1.2), he would have
been active over four decades. Despite the efforts of some scholars to
interpret chs 2-6 and perhaps portions of chs 30-31 as the prophet's
early preaching during Josiah's reign, no material in the book can be
unequivocally assigned to that time. Even more enigmatically,
although the prose sermons and biographical narratives in the book
bear strong linguistic resemblance to Deuteronomy and the so-called
Deuteronomistic History (Joshua-2 Kings), Jeremiah is inexplicably
regarding Josiah's religious reform inspired by the discovery of the
Temple of the "book of the law" in 622 BCE (2 Kings 22-23). These
difficulties lead some scholars to regard 627 BCE as the date of
Jeremiah's birth (1.5) rather than as the beginning of his public career.
He died sometime after 586, presumably in Egypt.
No matter which date is chosen, the important events that form the
backdrop of Jeremiah's preaching are clear. Jeremiah spoke in the
context of the last years of the existence of Judah as an independent
political entity: the final years of the seventh century BCE
(approximately 610-600 BCE) and the first decades of the sixth century
(until sometime after 586). These were the years during which the
growing power of the Babylonian Empire became more and more
threatening to Judah, culminating with the siege of Jerusalem in 598697 (during which the king, Jehoiakim, died and his son Jehoiachin
[Jeconiah or Coniah] assumed the throne). Jehoiachin was deposed and
replaced by his uncle, Zedekiah, and the deposed king and a portion of
the ruling classes (including the priest-prophet Ezekiel; see the
1486

JEREMIAH 1487

Introduction to Ezekiel) were exiled to Babylon. The ensuing decade
saw increasingly desperate attempts on the part of Judah to free itself
from the Babylonian overlordship, but a final revolt by Zedekiah (based
partly on the promises of help from Egypt that were unfulfilled)
brought about the Babylonian invasion of Jerusalem and the
destruction of the city and the Temple in 586 BCE, at which point the
rest of the rulers were exiled as well. Though Jeremiah wished to
remain in Judah with Gedaliah, the governor appointed by the
Babylonians, Gedaliah was assassinated, along with a contingent of
Babylonian soldiers. Fearing indiscriminate reprisals by the Babylonians,
many of the remaining Judean leaders fled to Egypt, taking the
protesting Jeremiah with them (chs 40-44).
HT

TH

Understanding the history behind the book of Jeremiah, and how the
prophet's statements relate to that history, is made more difficult by
the complexity of the organization of the book itself. Alongside the
typical prophetic oracles, which are in poetical form, Jeremiah also
contains a good deal of prose — often written in the third person,
influenced by the language and theology of Deuteronomy and the
Deuteronomistic History, and including the historical appendix (ch 52)
borrowed from 2 Kings 24.28-25.30. There are many doublets (7.1-15 ||
26.4-6; 7.32 || 19.6; 16.14-15 || 23.7-8). The relationship between the
standard Hebrew text and other ancient versions of the book is
confusing. An apparently artificial system of superstitions and
chronological notes may have been inserted to make the book conform
to the Deuteronomistic History. All these qualities suggest that the
book represents the product of a long period of editorial activity
lasting well into the Hellenistic period (see 33.14-26). According to the
structure imposed on the book by the prose superscriptions, it consists
essentially of a collection of oracles against Judah and Jerusalem,
which Jeremiah dictated to his aide Baruch (1.4-20.18, from the time of
Josiah and Jehoiakim; 21.1-25.14, from the time of Zedekiah); narratives
about Jeremiah's prophetic activity (chs 26-35; 36-45); and a group of
oracles against the foreign nations (25.15-38; chs 45-51), together with
an introduction (1.1-3) and the historical appendix (ch 52).

1487

JEREMIAH 1488

Scholars offer various models to explain formation of the book. Some
point to what they consider to be signs that the book was compiled
over a period of time from smaller collections of oracles. One clue to
such smaller collections may be the first two scrolls of judgment oracles
that Jeremiah is said to have dictated to Baruch (ch 36). The second
scroll (36.32) could have formed that nucleus for the material now
found in 2.1-20.18. Another small collection may have been the scroll of
consolation (30.1-3), which in its original form probably contained much
of what is now in chs 30-31. Against this view, however, others point
out that the narrative concerning Baruch's scrolls may not be reliable as
a guide to the history of the formation of the book because it occurs in
the prose narratives of chs 36-44, which are slanted in favor of
Babylonian exiles. Also, the narrative clearly contrasts the behavior of
the king (ch 36) with the account of Josiah's reaction to the discovery
of the scroll of the law (2 Kings 22-23) and may therefore have been
written with this aim in mind. If the book of Jeremiah cannot be traced
to Baruch's two scrolls, it presumably grew by means of successive
additions and redactions of some now unidentifiable core of
Jeremiah's preaching.
Perhaps the strongest evidence for this redactional model is that the
present Hebrew text differs substantially from the Greek version (the
Septuagint) in both content and order. Thus the Septuagint does not
contain several passages (e.g., 33.14-26) and combines the oracles
against the foreign nations into a single section following 25.14,
though in a different order. In addition, there are many smaller
differences from verse to verse. Remarkably, among the portions of the
text of Jeremiah in Hebrew that were found among the Dead Sea
Scrolls are not only those that reflect the standard Hebrew text but
also those that reflect the text tradition represented by the Septuagint.
It is likely, then, that these two text traditions represent the
contrasting editorial work of the book of Jeremiah that took place in
Egypt (the Septuagint tradition) and in Palestine or Babylon (the
traditional Hebrew text).

1488

JEREMIAH 1489

Much of Jeremiah's prophetic preaching is based on the theme of the
covenant relationship between God and the people of Israel and
Judah. Drawing on traditions at home in northern Israel, Jeremiah
considered the covenant to be a conditional one, which could be
broken by the people's persistent apostasy. Influenced by Hosea,
Jeremiah used imagery of the people as an unfaithful wife and as
rebellious children (chs 2-3). Such infidelity made judgment virtually
inevitable. In his vivid poetic oracles Jeremiah dramatizes the grief
experienced by God, prophet, and people (e.g., chs 4-6). Interspersed
with the words of judgment and anguish, however, are a number of
references to repentance and the renewal of the covenant relationship.
Because of the complex ways in which the book has been edited, it is
difficult to determine whether Jeremiah considered it possible that the
people's repentance might forestall judgment or whether he
considered repentance and a new beginning possible only after the
judgment had fallen. In the prose narratives about Jeremiah during the
siege and fall of Jerusalem, Jeremiah is represented as insisting that
there would be a future for the people in the land of Judah even after
the Babylonian conquest (chs 32, 42). The theme of restoration is
strongest in chs 30-31, where a future is envisioned in which a new
covenant will be made with Israel and Judah, one that will not be
broken (31.33).

[Jeremiah 1]
Superscription
1 The words of Jeremiah son of Hilkiah, of the priests who were in
Anathoth in the land of Benjamin, 2 to whom the word of the LORD
came in the days of King Josiah son of Amon of Judah, in the
thirteenth year of his reign. 3 It came also in the days of King
Jehoiakim son of Josiah of Judah, and until the end of the eleventh
year of King Zedekiah son of Josiah of Judah, until the captivity of
Jerusalem in the fifth month.

1489

JEREMIAH 1490

Jeremiah's call and related visions
4 Now the word of the LORD came to me saying,
5

"Before I formed you in the womb I knew you,
and before you were born I consecrated you;
I appointed you a prophet to the nations."
6 Then I said, "Ah, Lord GOD! Truly I do not know how to speak, for I
am only a boy." 7 But the LORD said to me,
"Do not say, 'I am only a boy';
for you shall go to all to whom I send you,
and you shall speak whatever I command you.
8
Do not be afraid of them,
for I am with you to deliver you,
says the LORD."
9 Then the LORD put out his hand and touched my mouth; and the LORD
said to me,
"Now I have put my words in your mouth.
10
See, today I appoint you over nations and over kingdoms,
to pluck up and to pull down,
to destroy and to overthrow,
to build and to plant."
11 The word of the LORD came to me, saying, "Jeremiah, what do you
see?" And I said, "I see a branch of an almond tree." 12 Then the LORD
said to me, "You have seen well, for I am watching over my word to
perform it." 13 The word of the LORD came to me a second time, saying,
"What do you see?" And I said, "I see a boiling pot, tilted away from
the north."
14 Then the LORD said to me: Out of the north disaster shall break out
on all the inhabitants of the land. 15 For now I am calling all the tribes
of the kingdoms of the north, says the LORD; and they shall come and
all of them shall set their thrones at the entrance of the gates of
Jerusalem, against all its surrounding walls and against all the cities of
Judah. 16 And I will utter my judgments against them, for all their
wickedness in forsaking me; they have made offerings to other gods,
and worshiped the works of their own hands. 17 But you, gird up your

1490

JEREMIAH 1491

loins; stand up and tell them everything that I command you. Do not
break down before them, or I will break you before them. 18 And I for
my part have made you today a fortified city, an iron pillar, and a
bronze wall, against the whole land — against the kings of Judah, its
princes, its priests, and the people of the land. 19 They will fight
against you; but they shall not prevail against you, for I am with you,
says the LORD, to deliver you.
[Jeremiah 2]
Introduction to Jeremiah's message; the apostasy of Israel
1 The word of the LORD came to me, saying: 2 Go and proclaim in the
hearing of Jerusalem, Thus says the LORD:
I remember the devotion of your youth,
your love as a bride,
how you followed me in the wilderness,
in a land not sown.
3 Israel was holy to the LORD,
the first fruits of his harvest.
All who ate of it were held guilty;
disaster came upon them,
says the LORD.
4 Hear the word of the LORD, O house of Jacob, and all the families of
the house of Israel. 5 Thus says the LORD:
What wrong did your ancestors find in me
that they went far from me,
and went after worthless things, and became worthless
themselves?
6 They did not say, "Where is the LORD
who brought us up from the land of Egypt,
who led us in the wilderness,
in a land of deserts and pits,
in a land of drought and deep darkness,
in a land that no one passes through,
where no one lives?"

1491

JEREMIAH 1492

7 I brought you into a plentiful land
to eat its fruits and its good things.
But when you entered you defiled my land,
and made my heritage an abomination.
8 The priests did not say, "Where is the LORD?"
Those who handle the law did not know me;
the rulers transgressed against me;
the prophets prophesied by Baal,
and went after things that do not profit.
9 Therefore once more I accuse you,
says the LORD,
and I accuse your children's children.
10 Cross to the coasts of Cyprus and look,
send to Kedar and examine with care;
see if there has ever been such a thing.
11 Has a nation changed its gods,
even though they are no gods?
But my people have changed their glory
for something that does not profit.
12 Be appalled, O heavens, at this,
be shocked, be utterly desolate,
says the LORD,
13 for my people have committed two evils:
they have forsaken me,
the fountain of living water,
and dug out cisterns for themselves,
cracked cisterns
that can hold no water.
14 Is Israel a slave? Is he a homeborn servant?
Why then has he become plunder?
15 The lions have roared against him,
they have roared loudly.
They have made his land a waste;
his cities are in ruins, without inhabitant.
16 Moreover, the people of Memphis and Tahpanhes
have broken the crown of your head.

1492

JEREMIAH 1493

17 Have you not brought this upon yourself
by forsaking the LORD your God,
while he led you in the way?
18 What then do you gain by going to Egypt,
to drink the waters of the Nile?
Or what do you gain by going to Assyria,
to drink the waters of the Euphrates?
19 Your wickedness will punish you,
and your apostasies will convict you.
Know and see that it is evil and bitter
for you to forsake the LORD your God;
the fear of me is not in you,
says the Lord GOD of hosts.
20 For long ago you broke your yoke
and burst your bonds,
and you said, "I will not serve!"
On every high hill
and under every green tree
you sprawled and played the whore.
21 Yet I planted you as a choice vine,
from the purest stock.
How then did you turn degenerate
and become a wild vine?
22 Though you wash yourself with lye
and use much soap,
the stain of your guilt is still before me,
says the Lord GOD.
23 How can you say, "I am not defiled,
I have not gone after the Baals"?
Look at your way in the valley;
know what you have done —
a restive young camel interlacing her tracks,
24
a wild ass at home in the wilderness,
in her heat sniffing the wind!
Who can restrain her lust?
None who seek her need weary themselves;
in her month they will find her.

1493

JEREMIAH 1494

25 Keep your feet from going unshod
and your throat from thirst.
But you said, "It is hopeless,
for I have loved strangers,
and after them I will go."
26 As a thief is shamed when caught,
so the house of Israel shall be shamed —
they, their kings, their officials,
their priests, and their prophets,
27 who say to a tree, "You are my father,"
and to a stone, "You gave me birth."
For they have turned their backs to me,
and not their faces.
But in the time of their trouble they say,
"Come and save us!"
28 But where are your gods
that you made for yourself?
Let them come, if they can save you,
in your time of trouble;
for you have as many gods
as you have towns, O Judah.
29 Why do you complain against me?
You have all rebelled against me,
says the LORD.
30 In vain I have struck down your children;
they accepted no correction.
Your own sword devoured your prophets
like a ravening lion.
31 And you, O generation, behold the word of the LORD!
Have I been a wilderness to Israel,
or a land of thick darkness?
Why then do my people say, "We are free,
we will come to you no more"?

1494

JEREMIAH 1495

32 Can a girl forget her ornaments,
or a bride her attire?
Yet my people have forgotten me,
days without number.
33 How well you direct your course
to seek lovers!
So that even to wicked women
you have taught your ways.
34 Also on your skirts is found
the lifeblood of the innocent poor,
though you did not catch them breaking in.
Yet in spite of all these things
35 you say, "I am innocent;
surely his anger has turned from me."
Now I am bringing you to judgment
for saying, "I have not sinned."
36 How lightly you gad about,
changing your ways!
You shall be put to shame by Egypt
as you were put to shame by Assyria.
37 From there also you will come away
with your hands on your head;
for the LORD has rejected those in whom you trust,
and you will not prosper through them.
[Jeremiah 3]
The possibility of repentance and the conditions for restoration
1 If a man divorces his wife
and she goes from him
and becomes another man's wife,
will he return to her?
Would not such a land be greatly polluted?
You have played the whore with many lovers;
and would you return to me?
says the LORD.

1495

JEREMIAH 1496

2 Look up to the bare heights, and see!
Where have you not been lain with?
By the waysides you have sat waiting for lovers,
like a nomad in the wilderness.
You have polluted the land
with your whoring and wickedness.
3 Therefore the showers have been withheld,
and the spring rain has not come;
yet you have the forehead of a whore,
you refuse to be ashamed.
4 Have you not just now called to me,
"My Father, you are the friend of my youth —
5 will he be angry forever,
will he be indignant to the end?"
This is how you have spoken,
but you have done all the evil that you could.
6 The LORD said to me in the days of King Josiah: Have you seen what
she did, that faithless one, Israel, how she went up on every high hill
and under every green tree, and played the whore there? 7 And I
thought, "After she has done all this she will return to me"; but she did
not return, and her false sister Judah saw it. 8 She saw that for all the
adulteries of that faithless one, Israel, I had sent her away with a
decree of divorce; yet her false sister Judah did not fear, but she too
went and played the whore. 9 Because she took her whoredom so
lightly, she polluted the land, committing adultery with stone and tree.
10 Yet for all this her false sister Judah did not return to me with her
whole heart, but only in pretense, says the LORD.
11 Then the LORD said to me: Faithless Israel has shown herself less
guilty than false Judah. 12 Go, and proclaim these words toward the
north, and say:
Return, faithless Israel,
says the LORD.
I will not look on you in anger,
for I am merciful,
says the LORD;
I will not be angry forever.

1496

JEREMIAH 1497

13 Only acknowledge your guilt,
that you have rebelled against the LORD your God,
and scattered your favors among strangers under every green
tree, and have not obeyed my voice,
says the LORD.
14 Return, O faithless children,
says the LORD,
for I am your master;
I will take you, one from a city and two from a family,
and I will bring you to Zion.
15 I will give you shepherds after my own heart, who will feed you with
knowledge and understanding. 16 And when you have multiplied and
increased in the land, in those days, says the LORD, they shall no longer
say, "The ark of the covenant of the LORD." It shall not come to mind,
or be remembered, or missed; nor shall another one be made. 17 At
that time Jerusalem shall be called the throne of the LORD, and all
nations shall gather to it, to the presence of the LORD in Jerusalem, and
they shall no longer stubbornly follow their own evil will. 18 In those
days the house of Judah shall join the house of Israel, and together
they shall come from the land of the north to the land that I gave your
ancestors for a heritage.
19 I thought
how I would set you among my children,
and give you a pleasant land,
the most beautiful heritage of all the nations.
And I thought you would call me, My Father,
and would not turn from following me.
20 Instead, as a faithless wife leaves her husband,
so you have been faithless to me, O house of Israel,
says the LORD.
21 A voice on the bare heights is heard,
the plaintive weeping of Israel's children,
because they have perverted their way,
they have forgotten the LORD their God:

1497

JEREMIAH 1498

22 Return, O faithless children,
I will heal your faithlessness.
"Here we come to you;
for you are the LORD our God.
23 Truly the hills are a delusion,
the orgies on the mountains.
Truly in the LORD our God
is the salvation of Israel.
24 "But from our youth the shameful thing has devoured all for which
our ancestors had labored, their flocks and their herds, their sons and
their daughters. 25 Let us lie down in our shame, and let our dishonor
cover us; for we have sinned against the LORD our God, we and our
ancestors, from our youth even to this day; and we have not obeyed
the voice of the LORD our God."
[Jeremiah 4]
1 If you return, O Israel,
says the LORD,
if you return to me,
if you remove your abominations from my presence,
and do not waver,
2 and if you swear, "As the LORD lives!"
in truth, in justice, and in uprightness,
then nations shall be blessed by him,
and by him they shall boast.
The foe from the north; a warning
3 For thus says the LORD to the people of Judah and to the inhabitants
of Jerusalem:
Break up your fallow ground,
and do not sow among thorns.

1498

JEREMIAH 1499

4 Circumcise yourselves to the LORD,
remove the foreskin of your hearts,
O people of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem,
or else my wrath will go forth like fire,
and burn with no one to quench it,
because of the evil of your doings.
The invading foe from the north, a recurring theme in Jeremiah
5 Declare in Judah, and proclaim in Jerusalem, and say:
Blow the trumpet through the land;
shout aloud and say,
"Gather together, and let us go
into the fortified cities!"
6 Raise a standard toward Zion,
flee for safety, do not delay,
for I am bringing evil from the north,
and a great destruction.
7 A lion has gone up from its thicket,
a destroyer of nations has set out;
he has gone out from his place
to make your land a waste;
your cities will be ruins
without inhabitant.
8 Because of this put on sackcloth,
lament and wail:
"The fierce anger of the LORD
has not turned away from us."
9 On that day, says the LORD, courage shall fail the king and the
officials; the priests shall be appalled and the prophets astounded. 10
Then I said, "Ah, Lord GOD, how utterly you have deceived this people
and Jerusalem, saying, 'It shall be well with you,' even while the sword
is at the throat!"
11 At that time it will be said to this people and to Jerusalem: A hot
wind comes from me out of the bare heights in the desert toward my

1499

JEREMIAH 1500

poor people, not to winnow or cleanse — 12 a wind too strong for that.
Now it is I who speak in judgment against them.
13 Look! He comes up like clouds,
his chariots like the whirlwind;
his horses are swifter than eagles —
woe to us, for we are ruined!
14 O Jerusalem, wash your heart clean of wickedness
so that you may be saved.
How long shall your evil schemes
lodge within you?
15 For a voice declares from Dan
and proclaims disaster from Mount Ephraim.
16 Tell the nations, "Here they are!"
Proclaim against Jerusalem,
"Besiegers come from a distant land;
they shout against the cities of Judah.
17 They have closed in around her like watchers of a field,
because she has rebelled against me,
says the LORD.
18 Your ways and your doings
have brought this upon you.
This is your doom; how bitter it is!
It has reached your very heart."
19 My anguish, my anguish! I writhe in pain!
Oh, the walls of my heart!
My heart is beating wildly;
I cannot keep silent;
for I hear the sound of the trumpet,
the alarm of war.
20 Disaster overtakes disaster,
the whole land is laid waste.
Suddenly my tents are destroyed,
my curtains in a moment.
21 How long must I see the standard,
and hear the sound of the trumpet?

1500

JEREMIAH 1501

22 "For my people are foolish,
they do not know me;
they are stupid children,
they have no understanding.
They are skilled in doing evil,
but do not know how to do good."
23 I looked on the earth, and lo, it was waste and void;
and to the heavens, and they had no light.
24 I looked on the mountains, and lo, they were quaking,
and all the hills moved to and fro.
25 I looked, and lo, there was no one at all,
and all the birds of the air had fled.
26 I looked, and lo, the fruitful land was a desert,
and all its cities were laid in ruins
before the LORD, before his fierce anger.
27 For thus says the LORD: The whole land shall be a desolation; yet I
will not make a full end.
28 Because of this the earth shall mourn,
and the heavens above grow black;
for I have spoken, I have purposed;
I have not relented nor will I turn back.
29 At the noise of horseman and archer
every town takes to flight;
they enter thickets; they climb among rocks;
all the towns are forsaken,
and no one lives in them.
30 And you, O desolate one,
what do you mean that you dress in crimson,
that you deck yourself with ornaments of gold,
that you enlarge your eyes with paint?
In vain you beautify yourself.
Your lovers despise you;
they seek your life.

1501

JEREMIAH 1502

31 For I heard a cry as of a woman in labor,
anguish as of one bringing forth her first child,
the cry of daughter Zion gasping for breath,
stretching out her hands,
"Woe is me! I am fainting before killers!"
[Jeremiah 5]
The corruptions that bring judgment
1 Run to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem,
look around and take note!
Search its squares and see
if you can find one person
who acts justly
and seeks truth —
so that I may pardon Jerusalem.
2 Although they say, "As the LORD lives,"
yet they swear falsely.
3 O LORD, do your eyes not look for truth?
You have struck them,
but they felt no anguish;
you have consumed them,
but they refused to take correction.
They have made their faces harder than rock;
they have refused to turn back.
4 Then I said, "These are only the poor,
they have no sense;
for they do not know the way of the LORD,
the law of their God.
5 Let me go to the rich
and speak to them;
surely they know the way of the LORD,
the law of their God."
But they all alike had broken the yoke,
they had burst the bonds.

1502

JEREMIAH 1503

6 Therefore a lion from the forest shall kill them,
a wolf from the desert shall destroy them.
A leopard is watching against their cities;
everyone who goes out of them shall be torn in pieces —
because their transgressions are many,
their apostasies are great.
7 How can I pardon you?
Your children have forsaken me,
and have sworn by those who are no gods.
When I fed them to the full,
they committed adultery
and trooped to the houses of prostitutes.
8 They were well-fed lusty stallions,
each neighing for his neighbor's wife.
9 Shall I not punish them for these things?
says the LORD;
and shall I not bring retribution
on a nation such as this?
10 Go up through her vine-rows and destroy,
but do not make a full end;
strip away her branches,
for they are not the LORD's.
11 For the house of Israel and the house of Judah
have been utterly faithless to me,
says the LORD.
12 They have spoken falsely of the LORD,
and have said, "He will do nothing.
No evil will come upon us,
and we shall not see sword or famine."
13 The prophets are nothing but wind,
for the word is not in them.
Thus shall it be done to them!
14 Therefore thus says the LORD, the God of hosts:
Because they have spoken this word,
I am now making my words in your mouth a fire,
and this people wood, and the fire shall devour them.

1503

JEREMIAH 1504

15 I am going to bring upon you
a nation from far away, O house of Israel,
says the LORD.
It is an enduring nation,
it is an ancient nation,
a nation whose language you do not know,
nor can you understand what they say.
16 Their quiver is like an open tomb;
all of them are mighty warriors.
17 They shall eat up your harvest and your food;
they shall eat up your sons and your daughters;
they shall eat up your flocks and your herds;
they shall eat up your vines and your fig trees;
they shall destroy with the sword
your fortified cities in which you trust.
18 But even in those days, says the LORD, I will not make a full end of
you. 19 And when your people say, "Why has the LORD our God done
all these things to us?" you shall say to them, "As you have forsaken
me and served foreign gods in your land, so you shall serve strangers in
a land that is not yours."
20 Declare this in the house of Jacob,
proclaim it in Judah:
21 Hear this, O foolish and senseless people,
who have eyes, but do not see,
who have ears, but do not hear.
22 Do you not fear me? says the LORD;
Do you not tremble before me?
I placed the sand as a boundary for the sea,
a perpetual barrier that it cannot pass;
though the waves toss, they cannot prevail,
though they roar, they cannot pass over it.
23 But this people has a stubborn and rebellious heart;
they have turned aside and gone away.

1504

JEREMIAH 1505

24 They do not say in their hearts,
"Let us fear the LORD our God,
who gives the rain in its season,
the autumn rain and the spring rain,
and keeps for us
the weeks appointed for the harvest."
25 Your iniquities have turned these away,
and your sins have deprived you of good.
26 For scoundrels are found among my people;
they take over the goods of others.
Like fowlers they set a trap;
they catch human beings.
27 Like a cage full of birds,
their houses are full of treachery;
therefore they have become great and rich,
28 they have grown fat and sleek.
They know no limits in deeds of wickedness;
they do not judge with justice
the cause of the orphan, to make it prosper,
and they do not defend the rights of the needy.
29 Shall I not punish them for these things?
says the LORD,
and shall I not bring retribution
on a nation such as this?
30 An appalling and horrible thing
has happened in the land:
31 the prophets prophesy falsely,
and the priests rule as the prophets direct;
my people love to have it so,
but what will you do when the end comes?

1505

JEREMIAH 1506

[Jeremiah 6]
The description of the approach of the foe from the north resumes
1 Flee for safety, O children of Benjamin,
from the midst of Jerusalem!
Blow the trumpet in Tekoa,
and raise a signal on Beth-haccherem;
for evil looms out of the north,
and great destruction.
2 I have likened daughter Zion
to the loveliest pasture.
3 Shepherds with their flocks shall come against her.
They shall pitch their tents around her;
they shall pasture, all in their places.
4 "Prepare war against her;
up, and let us attack at noon!"
"Woe to us, for the day declines,
the shadows of evening lengthen!"
5 "Up, and let us attack by night,
and destroy her palaces!"
6 For thus says the LORD of hosts:
Cut down her trees;
cast up a siege ramp against Jerusalem.
This is the city that must be punished;
there is nothing but oppression within her.
7 As a well keeps its water fresh,
so she keeps fresh her wickedness;
violence and destruction are heard within her;
sickness and wounds are ever before me.
8 Take warning, O Jerusalem,
or I shall turn from you in disgust,
and make you a desolation,
an uninhabited land.

1506

JEREMIAH 1507

Jerusalem's obduracy
9 Thus says the LORD of hosts:
Glean thoroughly as a vine
the remnant of Israel;
like a grape-gatherer, pass your hand again
over its branches.
10 To whom shall I speak and give warning,
that they may hear?
See, their ears are closed,
they cannot listen.
The word of the LORD is to them an object of scorn;
they take no pleasure in it.
11 But I am full of the wrath of the LORD;
I am weary of holding it in.
Pour it out on the children in the street,
and on the gatherings of young men as well;
both husband and wife shall be taken,
the old folk and the very aged.
12 Their houses shall be turned over to others,
their fields and wives together;
for I will stretch out my hand
against the inhabitants of the land,
says the LORD.
13 For from the least to the greatest of them,
everyone is greedy for unjust gain;
and from prophet to priest,
everyone deals falsely.
14 They have treated the wound of my people carelessly,
saying, "Peace, peace,"
when there is no peace.

1507

JEREMIAH 1508

15 They acted shamefully, they committed abomination;
yet they were not ashamed,
they did not know how to blush.
Therefore they shall fall among those who fall;
at the time that I punish them, they shall be overthrown,
says the LORD.
Jerusalem is without excuse
16 Thus says the LORD:
Stand at the crossroads, and look,
and ask for the ancient paths,
where the good way lies; and walk in it,
and find rest for your souls.
But they said, "We will not walk in it."
17 Also I raised up sentinels for you:
"Give heed to the sound of the trumpet!"
But they said, "We will not give heed."
18 Therefore hear, O nations,
and know, O congregation, what will happen to them.
19 Hear, O earth; I am going to bring disaster on this people,
the fruit of their schemes,
because they have not given heed to my words;
and as for my teaching, they have rejected it.
20 Of what use to me is frankincense that comes from Sheba,
or sweet cane from a distant land?
Your burnt offerings are not acceptable,
nor are your sacrifices pleasing to me.
21 Therefore thus says the LORD:
See, I am laying before this people
stumbling blocks against which they shall stumble;
parents and children together,
neighbor and friend shall perish.

1508

JEREMIAH 1509

The foe from the north
22 Thus says the LORD:
See, a people is coming from the land of the north,
a great nation is stirring from the farthest parts of the earth.
23 They grasp the bow and the javelin,
they are cruel and have no mercy,
their sound is like the roaring sea;
they ride on horses,
equipped like a warrior for battle,
against you, O daughter Zion!
The people's lament at the enemy's approach
24 "We have heard news of them,
our hands fall helpless;
anguish has taken hold of us,
pain as of a woman in labor.
25 Do not go out into the field,
or walk on the road;
for the enemy has a sword,
terror is on every side."
26 O my poor people, put on sackcloth,
and roll in ashes;
make mourning as for an only child,
most bitter lamentation:
for suddenly the destroyer
will come upon us.
Jeremiah, the assayer
27 I have made you a tester and a refiner among my people
so that you may know and test their ways.
28 They are all stubbornly rebellious,
going about with slanders;
they are bronze and iron,
all of them act corruptly.

1509

JEREMIAH 1510

29 The bellows blow fiercely,
the lead is consumed by the fire;
in vain the refining goes on,
for the wicked are not removed.
30 They are called "rejected silver,"
for the LORD has rejected them.
[Jeremiah 7]
Judah's fate is sealed; the Temple sermon
1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD: 2 Stand in the gate of
the LORD's house, and proclaim there this word, and say, Hear the word
of the LORD, all you people of Judah, you that enter these gates to
worship the LORD. 3 Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel:
Amend your ways and your doings, and let me dwell with you in this
place. 4 Do not trust in these deceptive words: "This is the temple of
the LORD, the temple of the LORD, the temple of the LORD."
5 For if you truly amend your ways and your doings, if you truly act
justly one with another, 6 if you do not oppress the alien, the orphan,
and the widow, or shed innocent blood in this place, and if you do not
go after other gods to your own hurt, 7 then I will dwell with you in
this place, in the land that I gave of old to your ancestors forever and
ever.
8 Here you are, trusting in deceptive words to no avail. 9 Will you steal,
murder, commit adultery, swear falsely, make offerings to Baal, and go
after other gods that you have not known, 10 and then come and stand
before me in this house, which is called by my name, and say, "We are
safe!" — only to go on doing all these abominations? 11 Has this house,
which is called by my name, become a den of robbers in your sight?
You know, I too am watching, says the LORD. 12 Go now to my place
that was in Shiloh, where I made my name dwell at first, and see what I
did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel. 13 And now, because
you have done all these things, says the LORD, and when I spoke to you
persistently, you did not listen, and when I called you, you did not
answer, 14 therefore I will do to the house that is called by my name, in
which you trust, and to the place that I gave to you and to your

1510

JEREMIAH 1511

ancestors, just what I did to Shiloh. 15 And I will cast you out of my
sight, just as I cast out all your kinsfolk, all the offspring of Ephraim.
Intercession is futile: Judah has gone too far in idolatry
16 As for you, do not pray for this people, do not raise a cry or prayer
on their behalf, and do not intercede with me, for I will not hear you.
17 Do you not see what they are doing in the towns of Judah and in
the streets of Jerusalem? 18 The children gather wood, the fathers
kindle fire, and the women knead dough, to make cakes for the queen
of heaven; and they pour out drink offerings to other gods, to provoke
me to anger. 19 Is it I whom they provoke? says the LORD. Is it not
themselves, to their own hurt? 20 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: My
anger and my wrath shall be poured out on this place, on human
beings and animals, on the trees of the field and the fruit of the
ground; it will burn and not be quenched.
21 Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Add your burnt
offerings to your sacrifices, and eat the flesh. 22 For in the day that I
brought your ancestors out of the land of Egypt, I did not speak to
them or command them concerning burnt offerings and sacrifices. 23
But this command I gave them, "Obey my voice, and I will be your God,
and you shall be my people; and walk only in the way that I command
you, so that it may be well with you." 24 Yet they did not obey or
incline their ear, but, in the stubbornness of their evil will, they walked
in their own counsels, and looked backward rather than forward. 25
From the day that your ancestors came out of the land of Egypt until
this day, I have persistently sent all my servants the prophets to them,
day after day; 26 yet they did not listen to me, or pay attention, but
they stiffened their necks. They did worse than their ancestors did.
27 So you shall speak all these words to them, but they will not listen to
you. You shall call to them, but they will not answer you. 28 You shall
say to them: This is the nation that did not obey the voice of the LORD
their God, and did not accept discipline; truth has perished; it is cut off
from their lips.

1511

JEREMIAH 1512

29 Cut off your hair and throw it away;
raise a lamentation on the bare heights,
for the LORD has rejected and forsaken
the generation that provoked his wrath.
30 For the people of Judah have done evil in my sight, says the LORD;
they have set their abominations in the house that is called by my
name, defiling it. 31 And they go on building the high place of
Topheth, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons
and their daughters in the fire — which I did not command, nor did it
come into my mind. 32 Therefore, the days are surely coming, says the
LORD, when it will no more be called Topheth, or the valley of the son
of Hinnom, but the valley of Slaughter: for they will bury in Topheth
until there is no more room. 33 The corpses of this people will be food
for the birds of the air, and for the animals of the earth; and no one
will frighten them away. 34 And I will bring to an end the sound of
mirth and gladness, the voice of the bride and bridegroom in the cities
of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem; for the land shall become a
waste.
[Jeremiah 8]
1 At that time, says the LORD, the bones of the kings of Judah, the
bones of its officials, the bones of the priests, the bones of the
prophets, and the bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be
brought out of their tombs; 2 and they shall be spread before the sun
and the moon and all the host of heaven, which they have loved and
served, which they have followed, and which they have inquired of and
worshiped; and they shall not be gathered or buried; they shall be like
dung on the surface of the ground. 3 Death shall be preferred to life by
all the remnant that remains of this evil family in all the places where I
have driven them, says the LORD of hosts.
Miscellaneous oracles continuing the theme of Judah's sealed fate
4 You shall say to them, Thus says the LORD:
When people fall, do they not get up again?
If they go astray, do they not turn back?

1512

JEREMIAH 1513

5 Why then has this people turned away
in perpetual backsliding?
They have held fast to deceit,
they have refused to return.
6 I have given heed and listened,
but they do not speak honestly;
no one repents of wickedness,
saying, "What have I done!"
All of them turn to their own course,
like a horse plunging headlong into battle.
7 Even the stork in the heavens
knows its times;
and the turtledove, swallow, and crane
observe the time of their coming;
but my people do not know
the ordinance of the LORD.
8 How can you say, "We are wise,
and the law of the LORD is with us,"
when, in fact, the false pen of the scribes
has made it into a lie?
9 The wise shall be put to shame,
they shall be dismayed and taken;
since they have rejected the word of the LORD,
what wisdom is in them?
10 Therefore I will give their wives to others
and their fields to conquerors,
because from the least to the greatest
everyone is greedy for unjust gain;
from prophet to priest
everyone deals falsely.
11 They have treated the wound of my people carelessly,
saying, "Peace, peace,"
when there is no peace.

1513

JEREMIAH 1514

12 They acted shamefully, they committed abomination;
yet they were not at all ashamed,
they did not know how to blush.
Therefore they shall fall among those who fall;
at the time when I punish them, they shall be overthrown,
says the LORD.
13 When I wanted to gather them, says the LORD,
there are no grapes on the vine,
nor figs on the fig tree;
even the leaves are withered,
and what I gave them has passed away from them.
14 Why do we sit still?
Gather together, let us go into the fortified cities
and perish there;
for the LORD our God has doomed us to perish,
and has given us poisoned water to drink,
because we have sinned against the LORD.
15 We look for peace, but find no good,
for a time of healing, but there is terror instead.
16 The snorting of their horses is heard from Dan;
at the sound of the neighing of their stallions
the whole land quakes.
They come and devour the land and all that fills it,
the city and those who live in it.
17 See, I am letting snakes loose among you,
adders that cannot be charmed,
and they shall bite you,
says the LORD.
Jerusalem's lament over Judah
18 My joy is gone, grief is upon me,
my heart is sick.

1514

JEREMIAH 1515

19 Hark, the cry of my poor people
from far and wide in the land:
"Is the LORD not in Zion?
Is her King not in her?"
("Why have they provoked me to anger with their images,
with their foreign idols?")
20 "The harvest is past, the summer is ended,
and we are not saved."
21 For the hurt of my poor people I am hurt,
I mourn, and dismay has taken hold of me.
22 Is there no balm in Gilead?
Is there no physician there?
Why then has the health of my poor people
not been restored?
[Jeremiah 9]
1 O that my head were a spring of water,
and my eyes a fountain of tears,
so that I might weep day and night
for the slain of my poor people!
The LORD's response
2 O that I had in the desert
a traveler's lodging place,
that I might leave my people
and go away from them!
For they are all adulterers,
a band of traitors.
3 They bend their tongues like bows;
they have grown strong in the land for falsehood,
and not for truth; for they proceed from evil to evil,
and they do not know me, says the LORD.

1515

JEREMIAH 1516

4 Beware of your neighbors,
and put no trust in any of your kin;
for all your kin are supplanters,
and every neighbor goes around like a slanderer.
5 They all deceive their neighbors,
and no one speaks the truth;
they have taught their tongues to speak lies;
they commit iniquity and are too weary to repent.
6 Oppression upon oppression, deceit upon deceit!
They refuse to know me, says the LORD.
7 Therefore thus says the LORD of hosts:
I will now refine and test them,
for what else can I do with my sinful people?
8 Their tongue is a deadly arrow;
it speaks deceit through the mouth.
They all speak friendly words to their neighbors,
but inwardly are planning to lay an ambush.
9 Shall I not punish them for these things? says the LORD;
and shall I not bring retribution
on a nation such as this?
Lamentation over Zion
10 Take up weeping and wailing for the mountains,
and a lamentation for the pastures of the wilderness,
because they are laid waste so that no one passes through,
and the lowing of cattle is not heard;
both the birds of the air and the animals
have fled and are gone.
11 I will make Jerusalem a heap of ruins,
a lair of jackals;
and I will make the towns of Judah a desolation,
without inhabitant.
12 Who is wise enough to understand this? To whom has the mouth of
the LORD spoken, so that they may declare it? Why is the land ruined
and laid waste like a wilderness, so that no one passes through? 13 And

1516

JEREMIAH 1517

the LORD says: Because they have forsaken my law that I set before
them, and have not obeyed my voice, or walked in accordance with it,
14 but have stubbornly followed their own hearts and have gone after
the Baals, as their ancestors taught them. 15 Therefore thus says the
LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: I am feeding this people with
wormwood, and giving them poisonous water to drink. 16 I will scatter
them among nations that neither they nor their ancestors have known;
and I will send the sword after them, until I have consumed them.
17 Thus says the LORD of hosts:
Consider, and call for the mourning women to come;
send for the skilled women to come;
18 let them quickly raise a dirge over us,
so that our eyes may run down with tears,
and our eyelids flow with water.
19 For a sound of wailing is heard from Zion:
"How we are ruined!
We are utterly shamed,
because we have left the land,
because they have cast down our dwellings."
20 Hear, O women, the word of the LORD,
and let your ears receive the word of his mouth;
teach to your daughters a dirge,
and each to her neighbor a lament.
21 "Death has come up into our windows,
it has entered our palaces,
to cut off the children from the streets
and the young men from the squares."
22 Speak! Thus says the LORD:
"Human corpses shall fall
like dung upon the open field,
like sheaves behind the reaper,
and no one shall gather them."

1517

JEREMIAH 1518

True glory versus false religious behavior
23 Thus says the LORD: Do not let the wise boast in their wisdom, do not
let the mighty boast in their might, do not let the wealthy boast in
their wealth; 24 but let those who boast boast in this, that they
understand and know me, that I am the LORD; I act with steadfast love,
justice, and righteousness in the earth, for in these things I delight, says
the LORD.
25 The days are surely coming, says the LORD, when I will attend to all
those who are circumcised only in the foreskin: 26 Egypt, Judah, Edom,
the Ammonites, Moab, and all those with shaven temples who live in
the desert. For all these nations are uncircumcised, and all the house of
Israel is uncircumcised in heart.
[Jeremiah 10]
God and the idols
1 Hear the word that the LORD speaks to you, O house of Israel. 2 Thus
says the LORD:
Do not learn the way of the nations,
or be dismayed at the signs of the heavens;
for the nations are dismayed at them.
3 For the customs of the peoples are false:
a tree from the forest is cut down,
and worked with an ax by the hands of an artisan;
4 people deck it with silver and gold;
they fasten it with hammer and nails
so that it cannot move.
5 Their idols are like scarecrows in a cucumber field,
and they cannot speak;
they have to be carried,
for they cannot walk.
Do not be afraid of them,
for they cannot do evil,
nor is it in them to do good.

1518

JEREMIAH 1519

6 There is none like you, O LORD;
you are great, and your name is great in might.
7 Who would not fear you, O King of the nations?
For that is your due;
among all the wise ones of the nations
and in all their kingdoms
there is no one like you.
8 They are both stupid and foolish;
the instruction given by idols
is no better than wood!
9 Beaten silver is brought from Tarshish,
and gold from Uphaz.
They are the work of the artisan and of the hands
of the goldsmith; their clothing is blue and purple;
they are all the product of skilled workers.
10 But the LORD is the true God;
he is the living God and the everlasting King.
At his wrath the earth quakes,
and the nations cannot endure his indignation.
11 Thus shall you say to them: The gods who did not make the heavens
and the earth shall perish from the earth and from under the heavens.
12 It is he who made the earth by his power,
who established the world by his wisdom,
and by his understanding stretched out the heavens.
13 When he utters his voice, there is a tumult of waters in the heavens,
and he makes the mist rise from the ends of the earth.
He makes lightnings for the rain,
and he brings out the wind from his storehouses.
14 Everyone is stupid and without knowledge;
goldsmiths are all put to shame by their idols;
for their images are false,
and there is no breath in them.
15 They are worthless, a work of delusion;
at the time of their punishment they shall perish.

1519

JEREMIAH 1520

16 Not like these is the LORD, the portion of Jacob,
for he is the one who formed all things,
and Israel is the tribe of his inheritance;
the LORD of hosts is his name.
Prepare to leave
17 Gather up your bundle from the ground,
O you who live under siege!
18 For thus says the LORD:
I am going to sling out the inhabitants of the land
at this time,
and I will bring distress on them,
so that they shall feel it.
19 Woe is me because of my hurt!
My wound is severe.
But I said, "Truly this is my punishment,
and I must bear it."
20 My tent is destroyed,
and all my cords are broken;
my children have gone from me,
and they are no more;
there is no one to spread my tent again,
and to set up my curtains.
21 For the shepherds are stupid,
and do not inquire of the LORD;
therefore they have not prospered,
and all their flock is scattered.
22 Hear, a noise! Listen, it is coming —
a great commotion from the land of the north
to make the cities of Judah a desolation,
a lair of jackals.

1520

JEREMIAH 1521

A prayer
23 I know, O LORD, that the way of human beings is not in their
control, that mortals as they walk cannot direct their steps.
24 Correct me, O LORD, but in just measure;
not in your anger, or you will bring me to nothing.
25 Pour out your wrath on the nations that do not know you,
and on the peoples that do not call on your name;
for they have devoured Jacob;
they have devoured him and consumed him,
and have laid waste his habitation.
[Jeremiah 11]
Judah's fate is sealed, part two
1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD: 2 Hear the words of
this covenant, and speak to the people of Judah and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem. 3 You shall say to them, Thus says the LORD, the God of
Israel: Cursed be anyone who does not heed the words of this
covenant, 4 which I commanded your ancestors when I brought them
out of the land of Egypt, from the iron-smelter, saying, Listen to my
voice, and do all that I command you. So shall you be my people, and I
will be your God, 5 that I may perform the oath that I swore to your
ancestors, to give them a land flowing with milk and honey, as at this
day. Then I answered, "So be it, LORD."
6 And the LORD said to me: Proclaim all these words in the cities of
Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem: Hear the words of this covenant
and do them. 7 For I solemnly warned your ancestors when I brought
them up out of the land of Egypt, warning them persistently, even to
this day, saying, Obey my voice. 8 Yet they did not obey or incline their
ear, but everyone walked in the stubbornness of an evil will. So I
brought upon them all the words of this covenant, which I commanded
them to do, but they did not.

1521

JEREMIAH 1522

9 And the LORD said to me: Conspiracy exists among the people of
Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 10 They have turned back to
the iniquities of their ancestors of old, who refused to heed my words;
they have gone after other gods to serve them; the house of Israel and
the house of Judah have broken the covenant that I made with their
ancestors. 11 Therefore, thus says the LORD, assuredly I am going to
bring disaster upon them that they cannot escape; though they cry out
to me, I will not listen to them. 12 Then the cities of Judah and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem will go and cry out to the gods to whom they
make offerings, but they will never save them in the time of their
trouble. 13 For your gods have become as many as your towns, O
Judah; and as many as the streets of Jerusalem are the altars to shame
you have set up, altars to make offerings to Baal.
A fragmentary Lady Zion poem
14 As for you, do not pray for this people, or lift up a cry or prayer on
their behalf, for I will not listen when they call to me in the time of
their trouble. 15 What right has my beloved in my house, when she has
done vile deeds? Can vows and sacrificial flesh avert your doom? Can
you then exult? 16 The LORD once called you, "A green olive tree, fair
with goodly fruit"; but with the roar of a great tempest he will set fire
to it, and its branches will be consumed. 17 The LORD of hosts, who
planted you, has pronounced evil against you, because of the evil that
the house of Israel and the house of Judah have done, provoking me to
anger by making offerings to Baal.
Jeremiah's first personal lament; a plot against Jeremiah's life
18 It was the LORD who made it known to me, and I knew;
then you showed me their evil deeds.
19 But I was like a gentle lamb
led to the slaughter.
And I did not know it was against me
that they devised schemes, saying,
"Let us destroy the tree with its fruit,
let us cut him off from the land of the living,
so that his name will no longer be remembered!"

1522

JEREMIAH 1523

20 But you, O LORD of hosts, who judge righteously,
who try the heart and the mind,
let me see your retribution upon them,
for to you I have committed my cause.
21 Therefore thus says the LORD concerning the people of Anathoth,
who seek your life, and say, "You shall not prophesy in the name of
the LORD, or you will die by our hand" — 22 therefore thus says the
LORD of hosts: I am going to punish them; the young men shall die by
the sword; their sons and their daughters shall die by famine; 23 and
not even a remnant shall be left of them. For I will bring disaster upon
the people of Anathoth, the year of their punishment.
[Jeremiah 12]
1 You will be in the right, O LORD,
when I lay charges against you;
but let me put my case to you.
Why does the way of the guilty prosper?
Why do all who are treacherous thrive?
2 You plant them, and they take root;
they grow and bring forth fruit;
you are near in their mouths
yet far from their hearts.
3 But you, O LORD, know me;
You see me and test me — my heart is with you.
Pull them out like sheep for the slaughter,
and set them apart for the day of slaughter.
4 How long will the land mourn,
and the grass of every field wither?
For the wickedness of those who live in it
the animals and the birds are swept away,
and because people said, "He is blind to our ways."
5 If you have raced with foot-runners and they have wearied you,
how will you compete with horses?
And if in a safe land you fall down,
how will you fare in the thickets of the Jordan?

1523

JEREMIAH 1524

6 For even your kinsfolk and your own family,
even they have dealt treacherously with you;
they are in full cry after you;
do not believe them,
though they speak friendly words to you.
God's lament over Jerusalem
7 I have forsaken my house,
I have abandoned my heritage;
I have given the beloved of my heart
into the hands of her enemies.
8 My heritage has become to me
like a lion in the forest;
she has lifted up her voice against me —
therefore I hate her.
9 Is the hyena greedy for my heritage at my command?
Are the birds of prey all around her?
Go, assemble all the wild animals;
bring them to devour her.
10 Many shepherds have destroyed my vineyard,
they have trampled down my portion,
they have made my pleasant portion
a desolate wilderness.
11 They have made it a desolation;
desolate, it mourns to me.
The whole land is made desolate,
but no one lays it to heart.
12 Upon all the bare heights in the desert
spoilers have come;
for the sword of the LORD devours
from one end of the land to the other;
no one shall be safe.
13 They have sown wheat and have reaped thorns,
they have tired themselves out but profit nothing.
They shall be ashamed of their harvests
because of the fierce anger of the LORD.

1524

JEREMIAH 1525

Judah's neighbors
14 Thus says the LORD concerning all my evil neighbors who touch the
heritage that I have given my people Israel to inherit: I am about to
pluck them up from their land, and I will pluck up the house of Judah
from among them. 15 And after I have plucked them up, I will again
have compassion on them, and I will bring them again to their heritage
and to their land, everyone of them. 16 And then, if they will diligently
learn the ways of my people, to swear by my name, "As the LORD lives,"
as they taught my people to swear by Baal, then they shall be built up
in the midst of my people. 17 But if any nation will not listen, then I will
completely uproot it and destroy it, says the LORD.
[Jeremiah 13]
The symbolic act involving the loincloth
1 Thus said the LORD to me, "Go and buy yourself a linen loincloth, and
put it on your loins, but do not dip it in water." 2 So I bought a
loincloth according to the word of the LORD, and put it on my loins. 3
And the word of the LORD came to me a second time, saying, 4 "Take
the loincloth that you bought and are wearing, and go now to the
Euphrates, and hide it there in a cleft of the rock." 5 So I went, and hid
it by the Euphrates, as the LORD commanded me. 6 And after many
days the LORD said to me, "Go now to the Euphrates, and take from
there the loincloth that I commanded you to hide there." 7 Then I went
to the Euphrates, and dug, and I took the loincloth from the place
where I had hidden it. But now the loincloth was ruined; it was good
for nothing.
8 Then the word of the LORD came to me: 9 Thus says the LORD: Just so I
will ruin the pride of Judah and the great pride of Jerusalem. 10 This
evil people, who refuse to hear my words, who stubbornly follow their
own will and have gone after other gods to serve them and worship
them, shall be like this loincloth, which is good for nothing. 11 For as
the loincloth clings to one's loins, so I made the whole house of Israel
and the whole house of Judah cling to me, says the LORD, in order that
they might be for me a people, a name, a praise, and a glory. But they
would not listen.

1525

JEREMIAH 1526

The allegory of the wine jar
12 You shall speak to them this word: Thus says the LORD, the God of
Israel: Every wine-jar should be filled with wine. And they will say to
you, "Do you think we do not know that every wine-jar should be
filled with wine?" 13 Then you shall say to them: Thus says the LORD: I
am about to fill all the inhabitants of this land — the kings who sit on
David's throne, the priests, the prophets, and all the inhabitants of
Jerusalem — with drunkenness. 14 And I will dash them one against
another, parents and children together, says the LORD. I will not pity or
spare or have compassion when I destroy them.
The last opportunity for repentance
15 Hear and give ear; do not be haughty,
for the LORD has spoken.
16 Give glory to the LORD your God
before he brings darkness,
and before your feet stumble
on the mountains at twilight;
while you look for light,
he turns it into gloom
and makes it deep darkness.
17 But if you will not listen,
my soul will weep in secret for your pride;
my eyes will weep bitterly and run down with tears,
because the LORD's flock has been taken captive.
Exile
18 Say to the king and the queen mother:
"Take a lowly seat,
for your beautiful crown
has come down from your head."
19 The towns of the Negeb are shut up
with no one to open them;
all Judah is taken into exile,
wholly taken into exile.

1526

JEREMIAH 1527

Jerusalem's shame
20 Lift up your eyes and see
those who come from the north.
Where is the flock that was given you,
your beautiful flock?
21 What will you say when they set as head over you
those whom you have trained
to be your allies?
Will not pangs take hold of you,
like those of a woman in labor?
22 And if you say in your heart,
"Why have these things come upon me?"
it is for the greatness of your iniquity
that your skirts are lifted up,
and you are violated.
23 Can Ethiopians change their skin
or leopards their spots?
Then also you can do good
who are accustomed to do evil.
24 I will scatter you like chaff
driven by the wind from the desert.
25 This is your lot,
the portion I have measured out to you, says the LORD,
because you have forgotten me
and trusted in lies.
26 I myself will lift up your skirts over your face,
and your shame will be seen.
27 I have seen your abominations,
your adulteries and neighings, your shameless prostitutions
on the hills of the countryside.
Woe to you, O Jerusalem!
How long will it be
before you are made clean?

1527

JEREMIAH 1528

[Jeremiah 14]
Lament over catastrophic drought and the coming military defeat of
Jerusalem
1 The word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah concerning
the drought:
2 Judah mourns
and her gates languish;
they lie in gloom on the ground,
and the cry of Jerusalem goes up.
3 Her nobles send their servants for water;
they come to the cisterns,
they find no water,
they return with their vessels empty.
They are ashamed and dismayed
and cover their heads,
4 because the ground is cracked.
Because there has been no rain on the land
the farmers are dismayed;
they cover their heads.
5 Even the doe in the field forsakes her newborn fawn
because there is no grass.
6 The wild asses stand on the bare heights,
they pant for air like jackals;
their eyes fail
because there is no herbage.
7 Although our iniquities testify against us,
act, O LORD, for your name's sake;
our apostasies indeed are many,
and we have sinned against you.
8 O hope of Israel,
its savior in time of trouble,
why should you be like a stranger in the land,
like a traveler turning aside for the night?

1528

JEREMIAH 1529

9 Why should you be like someone confused,
like a mighty warrior who cannot give help?
Yet you, O LORD, are in the midst of us,
and we are called by your name;
do not forsake us!
10 Thus says the LORD concerning this people:
Truly they have loved to wander,
they have not restrained their feet;
therefore the LORD does not accept them,
now he will remember their iniquity
and punish their sins.
11 The LORD said to me: Do not pray for the welfare of this people. 12
Although they fast, I do not hear their cry, and although they offer
burnt offering and grain offering, I do not accept them; but by the
sword, by famine, and by pestilence I consume them.
13 Then I said: "Ah, Lord GOD! Here are the prophets saying to them,
'You shall not see the sword, nor shall you have famine, but I will give
you true peace in this place.'" 14 And the LORD said to me: The
prophets are prophesying lies in my name; I did not send them, nor did
I command them or speak to them. They are prophesying to you a lying
vision, worthless divination, and the deceit of their own minds. 15
Therefore thus says the LORD concerning the prophets who prophesy in
my name though I did not send them, and who say, "Sword and
famine shall not come on this land": By sword and famine those
prophets shall be consumed. 16 And the people to whom they
prophesy shall be thrown out into the streets of Jerusalem, victims of
famine and sword. There shall be no one to bury them — themselves,
their wives, their sons, and their daughters. For I will pour out their
wickedness upon them.
17 You shall say to them this word:
Let my eyes run down with tears night and day,
and let them not cease,
for the virgin daughter — my people — is struck
down with a crushing blow, with a very grievous wound.

1529

JEREMIAH 1530

18 If I go out into the field,
look — those killed by the sword!
And if I enter the city,
look — those sick with famine!
For both prophet and priest ply their trade throughout the land,
and have no knowledge.
19 Have you completely rejected Judah?
Does your heart loathe Zion?
Why have you struck us down
so that there is no healing for us?
We look for peace, but find no good;
for a time of healing, but there is terror instead.
20 We acknowledge our wickedness, O LORD,
the iniquity of our ancestors,
for we have sinned against you.
21 Do not spurn us, for your name's sake;
do not dishonor your glorious throne;
remember and do not break your covenant with us.
22 Can any idols of the nations bring rain?
Or can the heavens give showers?
Is it not you, O LORD our God?
We set our hope on you,
for it is you who do all this.
[Jeremiah 15]
An extended composition on the certainty of Judah's fate
1 Then the LORD said to me: Though Moses and Samuel stood before
me, yet my heart would not turn toward this people. Send them out of
my sight, and let them go! 2 And when they say to you, "Where shall
we go?" you shall say to them: Thus says the LORD:
Those destined for pestilence, to pestilence,
and those destined for the sword, to the sword;
those destined for famine, to famine,
and those destined for captivity, to captivity.
3 And I will appoint over them four kinds of destroyers, says the LORD:
the sword to kill, the dogs to drag away, and the birds of the air and

1530

JEREMIAH 1531

the wild animals of the earth to devour and destroy. 4 I will make them
a horror to all the kingdoms of the earth because of what King
Manasseh son of Hezekiah of Judah did in Jerusalem.
Jerusalem's end
5 Who will have pity on you, O Jerusalem,
or who will bemoan you?
Who will turn aside
to ask about your welfare?
6 You have rejected me, says the LORD,
you are going backward;
so I have stretched out my hand against you and destroyed you —
I am weary of relenting.
7 I have winnowed them with a winnowing fork
in the gates of the land;
I have bereaved them, I have destroyed my people;
they did not turn from their ways.
8 Their widows became more numerous
than the sand of the seas;
I have brought against the mothers of youths
a destroyer at noonday;
I have made anguish and terror
fall upon her suddenly.
9 She who bore seven has languished;
she has swooned away;
her sun went down while it was yet day;
she has been shamed and disgraced.
And the rest of them I will give to the sword
before their enemies,
says the LORD.
Jeremiah's second personal lament
10 Woe is me, my mother, that you ever bore me, a man of strife and
contention to the whole land! I have not lent, nor have I borrowed, yet
all of them curse me. 11 The LORD said: Surely I have intervened in your
life for good, surely I have imposed enemies on you in a time of

1531

JEREMIAH 1532

trouble and in a time of distress. 12 Can iron and bronze break iron
from the north?
13 Your wealth and your treasures I will give as plunder, without price,
for all your sins, throughout all your territory. 14 I will make you serve
your enemies in a land that you do not know, for in my anger a fire is
kindled that shall burn forever.
15 O LORD, you know;
remember me and visit me,
and bring down retribution for me on my persecutors.
In your forbearance do not take me away;
know that on your account I suffer insult.
16 Your words were found, and I ate them,
and your words became to me a joy
and the delight of my heart;
for I am called by your name,
O LORD, God of hosts.
17 I did not sit in the company of merrymakers,
nor did I rejoice;
under the weight of your hand I sat alone,
for you had filled me with indignation.
18 Why is my pain unceasing,
my wound incurable,
refusing to be healed?
Truly, you are to me like a deceitful brook,
like waters that fail.
19 Therefore thus says the LORD:
If you turn back, I will take you back,
and you shall stand before me.
If you utter what is precious, and not what is worthless,
you shall serve as my mouth.
It is they who will turn to you,
not you who will turn to them.

1532

JEREMIAH 1533

20 And I will make you to this people
a fortified wall of bronze;
they will fight against you,
but they shall not prevail over you,
for I am with you
to save you and deliver you,
says the LORD.
21 I will deliver you out of the hand of the wicked,
and redeem you from the grasp of the ruthless.
[Jeremiah 16]
Jeremiah to remain unmarried and childless as a prophetic sign
1 The word of the LORD came to me: 2 You shall not take a wife, nor
shall you have sons or daughters in this place. 3 For thus says the LORD
concerning the sons and daughters who are born in this place, and
concerning the mothers who bear them and the fathers who beget
them in this land: 4 They shall die of deadly diseases. They shall not be
lamented, nor shall they be buried; they shall become like dung on the
surface of the ground. They shall perish by the sword and by famine,
and their dead bodies shall become food for the birds of the air and
for the wild animals of the earth.
5 For thus says the LORD: Do not enter the house of mourning, or go to
lament, or bemoan them; for I have taken away my peace from this
people, says the LORD, my steadfast love and mercy. 6 Both great and
small shall die in this land; they shall not be buried, and no one shall
lament for them; there shall be no gashing, no shaving of the head for
them. 7 No one shall break bread for the mourner, to offer comfort for
the dead; nor shall anyone give them the cup of consolation to drink
for their fathers or their mothers. 8 You shall not go into the house of
feasting to sit with them, to eat and drink. 9 For thus says the LORD of
hosts, the God of Israel: I am going to banish from this place, in your
days and before your eyes, the voice of mirth and the voice of
gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride.

1533

JEREMIAH 1534

Judah's fate
10 And when you tell this people all these words, and they say to you,
"Why has the LORD pronounced all this great evil against us? What is
our iniquity? What is the sin that we have committed against the LORD
our God?" 11 then you shall say to them: It is because your ancestors
have forsaken me, says the LORD, and have gone after other gods and
have served and worshiped them, and have forsaken me and have not
kept my law; 12 and because you have behaved worse than your
ancestors, for here you are, every one of you, following your stubborn
evil will, refusing to listen to me. 13 Therefore I will hurl you out of this
land into a land that neither you nor your ancestors have known, and
there you shall serve other gods day and night, for I will show you no
favor.
Israel's homecoming
14 Therefore, the days are surely coming, says the LORD, when it shall
no longer be said, "As the LORD lives who brought the people of Israel
up out of the land of Egypt," 15 but "As the LORD lives who brought
the people of Israel up out of the land of the north and out of all the
lands where he had driven them." For I will bring them back to their
own land that I gave to their ancestors.
No refuge for Judah
16 I am now sending for many fishermen, says the LORD, and they shall
catch them; and afterward I will send for many hunters, and they shall
hunt them from every mountain and every hill, and out of the clefts of
the rocks. 17 For my eyes are on all their ways; they are not hidden
from my presence, nor is their iniquity concealed from my sight. 18 And
I will doubly repay their iniquity and their sin, because they have
polluted my land with the carcasses of their detestable idols, and have
filled my inheritance with their abominations.

1534

JEREMIAH 1535

Conversion of the nations
19 O LORD, my strength and my stronghold,
my refuge in the day of trouble,
to you shall the nations come
from the ends of the earth and say:
Our ancestors have inherited nothing but lies,
worthless things in which there is no profit.
20 Can mortals make for themselves gods?
Such are no gods!
21 "Therefore I am surely going to teach them, this time I am going to
teach them my power and my might, and they shall know that my
name is the LORD."
[Jeremiah 17]
The human heart and the justice of God; Judah's sin is engraved in
their hearts
1 The sin of Judah is written with an iron pen; with a diamond point it
is engraved on the tablet of their hearts, and on the horns of their
altars, 2 while their children remember their altars and their sacred
poles, beside every green tree, and on the high hills, 3 on the
mountains in the open country. Your wealth and all your treasures I
will give for spoil as the price of your sin throughout all your territory.
4 By your own act you shall lose the heritage that I gave you, and I will
make you serve your enemies in a land that you do not know, for in my
anger a fire is kindled that shall burn forever.
The human heart and trust in God
5 Thus says the LORD:
Cursed are those who trust in mere mortals
and make mere flesh their strength,
whose hearts turn away from the LORD.

1535

JEREMIAH 1536

6 They shall be like a shrub in the desert,
and shall not see when relief comes.
They shall live in the parched places of the wilderness,
in an uninhabited salt land.
7 Blessed are those who trust in the LORD,
whose trust is the LORD.
8 They shall be like a tree planted by water,
sending out its roots by the stream.
It shall not fear when heat comes,
and its leaves shall stay green;
in the year of drought it is not anxious,
and it does not cease to bear fruit.
The heart is devious
9 The heart is devious above all else;
it is perverse —
who can understand it?
10 I the LORD test the mind
and search the heart,
to give to all according to their ways,
according to the fruit of their doings.
A proverb
11 Like the partridge hatching what it did not lay,
so are all who amass wealth unjustly;
in mid-life it will leave them,
and at their end they will prove to be fools.
God's ways are high
12 O glorious throne, exalted from the beginning,
shrine of our sanctuary!

1536

JEREMIAH 1537

13 O hope of Israel! O LORD!
All who forsake you shall be put to shame;
those who turn away from you shall be recorded in the
underworld,
for they have forsaken the fountain of living water, the LORD.
Jeremiah's third personal lament
14 Heal me, O LORD, and I shall be healed;
save me, and I shall be saved;
for you are my praise.
15 See how they say to me,
"Where is the word of the LORD?
Let it come!"
16 But I have not run away from being a shepherd in your service,
nor have I desired the fatal day.
You know what came from my lips;
it was before your face.
17 Do not become a terror to me;
you are my refuge in the day of disaster;
18 Let my persecutors be shamed,
but do not let me be shamed;
let them be dismayed,
but do not let me be dismayed;
bring on them the day of disaster;
destroy them with double destruction!
Judah and the sabbath
19 Thus said the LORD to me: Go and stand in the People's Gate, by
which the kings of Judah enter and by which they go out, and in all the
gates of Jerusalem, 20 and say to them: Hear the word of the LORD, you
kings of Judah, and all Judah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
who enter by these gates. 21 Thus says the LORD: For the sake of your
lives, take care that you do not bear a burden on the sabbath day or
bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem. 22 And do not carry a burden out
of your houses on the sabbath or do any work, but keep the sabbath
day holy, as I commanded your ancestors. 23 Yet they did not listen or

1537

JEREMIAH 1538

incline their ear; they stiffened their necks and would not hear or
receive instruction.
24 But if you listen to me, says the LORD, and bring in no burden by the
gates of this city on the sabbath day, but keep the sabbath day holy
and do no work on it, 25 then there shall enter by the gates of this city
kings who sit on the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses,
they and their officials, the people of Judah and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem; and this city shall be inhabited forever. 26 And people shall
come from the towns of Judah and the places around Jerusalem, from
the land of Benjamin, from the Shephelah, from the hill country, and
from the Negeb, bringing burnt offerings and sacrifices, grain offerings
and frankincense, and bringing thank offerings to the house of the
LORD. 27 But if you do not listen to me, to keep the sabbath day holy,
and to carry in no burden through the gates of Jerusalem on the
sabbath day, then I will kindle a fire in its gates; it shall devour the
palaces of Jerusalem and shall not be quenched.
[Jeremiah 18]
The symbolic act involving the potter
1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD: 2 "Come, go down to
the potter's house, and there I will let you hear my words." 3 So I went
down to the potter's house, and there he was working at his wheel. 4
The vessel he was making of clay was spoiled in the potter's hand, and
he reworked it into another vessel, as seemed good to him.
5 Then the word of the LORD came to me: 6 Can I not do with you, O
house of Israel, just as this potter has done? says the LORD. Just like the
clay in the potter's hand, so are you in my hand, O house of Israel. 7 At
one moment I may declare concerning a nation or a kingdom, that I
will pluck up and break down and destroy it, 8 but if that nation,
concerning which I have spoken, turns from its evil, I will change my
mind about the disaster that I intended to bring on it. 9 And at
another moment I may declare concerning a nation or a kingdom that I
will build and plant it, 10 but if it does evil in my sight, not listening to
my voice, then I will change my mind about the good that I had
intended to do to it. 11 Now, therefore, say to the people of Judah and

1538

JEREMIAH 1539

the inhabitants of Jerusalem: Thus says the LORD: Look, I am a potter
shaping evil against you and devising a plan against you. Turn now, all
of you from your evil way, and amend your ways and your doings.
12 But they say, "It is no use! We will follow our own plans, and each of
us will act according to the stubbornness of our evil will."
Faithless Judah is condemned to endless walking
13 Therefore thus says the LORD:
Ask among the nations:
Who has heard the like of this?
The virgin Israel has done
a most horrible thing.
14 Does the snow of Lebanon leave
the crags of Sirion?
Do the mountain waters run dry,
the cold flowing streams?
15 But my people have forgotten me,
they burn offerings to a delusion;
they have stumbled in their ways,
in the ancient roads,
and have gone into bypaths,
not the highway,
16 making their land a horror,
a thing to be hissed at forever.
All who pass by it are horrified
and shake their heads.
17 Like the wind from the east,
I will scatter them before the enemy.
I will show them my back, not my face,
in the day of their calamity.
Jeremiah's fourth personal lament
18 Then they said, "Come, let us make plots against Jeremiah — for
instruction shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the wise,

1539

JEREMIAH 1540

nor the word from the prophet. Come, let us bring charges against
him, and let us not heed any of his words."
19 Give heed to me, O LORD,
and listen to what my adversaries say!
20 Is evil a recompense for good?
Yet they have dug a pit for my life.
Remember how I stood before you
to speak good for them,
to turn away your wrath from them.
21 Therefore give their children over to famine;
hurl them out to the power of the sword,
let their wives become childless and widowed.
May their men meet death by pestilence,
their youths be slain by the sword in battle.
22 May a cry be heard from their houses,
when you bring the marauder suddenly upon them!
For they have dug a pit to catch me,
and laid snares for my feet.
23 Yet you, O LORD, know
all their plotting to kill me.
Do not forgive their iniquity,
do not blot out their sin from your sight.
Let them be tripped up before you;
deal with them while you are angry.
[Jeremiah 19]
The public persecution of Jeremiah
1 Thus said the LORD: Go and buy a potter's earthenware jug. Take with
you some of the elders of the people and some of the senior priests, 2
and go out to the valley of the son of Hinnom at the entry of the
Potsherd Gate, and proclaim there the words that I tell you. 3 You shall
say: Hear the word of the LORD, O kings of Judah and inhabitants of
Jerusalem. Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: I am going to
bring such disaster upon this place that the ears of everyone who hears
of it will tingle. 4 Because the people have forsaken me, and have
profaned this place by making offerings in it to other gods whom

1540

JEREMIAH 1541

neither they nor their ancestors nor the kings of Judah have known,
and because they have filled this place with the blood of the innocent,
5 and gone on building the high places of Baal to burn their children in
the fire as burnt offerings to Baal, which I did not command or decree,
nor did it enter my mind; 6 therefore the days are surely coming, says
the LORD, when this place shall no more be called Topheth, or the
valley of the son of Hinnom, but the valley of Slaughter. 7 And in this
place I will make void the plans of Judah and Jerusalem, and will make
them fall by the sword before their enemies, and by the hand of those
who seek their life. I will give their dead bodies for food to the birds of
the air and to the wild animals of the earth. 8 And I will make this city
a horror, a thing to be hissed at; everyone who passes by it will be
horrified and will hiss because of all its disasters. 9 And I will make
them eat the flesh of their sons and the flesh of their daughters, and
all shall eat the flesh of their neighbors in the siege, and in the distress
with which their enemies and those who seek their life afflict them.
10 Then you shall break the jug in the sight of those who go with you,
11 and shall say to them: Thus says the LORD of hosts: So will I break this
people and this city, as one breaks a potter's vessel, so that it can never
be mended. In Topheth they shall bury until there is no more room to
bury. 12 Thus will I do to this place, says the LORD, and to its inhabitants,
making this city like Topheth. 13 And the houses of Jerusalem and the
houses of the kings of Judah shall be defiled like the place of Topheth
— all the houses upon whose roofs offerings have been made to the
whole host of heaven, and libations have been poured out to other
gods.
14 When Jeremiah came from Topheth, where the LORD had sent him to
prophesy, he stood in the court of the LORD's house and said to all the
people: 15 Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: I am now
bringing upon this city and upon all its towns all the disaster that I
have pronounced against it, because they have stiffened their necks,
refusing to hear my words.

1541

JEREMIAH 1542

[Jeremiah 20]
1 Now the priest Pashhur son of Immer, who was chief officer in the
house of the LORD, heard Jeremiah prophesying these things. 2 Then
Pashhur struck the prophet Jeremiah, and put him in the stocks that
were in the upper Benjamin Gate of the house of the LORD. 3 The next
morning when Pashhur released Jeremiah from the stocks, Jeremiah
said to him, The LORD has named you not Pashhur but "Terror-allaround." 4 For thus says the LORD: I am making you a terror to yourself
and to all your friends; and they shall fall by the sword of their enemies
while you look on. And I will give all Judah into the hand of the king
of Babylon; he shall carry them captive to Babylon, and shall kill them
with the sword. 5 I will give all the wealth of this city, all its gains, all
its prized belongings, and all the treasures of the kings of Judah into
the hand of their enemies, who shall plunder them, and seize them,
and carry them to Babylon. 6 And you, Pashhur, and all who live in
your house, shall go into captivity, and to Babylon you shall go; there
you shall die, and there you shall be buried, you and all your friends, to
whom you have prophesied falsely.
Jeremiah's fifth and sixth personal laments
7 O LORD, you have enticed me,
and I was enticed;
you have overpowered me,
and you have prevailed.
I have become a laughingstock all day long;
everyone mocks me.
8 For whenever I speak, I must cry out,
I must shout, "Violence and destruction!"
For the word of the LORD has become for me
a reproach and derision all day long.
9 If I say, "I will not mention him,
or speak any more in his name,"
then within me there is something like a burning fire
shut up in my bones;
I am weary with holding it in,
and I cannot.

1542

JEREMIAH 1543

10 For I hear many whispering:
"Terror is all around!
Denounce him! Let us denounce him!"
All my close friends
are watching for me to stumble.
"Perhaps he can be enticed,
and we can prevail against him,
and take our revenge on him."
11 But the LORD is with me like a dread warrior;
therefore my persecutors will stumble,
and they will not prevail.
They will be greatly shamed,
for they will not succeed.
Their eternal dishonor
will never be forgotten.
12 O LORD of hosts, you test the righteous,
you see the heart and the mind;
let me see your retribution upon them,
for to you I have committed my cause.
13 Sing to the LORD;
praise the LORD!
For he has delivered the life of the needy
from the hands of evildoers.
14 Cursed be the day
on which I was born!
The day when my mother bore me,
let it not be blessed!
15 Cursed be the man
who brought the news to my father, saying,
"A child is born to you, a son,"
making him very glad.
16 Let that man be like the cities
that the LORD overthrew without pity;
let him hear a cry in the morning
and an alarm at noon,

1543

JEREMIAH 1544

17 because he did not kill me in the womb;
so my mother would have been my grave,
and her womb forever great.
18 Why did I come forth from the womb
to see toil and sorrow,
and spend my days in shame?
[Jeremiah 21]
Oracles from the time of Zedekiah; oracles against Zedekiah and
Jerusalem
1 This is the word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, when King
Zedekiah sent to him Pashhur son of Malchiah and the priest
Zephaniah son of Maaseiah, saying, 2 "Please inquire of the LORD on
our behalf, for King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon is making war against
us; perhaps the LORD will perform a wonderful deed for us, as he has
often done, and will make him withdraw from us."
3 Then Jeremiah said to them: 4 Thus you shall say to Zedekiah: Thus
says the LORD, the God of Israel: I am going to turn back the weapons
of war that are in your hands and with which you are fighting against
the king of Babylon and against the Chaldeans who are besieging you
outside the walls; and I will bring them together into the center of this
city. 5 I myself will fight against you with outstretched hand and
mighty arm, in anger, in fury, and in great wrath. 6 And I will strike
down the inhabitants of this city, both human beings and animals; they
shall die of a great pestilence. 7 Afterward, says the LORD, I will give
King Zedekiah of Judah, and his servants, and the people in this city —
those who survive the pestilence, sword, and famine — into the hands
of King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon, into the hands of their enemies,
into the hands of those who seek their lives. He shall strike them down
with the edge of the sword; he shall not pity them, or spare them, or
have compassion.
8 And to this people you shall say: Thus says the LORD: See, I am setting
before you the way of life and the way of death. 9 Those who stay in
this city shall die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence; but those
who go out and surrender to the Chaldeans who are besieging you

1544

JEREMIAH 1545

shall live and shall have their lives as a prize of war. 10 For I have set my
face against this city for evil and not for good, says the LORD: it shall be
given into the hands of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with
fire.
Oracles concerning the royal house
11 To the house of the king of Judah say: Hear the word of the LORD, 12
O house of David! Thus says the LORD:
Execute justice in the morning,
and deliver from the hand of the oppressor
anyone who has been robbed,
or else my wrath will go forth like fire,
and burn, with no one to quench it,
because of your evil doings.
13 See, I am against you, O inhabitant of the valley,
O rock of the plain,
says the LORD;
you who say, "Who can come down against us,
or who can enter our places of refuge?"
14 I will punish you according to the fruit of your doings,
says the LORD;
I will kindle a fire in its forest,
and it shall devour all that is around it.
[Jeremiah 22]
1 Thus says the LORD: Go down to the house of the king of Judah, and
speak there this word, 2 and say: Hear the word of the LORD, O King of
Judah sitting on the throne of David — you, and your servants, and
your people who enter these gates. 3 Thus says the LORD: Act with
justice and righteousness, and deliver from the hand of the oppressor
anyone who has been robbed. And do no wrong or violence to the
alien, the orphan, and the widow, or shed innocent blood in this place.
4 For if you will indeed obey this word, then through the gates of this
house shall enter kings who sit on the throne of David, riding in
chariots and on horses, they, and their servants, and their people. 5 But

1545

JEREMIAH 1546

if you will not heed these words, I swear by myself, says the LORD, that
this house shall become a desolation. 6 For thus says the LORD
concerning the house of the king of Judah:
You are like Gilead to me,
like the summit of Lebanon;
but I swear that I will make you a desert,
an uninhabited city.
7 I will prepare destroyers against you,
all with their weapons;
they shall cut down your choicest cedars
and cast them into the fire.
8 And many nations will pass by this city, and all of them will say one
to another, "Why has the LORD dealt in this way with that great city?"
9 And they will answer, "Because they abandoned the covenant of the
LORD their God, and worshiped other gods and served them."
Oracles concerning Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, and Jehoiachin, kings of
Judah
10 Do not weep for him who is dead,
nor bemoan him;
weep rather for him who goes away,
for he shall return no more
to see his native land.
11 For thus says the LORD concerning Shallum son of King Josiah of
Judah, who succeeded his father Josiah, and who went away from this
place: He shall return here no more, 12 but in the place where they
have carried him captive he shall die, and he shall never see this land
again.
13 Woe to him who builds his house by unrighteousness,
and his upper rooms by injustice;
who makes his neighbors work for nothing,
and does not give them their wages;

1546

JEREMIAH 1547

14 who says, "I will build myself a spacious house
with large upper rooms,"
and who cuts out windows for it,
paneling it with cedar,
and painting it with vermilion.
15 Are you a king
because you compete in cedar?
Did not your father eat and drink
and do justice and righteousness?
Then it was well with him.
16 He judged the cause of the poor and needy;
then it was well.
Is not this to know me?
says the LORD.
17 But your eyes and heart
are only on your dishonest gain,
for shedding innocent blood,
and for practicing oppression and violence.
18 Therefore thus says the LORD concerning King Jehoiakim
son of Josiah of Judah:
They shall not lament for him, saying,
"Alas, my brother!" or "Alas, sister!"
They shall not lament for him, saying,
"Alas, lord!" or "Alas, his majesty!"
19 With the burial of a donkey he shall be buried —
dragged off and thrown out beyond the gates of Jerusalem.
20 Go up to Lebanon, and cry out,
and lift up your voice in Bashan;
cry out from Abarim,
for all your lovers are crushed.
21 I spoke to you in your prosperity,
but you said, "I will not listen."
This has been your way from your youth,
for you have not obeyed my voice.

1547

JEREMIAH 1548

22 The wind shall shepherd all your shepherds,
and your lovers shall go into captivity;
then you will be ashamed and dismayed
because of all your wickedness.
23 O inhabitant of Lebanon,
nested among the cedars,
how you will groan when pangs come upon you,
pain as of a woman in labor!
24 As I live, says the LORD, even if King Coniah son of Jehoiakim of
Judah were the signet ring on my right hand, even from there I would
tear you off 25 and give you into the hands of those who seek your
life, into the hands of those of whom you are afraid, even into the
hands of King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon and into the hands of the
Chaldeans. 26 I will hurl you and the mother who bore you into
another country, where you were not born, and there you shall die. 27
But they shall not return to the land to which they long to return.
28 Is this man Coniah a despised broken pot,
a vessel no one wants?
Why are he and his offspring hurled out
and cast away in a land that they do not know?
29 O land, land, land,
hear the word of the LORD!
30 Thus says the LORD:
Record this man as childless,
a man who shall not succeed in his days;
for none of his offspring shall succeed
in sitting on the throne of David,
and ruling again in Judah.
[Jeremiah 23]
An oracle of restoration
1 Woe to the shepherds who destroy and scatter the sheep of my
pasture! says the LORD. 2 Therefore thus says the LORD, the God of
Israel, concerning the shepherds who shepherd my people: It is you
who have scattered my flock, and have driven them away, and you
have not attended to them. So I will attend to you for your evil doings,

1548

JEREMIAH 1549

says the LORD. 3 Then I myself will gather the remnant of my flock out
of all the lands where I have driven them, and I will bring them back to
their fold, and they shall be fruitful and multiply. 4 I will raise up
shepherds over them who will shepherd them, and they shall not fear
any longer, or be dismayed, nor shall any be missing, says the LORD.
5 The days are surely coming, says the LORD, when I will raise up for
David a righteous Branch, and he shall reign as king and deal wisely,
and shall execute justice and righteousness in the land. 6 In his days
Judah will be saved and Israel will live in safety. And this is the name by
which he will be called: "The LORD is our righteousness."
7 Therefore, the days are surely coming, says the LORD, when it shall no
longer be said, "As the LORD lives who brought the people of Israel up
out of the land of Egypt," 8 but "As the LORD lives who brought out
and led the offspring of the house of Israel out of the land of the north
and out of all the lands where he had driven them." Then they shall
live in their own land.
Oracles concerning the prophets
9 Concerning the prophets:
My heart is crushed within me,
all my bones shake;
I have become like a drunkard,
like one overcome by wine,
because of the LORD
and because of his holy words.
10 For the land is full of adulterers;
because of the curse the land mourns,
and the pastures of the wilderness are dried up.
Their course has been evil,
and their might is not right.
11 Both prophet and priest are ungodly;
even in my house I have found their wickedness,
says the LORD.

1549

JEREMIAH 1550

12 Therefore their way shall be to them
like slippery paths in the darkness,
into which they shall be driven and fall;
for I will bring disaster upon them
in the year of their punishment,
says the LORD.
13 In the prophets of Samaria
I saw a disgusting thing:
they prophesied by Baal
and led my people Israel astray.
14 But in the prophets of Jerusalem
I have seen a more shocking thing:
they commit adultery and walk in lies;
they strengthen the hands of evildoers,
so that no one turns from wickedness;
all of them have become like Sodom to me,
and its inhabitants like Gomorrah.
15 Therefore thus says the LORD of hosts concerning the prophets:
"I am going to make them eat wormwood,
and give them poisoned water to drink;
for from the prophets of Jerusalem
ungodliness has spread throughout the land."
16 Thus says the LORD of hosts: Do not listen to the words of the
prophets who prophesy to you; they are deluding you. They speak
visions of their own minds, not from the mouth of the LORD. 17 They
keep saying to those who despise the word of the LORD, "It shall be
well with you"; and to all who stubbornly follow their own stubborn
hearts, they say, "No calamity shall come upon you."
18 For who has stood in the council of the LORD
so as to see and to hear his word?
Who has given heed to his word so as to proclaim it?
19 Look, the storm of the LORD!
Wrath has gone forth,
a whirling tempest;
it will burst upon the head of the wicked.

1550

JEREMIAH 1551

20 The anger of the LORD will not turn back
until he has executed and accomplished
the intents of his mind.
In the latter days you will understand it clearly.
21 I did not send the prophets,
yet they ran;
I did not speak to them,
yet they prophesied.
22 But if they had stood in my council,
then they would have proclaimed my words to my people,
and they would have turned them from their evil way,
and from the evil of their doings.
23 Am I a God near by, says the LORD, and not a God far off? 24 Who
can hide in secret places so that I cannot see them? says the LORD. Do I
not fill heaven and earth? says the LORD. 25 I have heard what the
prophets have said who prophesy lies in my name, saying, "I have
dreamed, I have dreamed!" 26 How long? Will the hearts of the
prophets ever turn back — those who prophesy lies, and who prophesy
the deceit of their own heart? 27 They plan to make my people forget
my name by their dreams that they tell one another, just as their
ancestors forgot my name for Baal. 28 Let the prophet who has a
dream tell the dream, but let the one who has my word speak my word
faithfully. What has straw in common with wheat? says the LORD. 29 Is
not my word like fire, says the LORD, and like a hammer that breaks a
rock in pieces? 30 See, therefore, I am against the prophets, says the
LORD, who steal my words from one another. 31 See, I am against the
prophets, says the LORD, who use their own tongues and say, "Says the
LORD." 32 See, I am against those who prophesy lying dreams, says the
LORD, and who tell them, and who lead my people astray by their lies
and their recklessness, when I did not send them or appoint them; so
they do not profit this people at all, says the LORD.
33 When this people, or a prophet, or a priest asks you, "What is the
burden of the LORD?" you shall say to them, "You are the burden, and I
will cast you off, says the LORD." 34 And as for the prophet, priest, or
the people who say, "The burden of the LORD," I will punish them and

1551

JEREMIAH 1552

their households. 35 Thus shall you say to one another, among
yourselves, "What has the LORD answered?" or "What has the LORD
spoken?" 36 But "the burden of the LORD" you shall mention no more,
for the burden is everyone's own word, and so you pervert the words
of the living God, the LORD of hosts, our God. 37 Thus you shall ask the
prophet, "What has the LORD answered you?" or "What has the LORD
spoken?" 38 But if you say, "the burden of the LORD," thus says the
LORD: Because you have said these words, "the burden of the LORD,"
when I sent to you, saying, You shall not say, "the burden of the LORD,"
39 therefore, I will surely lift you up and cast you away from my
presence, you and the city that I gave to you and your ancestors. 40
And I will bring upon you everlasting disgrace and perpetual shame,
which shall not be forgotten.
[Jeremiah 24]
The vision of the baskets of figs
1 The LORD showed me two baskets of figs placed before the temple of
the LORD. This was after King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon had taken
into exile from Jerusalem King Jeconiah son of Jehoiakim of Judah,
together with the officials of Judah, the artisans, and the smiths, and
had brought them to Babylon. 2 One basket had very good figs, like
first-ripe figs, but the other basket had very bad figs, so bad that they
could not be eaten. 3 And the LORD said to me, "What do you see,
Jeremiah?" I said, "Figs, the good figs very good, and the bad figs very
bad, so bad that they cannot be eaten."
4 Then the word of the LORD came to me: 5 Thus says the LORD, the God
of Israel: Like these good figs, so I will regard as good the exiles from
Judah, whom I have sent away from this place to the land of the
Chaldeans. 6 I will set my eyes upon them for good, and I will bring
them back to this land. I will build them up, and not tear them down; I
will plant them, and not pluck them up. 7 I will give them a heart to
know that I am the LORD; and they shall be my people and I will be
their God, for they shall return to me with their whole heart.

1552

JEREMIAH 1553

8 But thus says the LORD: Like the bad figs that are so bad they cannot
be eaten, so will I treat King Zedekiah of Judah, his officials, the
remnant of Jerusalem who remain in this land, and those who live in
the land of Egypt. 9 I will make them a horror, an evil thing, to all the
kingdoms of the earth — a disgrace, a byword, a taunt, and a curse in
all the places where I shall drive them. 10 And I will send sword,
famine, and pestilence upon them, until they are utterly destroyed
from the land that I gave to them and their ancestors.
[Jeremiah 25]
Babylon, God's instrument for punishment
1 The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah,
in the fourth year of King Jehoiakim son of Josiah of Judah (that was
the first year of King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon), 2 which the prophet
Jeremiah spoke to all the people of Judah and all the inhabitants of
Jerusalem: 3 For twenty-three years, from the thirteenth year of King
Josiah son of Amon of Judah, to this day, the word of the LORD has
come to me, and I have spoken persistently to you, but you have not
listened. 4 And though the LORD persistently sent you all his servants
the prophets, you have neither listened nor inclined your ears to hear 5
when they said, "Turn now, everyone of you, from your evil way and
wicked doings, and you will remain upon the land that the LORD has
given to you and your ancestors from of old and forever; 6 do not go
after other gods to serve and worship them, and do not provoke me to
anger with the work of your hands. Then I will do you no harm." 7 Yet
you did not listen to me, says the LORD, and so you have provoked me
to anger with the work of your hands to your own harm.
8 Therefore thus says the LORD of hosts: Because you have not obeyed
my words, 9 I am going to send for all the tribes of the north, says the
LORD, even for King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon, my servant, and I will
bring them against this land and its inhabitants, and against all these
nations around; I will utterly destroy them, and make them an object
of horror and of hissing, and an everlasting disgrace. 10 And I will
banish from them the sound of mirth and the sound of gladness, the
voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the sound of the
millstones and the light of the lamp. 11 This whole land shall become a

1553

JEREMIAH 1554

ruin and a waste, and these nations shall serve the king of Babylon
seventy years. 12 Then after seventy years are completed, I will punish
the king of Babylon and that nation, the land of the Chaldeans, for
their iniquity, says the LORD, making the land an everlasting waste. 13 I
will bring upon that land all the words that I have uttered against it,
everything written in this book, which Jeremiah prophesied against all
the nations. 14 For many nations and great kings shall make slaves of
them also; and I will repay them according to their deeds and the work
of their hands.
The cup of wrath
15 For thus the LORD, the God of Israel, said to me: Take from my hand
this cup of the wine of wrath, and make all the nations to whom I send
you drink it. 16 They shall drink and stagger and go out of their minds
because of the sword that I am sending among them.
17 So I took the cup from the LORD's hand, and made all the nations to
whom the LORD sent me drink it: 18 Jerusalem and the towns of Judah,
its kings and officials, to make them a desolation and a waste, an
object of hissing and of cursing, as they are today; 19 Pharaoh king of
Egypt, his servants, his officials, and all his people; 20 all the mixed
people; all the kings of the land of Uz; all the kings of the land of the
Philistines — Ashkelon, Gaza, Ekron, and the remnant of Ashdod; 21
Edom, Moab, and the Ammonites; 22 all the kings of Tyre, all the kings
of Sidon, and the kings of the coastland across the sea; 23 Dedan,
Tema, Buz, and all who have shaven temples; 24 all the kings of Arabia
and all the kings of the mixed peoples that live in the desert; 25 all the
kings of Zimri, all the kings of Elam, and all the kings of Media; 26 all
the kings of the north, far and near, one after another, and all the
kingdoms of the world that are on the face of the earth. And after
them the king of Sheshach shall drink.
27 Then you shall say to them, Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of
Israel: Drink, get drunk and vomit, fall and rise no more, because of the
sword that I am sending among you.

1554

JEREMIAH 1555

28 And if they refuse to accept the cup from your hand to drink, then
you shall say to them: Thus says the LORD of hosts: You must drink! 29
See, I am beginning to bring disaster on the city that is called by my
name, and how can you possibly avoid punishment? You shall not go
unpunished, for I am summoning a sword against all the inhabitants of
the earth, says the LORD of hosts.
30 You, therefore, shall prophesy against them all these words, and say
to them:
The LORD will roar from on high,
and from his holy habitation utter his voice;
he will roar mightily against his fold,
and shout, like those who tread grapes,
against all the inhabitants of the earth.
31 The clamor will resound to the ends of the earth,
for the LORD has an indictment against the nations;
he is entering into judgment with all flesh,
and the guilty he will put to the sword,
says the LORD.
32 Thus says the LORD of hosts:
See, disaster is spreading
from nation to nation,
and a great tempest is stirring
from the farthest parts of the earth!
33 Those slain by the LORD on that day shall extend from one end of the
earth to the other. They shall not be lamented, or gathered, or buried;
they shall become dung on the surface of the ground.
34 Wail, you shepherds, and cry out;
roll in ashes, you lords of the flock,
for the days of your slaughter have come — and your dispersions,
and you shall fall like a choice vessel.
35 Flight shall fail the shepherds,
and there shall be no escape for the lords of the flock.
36 Hark! the cry of the shepherds,
and the wail of the lords of the flock!
For the LORD is despoiling their pasture,

1555

JEREMIAH 1556

37

and the peaceful folds are devastated,
because of the fierce anger of the LORD.
38 Like a lion he has left his covert;
for their land has become a waste
because of the cruel sword,
and because of his fierce anger.
[Jeremiah 26]
The problem of distinguishing true and false prophecy; the Temple
sermon

1 At the beginning of the reign of King Jehoiakim son of Josiah of
Judah, this word came from the LORD: 2 Thus says the LORD: Stand in the
court of the LORD's house, and speak to all the cities of Judah that
come to worship in the house of the LORD; speak to them all the words
that I command you; do not hold back a word. 3 It may be that they
will listen, all of them, and will turn from their evil way, that I may
change my mind about the disaster that I intend to bring on them
because of their evil doings. 4 You shall say to them: Thus says the
LORD: If you will not listen to me, to walk in my law that I have set
before you, 5 and to heed the words of my servants the prophets
whom I send to you urgently — though you have not heeded — 6 then
I will make this house like Shiloh, and I will make this city a curse for all
the nations of the earth.
Jeremiah's arrest and release
7 The priests and the prophets and all the people heard Jeremiah
speaking these words in the house of the LORD. 8 And when Jeremiah
had finished speaking all that the LORD had commanded him to speak
to all the people, then the priests and the prophets and all the people
laid hold of him, saying, "You shall die! 9 Why have you prophesied in
the name of the LORD, saying, 'This house shall be like Shiloh, and this
city shall be desolate, without inhabitant'?" And all the people
gathered around Jeremiah in the house of the LORD.

1556

JEREMIAH 1557

10 When the officials of Judah heard these things, they came up from
the king's house to the house of the LORD and took their seat in the
entry of the New Gate of the house of the LORD. 11 Then the priests and
the prophets said to the officials and to all the people, "This man
deserves the sentence of death because he has prophesied against this
city, as you have heard with your own ears."
12 Then Jeremiah spoke to all the officials and all the people, saying,
"It is the LORD who sent me to prophesy against this house and this city
all the words you have heard. 13 Now therefore amend your ways and
your doings, and obey the voice of the LORD your God, and the LORD
will change his mind about the disaster that he has pronounced against
you. 14 But as for me, here I am in your hands. Do with me as seems
good and right to you. 15 Only know for certain that if you put me to
death, you will be bringing innocent blood upon yourselves and upon
this city and its inhabitants, for in truth the LORD sent me to you to
speak all these words in your ears."
16 Then the officials and all the people said to the priests and the
prophets, "This man does not deserve the sentence of death, for he has
spoken to us in the name of the LORD our God." 17 And some of the
elders of the land arose and said to all the assembled people, 18
"Micah of Moresheth, who prophesied during the days of King
Hezekiah of Judah, said to all the people of Judah: 'Thus says the LORD
of hosts,
Zion shall be plowed as a field;
Jerusalem shall become a heap of ruins,
and the mountain of the house a wooded height.'
19 Did King Hezekiah of Judah and all Judah actually put him to death?
Did he not fear the LORD and entreat the favor of the LORD, and did not
the LORD change his mind about the disaster that he had pronounced
against them? But we are about to bring great disaster on ourselves!"

1557

JEREMIAH 1558

Martyrdom of Uriah
20 There was another man prophesying in the name of the LORD, Uriah
son of Shemaiah from Kiriath-jearim. He prophesied against this city
and against this land in words exactly like those of Jeremiah. 21 And
when King Jehoiakim, with all his warriors and all the officials, heard
his words, the king sought to put him to death; but when Uriah heard
of it, he was afraid and fled and escaped to Egypt. 22 Then King
Jehoiakim sent Elnathan son of Achbor and men with him to Egypt, 23
and they took Uriah from Egypt and brought him to King Jehoiakim,
who struck him down with the sword and threw his dead body into the
burial place of the common people.
24 But the hand of Ahikam son of Shaphan was with Jeremiah so that
he was not given over into the hands of the people to be put to death.
[Jeremiah 27]
The yoke of the king of Babylon
1 In the beginning of the reign of King Zedekiah son of Josiah of
Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from the LORD. 2 Thus the LORD said
to me: Make yourself a yoke of straps and bars, and put them on your
neck. 3 Send word to the king of Edom, the king of Moab, the king of
the Ammonites, the king of Tyre, and the king of Sidon by the hand of
the envoys who have come to Jerusalem to King Zedekiah of Judah. 4
Give them this charge for their masters: Thus says the LORD of hosts, the
God of Israel: This is what you shall say to your masters: 5 It is I who by
my great power and my outstretched arm have made the earth, with
the people and animals that are on the earth, and I give it to
whomever I please. 6 Now I have given all these lands into the hand of
King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon, my servant, and I have given him
even the wild animals of the field to serve him. 7 All the nations shall
serve him and his son and his grandson, until the time of his own land
comes; then many nations and great kings shall make him their slave.

1558

JEREMIAH 1559

8 But if any nation or kingdom will not serve this king,
Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon, and put its neck under the yoke of the
king of Babylon, then I will punish that nation with the sword, with
famine, and with pestilence, says the LORD, until I have completed its
destruction by his hand. 9 You, therefore, must not listen to your
prophets, your diviners, your dreamers, your soothsayers, or your
sorcerers, who are saying to you, "You shall not serve the king of
Babylon." 10 For they are prophesying a lie to you, with the result that
you will be removed far from your land; I will drive you out, and you
will perish. 11 But any nation that will bring its neck under the yoke of
the king of Babylon and serve him, I will leave on its own land, says the
LORD, to till it and live there.
12 I spoke to King Zedekiah of Judah in the same way: Bring your necks
under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him and his people,
and live. 13 Why should you and your people die by the sword, by
famine, and by pestilence, as the LORD has spoken concerning any
nation that will not serve the king of Babylon? 14 Do not listen to the
words of the prophets who are telling you not to serve the king of
Babylon, for they are prophesying a lie to you. 15 I have not sent them,
says the LORD, but they are prophesying falsely in my name, with the
result that I will drive you out and you will perish, you and the
prophets who are prophesying to you.
16 Then I spoke to the priests and to all this people, saying, Thus says
the LORD: Do not listen to the words of your prophets who are
prophesying to you, saying, "The vessels of the LORD's house will soon
be brought back from Babylon," for they are prophesying a lie to you.
17 Do not listen to them; serve the king of Babylon and live. Why
should this city become a desolation? 18 If indeed they are prophets,
and if the word of the LORD is with them, then let them intercede with
the LORD of hosts, that the vessels left in the house of the LORD, in the
house of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem may not go to Babylon. 19
For thus says the LORD of hosts concerning the pillars, the sea, the
stands, and the rest of the vessels that are left in this city, 20 which
King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon did not take away when he took into
exile from Jerusalem to Babylon King Jeconiah son of Jehoiakim of
Judah, and all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem — 21 thus says the

1559

JEREMIAH 1560

LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, concerning the vessels left in the house
of the LORD, in the house of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem: 22
They shall be carried to Babylon, and there they shall stay, until the day
when I give attention to them, says the LORD. Then I will bring them up
and restore them to this place.
[Jeremiah 28]
Jeremiah and Hananiah
1 In that same year, at the beginning of the reign of King Zedekiah of
Judah, in the fifth month of the fourth year, the prophet Hananiah son
of Azzur, from Gibeon, spoke to me in the house of the LORD, in the
presence of the priests and all the people, saying, 2 "Thus says the LORD
of hosts, the God of Israel: I have broken the yoke of the king of
Babylon. 3 Within two years I will bring back to this place all the vessels
of the LORD's house, which King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon took away
from this place and carried to Babylon. 4 I will also bring back to this
place King Jeconiah son of Jehoiakim of Judah, and all the exiles from
Judah who went to Babylon, says the LORD, for I will break the yoke of
the king of Babylon."
5 Then the prophet Jeremiah spoke to the prophet Hananiah in the
presence of the priests and all the people who were standing in the
house of the LORD; 6 and the prophet Jeremiah said, "Amen! May the
LORD do so; may the LORD fulfill the words that you have prophesied,
and bring back to this place from Babylon the vessels of the house of
the LORD, and all the exiles. 7 But listen now to this word that I speak in
your hearing and in the hearing of all the people. 8 The prophets who
preceded you and me from ancient times prophesied war, famine, and
pestilence against many countries and great kingdoms. 9 As for the
prophet who prophesies peace, when the word of that prophet comes
true, then it will be known that the LORD has truly sent the prophet."
10 Then the prophet Hananiah took the yoke from the neck of the
prophet Jeremiah, and broke it. 11 And Hananiah spoke in the presence
of all the people, saying, "Thus says the LORD: This is how I will break
the yoke of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon from the neck of all the
nations within two years." At this, the prophet Jeremiah went his way.

1560

JEREMIAH 1561

12 Sometime after the prophet Hananiah had broken the yoke from
the neck of the prophet Jeremiah, the word of the LORD came to
Jeremiah: 13 Go, tell Hananiah, Thus says the LORD: You have broken
wooden bars only to forge iron bars in place of them! 14 For thus says
the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: I have put an iron yoke on the neck
of all these nations so that they may serve King Nebuchadnezzar of
Babylon, and they shall indeed serve him; I have even given him the
wild animals. 15 And the prophet Jeremiah said to the prophet
Hananiah, "Listen, Hananiah, the LORD has not sent you, and you made
this people trust in a lie. 16 Therefore thus says the LORD: I am going to
send you off the face of the earth. Within this year you will be dead,
because you have spoken rebellion against the LORD."
17 In that same year, in the seventh month, the prophet Hananiah died.
[Jeremiah 29]
Jeremiah's letters to Babylon; letter to the exiles
1 These are the words of the letter that the prophet Jeremiah sent from
Jerusalem to the remaining elders among the exiles, and to the priests,
the prophets, and all the people, whom Nebuchadnezzar had taken
into exile from Jerusalem to Babylon. 2 This was after King Jeconiah,
and the queen mother, the court officials, the leaders of Judah and
Jerusalem, the artisans, and the smiths had departed from Jerusalem. 3
The letter was sent by the hand of Elasah son of Shaphan and
Gemariah son of Hilkiah, whom King Zedekiah of Judah sent to
Babylon to King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon. It said: 4 Thus says the
LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, to all the exiles whom I have sent into
exile from Jerusalem to Babylon: 5 Build houses and live in them; plant
gardens and eat what they produce. 6 Take wives and have sons and
daughters; take wives for your sons, and give your daughters in
marriage, that they may bear sons and daughters; multiply there, and
do not decrease. 7 But seek the welfare of the city where I have sent
you into exile, and pray to the LORD on its behalf, for in its welfare you
will find your welfare. 8 For thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of
Israel: Do not let the prophets and the diviners who are among you
deceive you, and do not listen to the dreams that they dream, 9 for it is

1561

JEREMIAH 1562

a lie that they are prophesying to you in my name; I did not send them,
says the LORD.
10 For thus says the LORD: Only when Babylon's seventy years are
completed will I visit you, and I will fulfill to you my promise and bring
you back to this place. 11 For surely I know the plans I have for you, says
the LORD, plans for your welfare and not for harm, to give you a future
with hope. 12 Then when you call upon me and come and pray to me, I
will hear you. 13 When you search for me, you will find me; if you seek
me with all your heart, 14 I will let you find me, says the LORD, and I will
restore your fortunes and gather you from all the nations and all the
places where I have driven you, says the LORD, and I will bring you back
to the place from which I sent you into exile.
15 Because you have said, "The LORD has raised up prophets for us in
Babylon," — 16 Thus says the LORD concerning the king who sits on the
throne of David, and concerning all the people who live in this city,
your kinsfolk who did not go out with you into exile: 17 Thus says the
LORD of hosts, I am going to let loose on them sword, famine, and
pestilence, and I will make them like rotten figs that are so bad they
cannot be eaten. 18 I will pursue them with the sword, with famine,
and with pestilence, and will make them a horror to all the kingdoms
of the earth, to be an object of cursing, and horror, and hissing, and a
derision among all the nations where I have driven them, 19 because
they did not heed my words, says the LORD, when I persistently sent to
you my servants the prophets, but they would not listen, says the LORD.
20 But now, all you exiles whom I sent away from Jerusalem to
Babylon, hear the word of the LORD: 21 Thus says the LORD of hosts, the
God of Israel, concerning Ahab son of Kolaiah and Zedekiah son of
Maaseiah, who are prophesying a lie to you in my name: I am going to
deliver them into the hand of King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon, and he
shall kill them before your eyes. 22 And on account of them this curse
shall be used by all the exiles from Judah in Babylon: "The LORD make
you like Zedekiah and Ahab, whom the king of Babylon roasted in the
fire," 23 because they have perpetrated outrage in Israel and have
committed adultery with their neighbors' wives, and have spoken in
my name lying words that I did not command them; I am the one who
knows and bears witness, says the LORD.

1562

JEREMIAH 1563

Jeremiah and Shemaiah
24 To Shemaiah of Nehelam you shall say: 25 Thus says the LORD of
hosts, the God of Israel: In your own name you sent a letter to all the
people who are in Jerusalem, and to the priest Zephaniah son of
Maaseiah, and to all the priests, saying, 26 The LORD himself has made
you priest instead of the priest Jehoiada, so that there may be officers
in the house of the LORD to control any madman who plays the
prophet, to put him in the stocks and the collar. 27 So now why have
you not rebuked Jeremiah of Anathoth who plays the prophet for you?
28 For he has actually sent to us in Babylon, saying, "It will be a long
time; build houses and live in them, and plant gardens and eat what
they produce."
29 The priest Zephaniah read this letter in the hearing of the prophet
Jeremiah. 30 Then the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah: 31 Send to
all the exiles, saying, Thus says the LORD concerning Shemaiah of
Nehelam: Because Shemaiah has prophesied to you, though I did not
send him, and has led you to trust in a lie, 32 therefore thus says the
LORD: I am going to punish Shemaiah of Nehelam and his descendants;
he shall not have anyone living among this people to see the good that
I am going to do to my people, says the LORD, for he has spoken
rebellion against the LORD.
[Jeremiah 30]
The book of consolation
1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD: 2 Thus says the LORD,
the God of Israel: Write in a book all the words that I have spoken to
you. 3 For the days are surely coming, says the LORD, when I will restore
the fortunes of my people, Israel and Judah, says the LORD, and I will
bring them back to the land that I gave to their ancestors and they
shall take possession of it.

1563

JEREMIAH 1564

4 These are the words that the LORD spoke concerning Israel and Judah:
Oracles concerning Jacob
5 Thus says the LORD:
We have heard a cry of panic,
of terror, and no peace.
6 Ask now, and see,
can a man bear a child?
Why then do I see every man
with his hands on his loins like a woman in labor?
Why has every face turned pale?
7 Alas! that day is so great
there is none like it;
it is a time of distress for Jacob;
yet he shall be rescued from it.
8 On that day, says the LORD of hosts, I will break the yoke from off his
neck, and I will burst his bonds, and strangers shall no more make a
servant of him. 9 But they shall serve the LORD their God and David
their king, whom I will raise up for them.
10 But as for you, have no fear, my servant Jacob, says the LORD,
and do not be dismayed, O Israel;
for I am going to save you from far away,
and your offspring from the land of their captivity.
Jacob shall return and have quiet and ease,
and no one shall make him afraid.
11 For I am with you, says the LORD, to save you;
I will make an end of all the nations
among which I scattered you,
but of you I will not make an end.
I will chastise you in just measure,
and I will by no means leave you unpunished.

1564

JEREMIAH 1565

Oracles concerning Zion
12 For thus says the LORD:
Your hurt is incurable,
your wound is grievous.
13 There is no one to uphold your cause,
no medicine for your wound,
no healing for you.
14 All your lovers have forgotten you;
they care nothing for you;
for I have dealt you the blow of an enemy,
the punishment of a merciless foe,
because your guilt is great,
because your sins are so numerous.
15 Why do you cry out over your hurt?
Your pain is incurable.
Because your guilt is great,
because your sins are so numerous,
I have done these things to you.
16 Therefore all who devour you shall be devoured,
and all your foes, everyone of them, shall go into captivity;
those who plunder you shall be plundered,
and all who prey on you I will make a prey.
17 For I will restore health to you,
and your wounds I will heal,
says the LORD,
because they have called you an outcast:
"It is Zion; no one cares for her!"
Restoration
18 Thus says the LORD:
I am going to restore the fortunes of the tents of Jacob,
and have compassion on his dwellings;
the city shall be rebuilt upon its mound,
and the citadel set on its rightful site.

1565

JEREMIAH 1566

19 Out of them shall come thanksgiving,
and the sound of merrymakers.
I will make them many, and they shall not be few;
I will make them honored, and they shall not be disdained.
20 Their children shall be as of old,
their congregation shall be established before me;
and I will punish all who oppress them.
21 Their prince shall be one of their own,
their ruler shall come from their midst;
I will bring him near, and he shall approach me,
for who would otherwise dare to approach me?
says the LORD.
22 And you shall be my people,
and I will be your God.
23 Look, the storm of the LORD!
Wrath has gone forth,
a whirling tempest;
it will burst upon the head of the wicked.
24 The fierce anger of the LORD will not turn back
until he has executed and accomplished
the intents of his mind.
In the latter days you will understand this.
[Jeremiah 31]
Redemption of Israel
1 At that time, says the LORD, I will be the God of all the families of
Israel, and they shall be my people.
2 Thus says the LORD:
The people who survived the sword
found grace in the wilderness;
when Israel sought for rest,
3
the LORD appeared to him from far away.
I have loved you with an everlasting love;
therefore I have continued my faithfulness to you.

1566

JEREMIAH 1567

4 Again I will build you, and you shall be built,
O virgin Israel!
Again you shall take your tambourines,
and go forth in the dance of the merrymakers.
5 Again you shall plant vineyards
on the mountains of Samaria;
the planters shall plant,
and shall enjoy the fruit.
6 For there shall be a day when sentinels will call
in the hill country of Ephraim:
"Come, let us go up to Zion,
to the LORD our God."
Homecoming
7 For thus says the LORD:
Sing aloud with gladness for Jacob,
and raise shouts for the chief of the nations;
proclaim, give praise, and say,
"Save, O LORD, your people,
the remnant of Israel."
8 See, I am going to bring them from the land of the north,
and gather them from the farthest parts of the earth,
among them the blind and the lame,
those with child and those in labor, together;
a great company, they shall return here.
9 With weeping they shall come,
and with consolations I will lead them back,
I will let them walk by brooks of water,
in a straight path in which they shall not stumble;
for I have become a father to Israel,
and Ephraim is my firstborn.
10 Hear the word of the LORD, O nations,
and declare it in the coastlands far away;
say, "He who scattered Israel will gather him,
and will keep him as a shepherd a flock."

1567

JEREMIAH 1568

11 For the LORD has ransomed Jacob,
and has redeemed him from hands too strong for him.
12 They shall come and sing aloud on the height of Zion,
and they shall be radiant over the goodness of the LORD,
over the grain, the wine, and the oil,
and over the young of the flock and the herd;
their life shall become like a watered garden,
and they shall never languish again.
13 Then shall the young women rejoice in the dance,
and the young men and the old shall be merry.
I will turn their mourning into joy,
I will comfort them, and give them gladness for sorrow.
14 I will give the priests their fill of fatness,
and my people shall be satisfied with my bounty,
says the LORD.
Lament of the exiles is heard
15 Thus says the LORD:
A voice is heard in Ramah,
lamentation and bitter weeping.
Rachel is weeping for her children;
she refuses to be comforted for her children,
because they are no more.
16 Thus says the LORD:
Keep your voice from weeping,
and your eyes from tears;
for there is a reward for your work,
says the LORD:
they shall come back from the land of the enemy;
17 there is hope for your future,
says the LORD:
your children shall come back to their own country.

1568

JEREMIAH 1569

18 Indeed I heard Ephraim pleading:
"You disciplined me, and I took the discipline;
I was like a calf untrained.
Bring me back, let me come back,
for you are the LORD my God.
19 For after I had turned away I repented;
and after I was discovered, I struck my thigh;
I was ashamed, and I was dismayed
because I bore the disgrace of my youth."
20 Is Ephraim my dear son?
Is he the child I delight in?
As often as I speak against him,
I still remember him.
Therefore I am deeply moved for him;
I will surely have mercy on him,
says the LORD.
The return
21 Set up road markers for yourself,
make yourself guideposts;
consider well the highway,
the road by which you went.
Return, O virgin Israel,
return to these your cities.
22 How long will you waver,
O faithless daughter?
For the LORD has created a new thing on the earth:
a woman encompasses a man.
23 Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Once more they shall
use these words in the land of Judah and in its towns when I restore
their fortunes:
"The LORD bless you, O abode of righteousness,
O holy hill!"
24 And Judah and all its towns shall live there together, and the
farmers and those who wander with their flocks.

1569

JEREMIAH 1570

25 I will satisfy the weary,
and all who are faint I will replenish.
26 Thereupon I awoke and looked, and my sleep was pleasant to me.
A chain of eschatological promises
27 The days are surely coming, says the LORD, when I will sow the house
of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of humans and the seed
of animals. 28 And just as I have watched over them to pluck up and
break down, to overthrow, destroy, and bring evil, so I will watch over
them to build and to plant, says the LORD. 29 In those days they shall no
longer say:
"The parents have eaten sour grapes,
and the children's teeth are set on edge."
30 But all shall die for their own sins; the teeth of everyone who eats
sour grapes shall be set on edge.
31 The days are surely coming, says the LORD, when I will make a new
covenant with the house of Israel and the house of Judah. 32 It will not
be like the covenant that I made with their ancestors when I took them
by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt — a covenant that
they broke, though I was their husband, says the LORD. 33 But this is the
covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says
the LORD: I will put my law within them, and I will write it on their
hearts; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. 34 No
longer shall they teach one another, or say to each other, "Know the
LORD," for they shall all know me, from the least of them to the
greatest, says the LORD; for I will forgive their iniquity, and remember
their sin no more.
35 Thus says the LORD,
who gives the sun for light by day
and the fixed order of the moon and the stars for light by night,
who stirs up the sea so that its waves roar —
the LORD of hosts is his name:

1570

JEREMIAH 1571

36 If this fixed order were ever to cease
from my presence, says the LORD,
then also the offspring of Israel would cease
to be a nation before me forever.
37 Thus says the LORD:
If the heavens above can be measured,
and the foundations of the earth below can be explored,
then I will reject all the offspring of Israel
because of all they have done,
says the LORD.
Appendix to the book of consolation: The future of Jerusalem
38 The days are surely coming, says the LORD, when the city shall be
rebuilt for the LORD from the tower of Hananel to the Corner Gate. 39
And the measuring line shall go out farther, straight to the hill Gareb,
and shall then turn to Goah. 40 The whole valley of the dead bodies
and the ashes, and all the fields as far as the Wadi Kidron, to the
corner of the Horse Gate toward the east, shall be sacred to the LORD. It
shall never again be uprooted or overthrown.
[Jeremiah 32]
Jeremiah purchases land in Anathoth
1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD in the tenth year of
King Zedekiah of Judah, which was the eighteenth year of
Nebuchadrezzar. 2 At that time the army of the king of Babylon was
besieging Jerusalem, and the prophet Jeremiah was confined in the
court of the guard that was in the palace of the king of Judah, 3 where
King Zedekiah of Judah had confined him. Zedekiah had said, "Why do
you prophesy and say: Thus says the LORD: I am going to give this city
into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it; 4 King
Zedekiah of Judah shall not escape out of the hands of the Chaldeans,
but shall surely be given into the hands of the king of Babylon, and
shall speak with him face to face and see him eye to eye; 5 and he shall
take Zedekiah to Babylon, and there he shall remain until I attend to

1571

JEREMIAH 1572

him, says the LORD; though you fight against the Chaldeans, you shall
not succeed?"
6 Jeremiah said, The word of the LORD came to me: 7 Hanamel son of
your uncle Shallum is going to come to you and say, "Buy my field that
is at Anathoth, for the right of redemption by purchase is yours." 8
Then my cousin Hanamel came to me in the court of the guard, in
accordance with the word of the LORD, and said to me, "Buy my field
that is at Anathoth in the land of Benjamin, for the right of possession
and redemption is yours; buy it for yourself." Then I knew that this was
the word of the LORD.
9 And I bought the field at Anathoth from my cousin Hanamel, and
weighed out the money to him, seventeen shekels of silver. 10 I signed
the deed, sealed it, got witnesses, and weighed the money on scales. 11
Then I took the sealed deed of purchase, containing the terms and
conditions, and the open copy; 12 and I gave the deed of purchase to
Baruch son of Neriah son of Mahseiah, in the presence of my cousin
Hanamel, in the presence of the witnesses who signed the deed of
purchase, and in the presence of all the Judeans who were sitting in
the court of the guard. 13 In their presence I charged Baruch, saying, 14
Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Take these deeds, both
this sealed deed of purchase and this open deed, and put them in an
earthenware jar, in order that they may last for a long time. 15 For thus
says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Houses and fields and
vineyards shall again be bought in this land.
16 After I had given the deed of purchase to Baruch son of Neriah, I
prayed to the LORD, saying: 17 Ah Lord GOD! It is you who made the
heavens and the earth by your great power and by your outstretched
arm! Nothing is too hard for you. 18 You show steadfast love to the
thousandth generation, but repay the guilt of parents into the laps of
their children after them, O great and mighty God whose name is the
LORD of hosts, 19 great in counsel and mighty in deed; whose eyes are
open to all the ways of mortals, rewarding all according to their ways
and according to the fruit of their doings. 20 You showed signs and
wonders in the land of Egypt, and to this day in Israel and among all
humankind, and have made yourself a name that continues to this very

1572

JEREMIAH 1573

day. 21 You brought your people Israel out of the land of Egypt with
signs and wonders, with a strong hand and outstretched arm, and with
great terror; 22 and you gave them this land, which you swore to their
ancestors to give them, a land flowing with milk and honey; 23 and
they entered and took possession of it. But they did not obey your
voice or follow your law; of all you commanded them to do, they did
nothing. Therefore you have made all these disasters come upon them.
24 See, the siege ramps have been cast up against the city to take it,
and the city, faced with sword, famine, and pestilence, has been given
into the hands of the Chaldeans who are fighting against it. What you
spoke has happened, as you yourself can see. 25 Yet you, O Lord GOD,
have said to me, "Buy the field for money and get witnesses" —
though the city has been given into the hands of the Chaldeans.
26 The word of the LORD came to Jeremiah: 27 See, I am the LORD, the
God of all flesh; is anything too hard for me? 28 Therefore, thus says
the LORD: I am going to give this city into the hands of the Chaldeans
and into the hand of King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon, and he shall
take it. 29 The Chaldeans who are fighting against this city shall come,
set it on fire, and burn it, with the houses on whose roofs offerings
have been made to Baal and libations have been poured out to other
gods, to provoke me to anger. 30 For the people of Israel and the
people of Judah have done nothing but evil in my sight from their
youth; the people of Israel have done nothing but provoke me to
anger by the work of their hands, says the LORD. 31 This city has aroused
my anger and wrath, from the day it was built until this day, so that I
will remove it from my sight 32 because of all the evil of the people of
Israel and the people of Judah that they did to provoke me to anger —
they, their kings and their officials, their priests and their prophets, the
citizens of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 33 They have turned
their backs to me, not their faces; though I have taught them
persistently, they would not listen and accept correction. 34 They set up
their abominations in the house that bears my name, and defiled it. 35
They built the high places of Baal in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to
offer up their sons and daughters to Molech, though I did not
command them, nor did it enter my mind that they should do this
abomination, causing Judah to sin.

1573

JEREMIAH 1574

36 Now therefore thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, concerning this
city of which you say, "It is being given into the hand of the king of
Babylon by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence": 37 See, I am
going to gather them from all the lands to which I drove them in my
anger and my wrath and in great indignation; I will bring them back to
this place, and I will settle them in safety. 38 They shall be my people,
and I will be their God. 39 I will give them one heart and one way, that
they may fear me for all time, for their own good and the good of
their children after them. 40 I will make an everlasting covenant with
them, never to draw back from doing good to them; and I will put the
fear of me in their hearts, so that they may not turn from me. 41 I will
rejoice in doing good to them, and I will plant them in this land in
faithfulness, with all my heart and all my soul.
42 For thus says the LORD: Just as I have brought all this great disaster
upon this people, so I will bring upon them all the good fortune that I
now promise them. 43 Fields shall be bought in this land of which you
are saying, It is a desolation, without human beings or animals; it has
been given into the hands of the Chaldeans. 44 Fields shall be bought
for money, and deeds shall be signed and sealed and witnessed, in the
land of Benjamin, in the places around Jerusalem, and in the cities of
Judah, of the hill country, of the Shephelah, and of the Negeb; for I
will restore their fortunes, says the LORD.
[Jeremiah 33]
God will rebuild the walls of Jerusalem
1 The word of the LORD came to Jeremiah a second time, while he was
still confined in the court of the guard: 2 Thus says the LORD who made
the earth, the LORD who formed it to establish it — the LORD is his
name: 3 Call to me and I will answer you, and will tell you great and
hidden things that you have not known. 4 For thus says the LORD, the
God of Israel, concerning the houses of this city and the houses of the
kings of Judah that were torn down to make a defense against the
siege ramps and before the sword: 5 The Chaldeans are coming in to
fight and to fill them with the dead bodies of those whom I shall strike
down in my anger and my wrath, for I have hidden my face from this
city because of all their wickedness. 6 I am going to bring it recovery

1574

JEREMIAH 1575

and healing; I will heal them and reveal to them abundance of
prosperity and security. 7 I will restore the fortunes of Judah and the
fortunes of Israel, and rebuild them as they were at first. 8 I will
cleanse them from all the guilt of their sin against me, and I will
forgive all the guilt of their sin and rebellion against me. 9 And this city
shall be to me a name of joy, a praise and a glory before all the nations
of the earth who shall hear of all the good that I do for them; they
shall fear and tremble because of all the good and all the prosperity I
provide for it.
Two proclamations of salvation
10 Thus says the LORD: In this place of which you say, "It is a waste
without human beings or animals," in the towns of Judah and the
streets of Jerusalem that are desolate, without inhabitants, human or
animal, there shall once more be heard 11 the voice of mirth and the
voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the
bride, the voices of those who sing, as they bring thank offerings to
the house of the LORD:
"Give thanks to the LORD of hosts,
for the LORD is good,
for his steadfast love endures forever!"
For I will restore the fortunes of the land as at first, says the LORD.
12 Thus says the LORD of hosts: In this place that is waste, without
human beings or animals, and in all its towns there shall again be
pasture for shepherds resting their flocks. 13 In the towns of the hill
country, of the Shephelah, and of the Negeb, in the land of Benjamin,
the places around Jerusalem, and in the towns of Judah, flocks shall
again pass under the hands of the one who counts them, says the LORD.
A variation of ch 23.5-6
14 The days are surely coming, says the LORD, when I will fulfill the
promise I made to the house of Israel and the house of Judah. 15 In
those days and at that time I will cause a righteous Branch to spring up
for David; and he shall execute justice and righteousness in the land. 16
In those days Judah will be saved and Jerusalem will live in safety. And

1575

JEREMIAH 1576

this is the name by which it will be called: "The LORD is our
righteousness."
17 For thus says the LORD: David shall never lack a man to sit on the
throne of the house of Israel, 18 and the levitical priests shall never lack
a man in my presence to offer burnt offerings, to make grain offerings,
and to make sacrifices for all time.
19 The word of the LORD came to Jeremiah: 20 Thus says the LORD: If any
of you could break my covenant with the day and my covenant with
the night, so that day and night would not come at their appointed
time, 21 only then could my covenant with my servant David be broken,
so that he would not have a son to reign on his throne, and my
covenant with my ministers the Levites. 22 Just as the host of heaven
cannot be numbered and the sands of the sea cannot be measured, so I
will increase the offspring of my servant David, and the Levites who
minister to me.
23 The word of the LORD came to Jeremiah: 24 Have you not observed
how these people say, "The two families that the LORD chose have been
rejected by him," and how they hold my people in such contempt that
they no longer regard them as a nation? 25 Thus says the LORD: Only if I
had not established my covenant with day and night and the
ordinances of heaven and earth, 26 would I reject the offspring of
Jacob and of my servant David and not choose any of his descendants
as rulers over the offspring of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. For I will
restore their fortunes, and will have mercy upon them.
[Jeremiah 34]
Warning to Zedekiah
1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, when King
Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon and all his army and all the kingdoms of
the earth and all the peoples under his dominion were fighting against
Jerusalem and all its cities: 2 Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: Go
and speak to King Zedekiah of Judah and say to him: Thus says the
LORD: I am going to give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon,
and he shall burn it with fire. 3 And you yourself shall not escape from

1576

JEREMIAH 1577

his hand, but shall surely be captured and handed over to him; you
shall see the king of Babylon eye to eye and speak with him face to
face; and you shall go to Babylon. 4 Yet hear the word of the LORD, O
King Zedekiah of Judah! Thus says the LORD concerning you: You shall
not die by the sword; 5 you shall die in peace. And as spices were
burned for your ancestors, the earlier kings who preceded you, so they
shall burn spices for you and lament for you, saying, "Alas, lord!" For I
have spoken the word, says the LORD.
6 Then the prophet Jeremiah spoke all these words to Zedekiah king of
Judah, in Jerusalem, 7 when the army of the king of Babylon was
fighting against Jerusalem and against all the cities of Judah that were
left, Lachish and Azekah; for these were the only fortified cities of
Judah that remained.
Manumission of slaves and perfidy of the Jerusalemites
8 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, after King Zedekiah
had made a covenant with all the people in Jerusalem to make a
proclamation of liberty to them — 9 that all should set free their
Hebrew slaves, male and female, so that no one should hold another
Judean in slavery. 10 And they obeyed, all the officials and all the
people who had entered into the covenant that all would set free their
slaves, male or female, so that they would not be enslaved again; they
obeyed and set them free. 11 But afterward they turned around and
took back the male and female slaves they had set free, and brought
them again into subjection as slaves. 12 The word of the LORD came to
Jeremiah from the LORD: 13 Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: I
myself made a covenant with your ancestors when I brought them out
of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery, saying, 14 "Every
seventh year each of you must set free any Hebrews who have been
sold to you and have served you six years; you must set them free from
your service." But your ancestors did not listen to me or incline their
ears to me. 15 You yourselves recently repented and did what was right
in my sight by proclaiming liberty to one another, and you made a
covenant before me in the house that is called by my name; 16 but then
you turned around and profaned my name when each of you took
back your male and female slaves, whom you had set free according to

1577

JEREMIAH 1578

their desire, and you brought them again into subjection to be your
slaves. 17 Therefore, thus says the LORD: You have not obeyed me by
granting a release to your neighbors and friends; I am going to grant a
release to you, says the LORD — a release to the sword, to pestilence,
and to famine. I will make you a horror to all the kingdoms of the
earth. 18 And those who transgressed my covenant and did not keep
the terms of the covenant that they made before me, I will make like
the calf when they cut it in two and passed between its parts: 19 the
officials of Judah, the officials of Jerusalem, the eunuchs, the priests,
and all the people of the land who passed between the parts of the
calf 20 shall be handed over to their enemies and to those who seek
their lives. Their corpses shall become food for the birds of the air and
the wild animals of the earth. 21 And as for King Zedekiah of Judah
and his officials, I will hand them over to their enemies and to those
who seek their lives, to the army of the king of Babylon, which has
withdrawn from you. 22 I am going to command, says the LORD, and
will bring them back to this city; and they will fight against it, and take
it, and burn it with fire. The towns of Judah I will make a desolation
without inhabitant.
[Jeremiah 35]
The symbol of the Rechabites
1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD in the days of King
Jehoiakim son of Josiah of Judah: 2 Go to the house of the Rechabites,
and speak with them, and bring them to the house of the LORD, into
one of the chambers; then offer them wine to drink. 3 So I took
Jaazaniah son of Jeremiah son of Habazziniah, and his brothers, and all
his sons, and the whole house of the Rechabites. 4 I brought them to
the house of the LORD into the chamber of the sons of Hanan son of
Igdaliah, the man of God, which was near the chamber of the officials,
above the chamber of Maaseiah son of Shallum, keeper of the
threshold. 5 Then I set before the Rechabites pitchers full of wine, and
cups; and I said to them, "Have some wine." 6 But they answered, "We
will drink no wine, for our ancestor Jonadab son of Rechab
commanded us, 'You shall never drink wine, neither you nor your
children; 7 nor shall you ever build a house, or sow seed; nor shall you
plant a vineyard, or even own one; but you shall live in tents all your

1578

JEREMIAH 1579

days, that you may live many days in the land where you reside.' 8 We
have obeyed the charge of our ancestor Jonadab son of Rechab in all
that he commanded us, to drink no wine all our days, ourselves, our
wives, our sons, or our daughters, 9 and not to build houses to live in.
We have no vineyard or field or seed; 10 but we have lived in tents, and
have obeyed and done all that our ancestor Jonadab commanded us. 11
But when King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon came up against the land,
we said, 'Come, and let us go to Jerusalem for fear of the army of the
Chaldeans and the army of the Arameans.' That is why we are living in
Jerusalem."
12 Then the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah: 13 Thus says the LORD
of hosts, the God of Israel: Go and say to the people of Judah and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, Can you not learn a lesson and obey my
words? says the LORD. 14 The command has been carried out that
Jonadab son of Rechab gave to his descendants to drink no wine; and
they drink none to this day, for they have obeyed their ancestor's
command. But I myself have spoken to you persistently, and you have
not obeyed me. 15 I have sent to you all my servants the prophets,
sending them persistently, saying, "Turn now everyone of you from
your evil way, and amend your doings, and do not go after other gods
to serve them, and then you shall live in the land that I gave to you and
your ancestors." But you did not incline your ear or obey me. 16 The
descendants of Jonadab son of Rechab have carried out the command
that their ancestor gave them, but this people has not obeyed me. 17
Therefore, thus says the LORD, the God of hosts, the God of Israel: I am
going to bring on Judah and on all the inhabitants of Jerusalem every
disaster that I have pronounced against them; because I have spoken to
them and they have not listened, I have called to them and they have
not answered.
18 But to the house of the Rechabites Jeremiah said: Thus says the LORD
of hosts, the God of Israel: Because you have obeyed the command of
your ancestor Jonadab, and kept all his precepts, and done all that he
commanded you, 19 therefore thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of
Israel: Jonadab son of Rechab shall not lack a descendant to stand
before me for all time.

1579

JEREMIAH 1580

[Jeremiah 36]
Jehoiakim burns a scroll of Jeremiah, and Jeremiah dictates another
1 In the fourth year of King Jehoiakim son of Josiah of Judah, this word
came to Jeremiah from the LORD: 2 Take a scroll and write on it all the
words that I have spoken to you against Israel and Judah and all the
nations, from the day I spoke to you, from the days of Josiah until
today. 3 It may be that when the house of Judah hears of all the
disasters that I intend to do to them, all of them may turn from their
evil ways, so that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin.
4 Then Jeremiah called Baruch son of Neriah, and Baruch wrote on a
scroll at Jeremiah's dictation all the words of the LORD that he had
spoken to him. 5 And Jeremiah ordered Baruch, saying, "I am
prevented from entering the house of the LORD; 6 so you go yourself,
and on a fast day in the hearing of the people in the LORD's house you
shall read the words of the LORD from the scroll that you have written
at my dictation. You shall read them also in the hearing of all the
people of Judah who come up from their towns. 7 It may be that their
plea will come before the LORD, and that all of them will turn from
their evil ways, for great is the anger and wrath that the LORD has
pronounced against this people." 8 And Baruch son of Neriah did all
that the prophet Jeremiah ordered him about reading from the scroll
the words of the LORD in the LORD's house.
9 In the fifth year of King Jehoiakim son of Josiah of Judah, in the
ninth month, all the people in Jerusalem and all the people who came
from the towns of Judah to Jerusalem proclaimed a fast before the
LORD. 10 Then, in the hearing of all the people, Baruch read the words
of Jeremiah from the scroll, in the house of the LORD, in the chamber of
Gemariah son of Shaphan the secretary, which was in the upper court,
at the entry of the New Gate of the LORD's house.
11 When Micaiah son of Gemariah son of Shaphan heard all the words
of the LORD from the scroll, 12 he went down to the king's house, into
the secretary's chamber; and all the officials were sitting there:
Elishama the secretary, Delaiah son of Shemaiah, Elnathan son of
Achbor, Gemariah son of Shaphan, Zedekiah son of Hananiah, and all

1580

JEREMIAH 1581

the officials. 13 And Micaiah told them all the words that he had heard,
when Baruch read the scroll in the hearing of the people. 14 Then all
the officials sent Jehudi son of Nethaniah son of Shelemiah son of
Cushi to say to Baruch, "Bring the scroll that you read in the hearing of
the people, and come." So Baruch son of Neriah took the scroll in his
hand and came to them. 15 And they said to him, "Sit down and read it
to us." So Baruch read it to them. 16 When they heard all the words,
they turned to one another in alarm, and said to Baruch, "We certainly
must report all these words to the king." 17 Then they questioned
Baruch, "Tell us now, how did you write all these words? Was it at his
dictation?" 18 Baruch answered them, "He dictated all these words to
me, and I wrote them with ink on the scroll." 19 Then the officials said
to Baruch, "Go and hide, you and Jeremiah, and let no one know
where you are."
20 Leaving the scroll in the chamber of Elishama the secretary, they
went to the court of the king; and they reported all the words to the
king. 21 Then the king sent Jehudi to get the scroll, and he took it from
the chamber of Elishama the secretary; and Jehudi read it to the king
and all the officials who stood beside the king. 22 Now the king was
sitting in his winter apartment (it was the ninth month), and there was
a fire burning in the brazier before him. 23 As Jehudi read three or
four columns, the king would cut them off with a penknife and throw
them into the fire in the brazier, until the entire scroll was consumed in
the fire that was in the brazier. 24 Yet neither the king, nor any of his
servants who heard all these words, was alarmed, nor did they tear
their garments. 25 Even when Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah
urged the king not to burn the scroll, he would not listen to them. 26
And the king commanded Jerahmeel the king's son and Seraiah son of
Azriel and Shelemiah son of Abdeel to arrest the secretary Baruch and
the prophet Jeremiah. But the LORD hid them.
27 Now, after the king had burned the scroll with the words that
Baruch wrote at Jeremiah's dictation, the word of the LORD came to
Jeremiah: 28 Take another scroll and write on it all the former words
that were in the first scroll, which King Jehoiakim of Judah has burned.
29 And concerning King Jehoiakim of Judah you shall say: Thus says the
LORD, You have dared to burn this scroll, saying, Why have you written

1581

JEREMIAH 1582

in it that the king of Babylon will certainly come and destroy this land,
and will cut off from it human beings and animals? 30 Therefore thus
says the LORD concerning King Jehoiakim of Judah: He shall have no
one to sit upon the throne of David, and his dead body shall be cast
out to the heat by day and the frost by night. 31 And I will punish him
and his offspring and his servants for their iniquity; I will bring on
them, and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and on the people of
Judah, all the disasters with which I have threatened them — but they
would not listen.
32 Then Jeremiah took another scroll and gave it to the secretary
Baruch son of Neriah, who wrote on it at Jeremiah's dictation all the
words of the scroll that King Jehoiakim of Judah had burned in the
fire; and many similar words were added to them.
[Jeremiah 37]
The sufferings of Jeremiah before, during, and after the fall of
Jerusalem; Jeremiah, Zedekiah, and the siege
1 Zedekiah son of Josiah, whom King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon made
king in the land of Judah, succeeded Coniah son of Jehoiakim. 2 But
neither he nor his servants nor the people of the land listened to the
words of the LORD that he spoke through the prophet Jeremiah.
3 King Zedekiah sent Jehucal son of Shelemiah and the priest
Zephaniah son of Maaseiah to the prophet Jeremiah saying, "Please
pray for us to the LORD our God." 4 Now Jeremiah was still going in
and out among the people, for he had not yet been put in prison. 5
Meanwhile, the army of Pharaoh had come out of Egypt; and when the
Chaldeans who were besieging Jerusalem heard news of them, they
withdrew from Jerusalem.
6 Then the word of the LORD came to the prophet Jeremiah: 7 Thus says
the LORD, God of Israel: This is what the two of you shall say to the king
of Judah, who sent you to me to inquire of me: Pharaoh's army, which
set out to help you, is going to return to its own land, to Egypt. 8 And
the Chaldeans shall return and fight against this city; they shall take it
and burn it with fire. 9 Thus says the LORD: Do not deceive yourselves,

1582

JEREMIAH 1583

saying, "The Chaldeans will surely go away from us," for they will not
go away. 10 Even if you defeated the whole army of Chaldeans who
are fighting against you, and there remained of them only wounded
men in their tents, they would rise up and burn this city with fire.
11 Now when the Chaldean army had withdrawn from Jerusalem at the
approach of Pharaoh's army, 12 Jeremiah set out from Jerusalem to go
to the land of Benjamin to receive his share of property among the
people there. 13 When he reached the Benjamin Gate, a sentinel there
named Irijah son of Shelemiah son of Hananiah arrested the prophet
Jeremiah saying, "You are deserting to the Chaldeans." 14 And
Jeremiah said, "That is a lie; I am not deserting to the Chaldeans." But
Irijah would not listen to him, and arrested Jeremiah and brought him
to the officials. 15 The officials were enraged at Jeremiah, and they
beat him and imprisoned him in the house of the secretary Jonathan,
for it had been made a prison. 16 Thus Jeremiah was put in the cistern
house, in the cells, and remained there many days.
17 Then King Zedekiah sent for him, and received him. The king
questioned him secretly in his house, and said, "Is there any word from
the LORD?" Jeremiah said, "There is!" Then he said, "You shall be
handed over to the king of Babylon." 18 Jeremiah also said to King
Zedekiah, "What wrong have I done to you or your servants or this
people, that you have put me in prison? 19 Where are your prophets
who prophesied to you, saying, 'The king of Babylon will not come
against you and against this land'? 20 Now please hear me, my lord
king: be good enough to listen to my plea, and do not send me back to
the house of the secretary Jonathan to die there." 21 So King Zedekiah
gave orders, and they committed Jeremiah to the court of the guard;
and a loaf of bread was given him daily from the bakers' street, until
all the bread of the city was gone. So Jeremiah remained in the court
of the guard.

1583

JEREMIAH 1584

[Jeremiah 38]
1 Now Shephatiah son of Mattan, Gedaliah son of Pashhur, Jucal son of
Shelemiah, and Pashhur son of Malchiah heard the words that
Jeremiah was saying to all the people, 2 Thus says the LORD, Those who
stay in this city shall die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence; but
those who go out to the Chaldeans shall live; they shall have their lives
as a prize of war, and live. 3 Thus says the LORD, This city shall surely be
handed over to the army of the king of Babylon and be taken. 4 Then
the officials said to the king, "This man ought to be put to death,
because he is discouraging the soldiers who are left in this city, and all
the people, by speaking such words to them. For this man is not
seeking the welfare of this people, but their harm." 5 King Zedekiah
said, "Here he is; he is in your hands; for the king is powerless against
you." 6 So they took Jeremiah and threw him into the cistern of
Malchiah, the king's son, which was in the court of the guard, letting
Jeremiah down by ropes. Now there was no water in the cistern, but
only mud, and Jeremiah sank in the mud.
7 Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, a eunuch in the king's house, heard that
they had put Jeremiah into the cistern. The king happened to be sitting
at the Benjamin Gate, 8 So Ebed-melech left the king's house and
spoke to the king, 9 "My lord king, these men have acted wickedly in
all they did to the prophet Jeremiah by throwing him into the cistern
to die there of hunger, for there is no bread left in the city." 10 Then
the king commanded Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, "Take three men
with you from here, and pull the prophet Jeremiah up from the cistern
before he dies." 11 So Ebed-melech took the men with him and went to
the house of the king, to a wardrobe of the storehouse, and took from
there old rags and worn-out clothes, which he let down to Jeremiah in
the cistern by ropes. 12 Then Ebed-melech the Ethiopian said to
Jeremiah, "Just put the rags and clothes between your armpits and the
ropes." Jeremiah did so. 13 Then they drew Jeremiah up by the ropes
and pulled him out of the cistern. And Jeremiah remained in the court
of the guard.

1584

JEREMIAH 1585

14 King Zedekiah sent for the prophet Jeremiah and received him at
the third entrance of the temple of the LORD. The king said to
Jeremiah, "I have something to ask you; do not hide anything from
me." 15 Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, "If I tell you, you will put me to
death, will you not? And if I give you advice, you will not listen to me."
16 So King Zedekiah swore an oath in secret to Jeremiah, "As the LORD
lives, who gave us our lives, I will not put you to death or hand you
over to these men who seek your life."
17 Then Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, "Thus says the LORD, the God of
hosts, the God of Israel, If you will only surrender to the officials of the
king of Babylon, then your life shall be spared, and this city shall not be
burned with fire, and you and your house shall live. 18 But if you do
not surrender to the officials of the king of Babylon, then this city shall
be handed over to the Chaldeans, and they shall burn it with fire, and
you yourself shall not escape from their hand." 19 King Zedekiah said
to Jeremiah, "I am afraid of the Judeans who have deserted to the
Chaldeans, for I might be handed over to them and they would abuse
me." 20 Jeremiah said, "That will not happen. Just obey the voice of
the LORD in what I say to you, and it shall go well with you, and your
life shall be spared. 21 But if you are determined not to surrender, this
is what the LORD has shown me — 22 a vision of all the women
remaining in the house of the king of Judah being led out to the
officials of the king of Babylon and saying,
'Your trusted friends have seduced you
and have overcome you;
Now that your feet are stuck in the mud,
they desert you.'
23 All your wives and your children shall be led out to the Chaldeans,
and you yourself shall not escape from their hand, but shall be seized
by the king of Babylon; and this city shall be burned with fire."
24 Then Zedekiah said to Jeremiah, "Do not let anyone else know of
this conversation, or you will die. 25 If the officials should hear that I
have spoken with you, and they should come and say to you, 'Just tell
us what you said to the king; do not conceal it from us, or we will put
you to death. What did the king say to you?' 26 then you shall say to
them, 'I was presenting my plea to the king not to send me back to the

1585

JEREMIAH 1586

house of Jonathan to die there.'" 27 All the officials did come to
Jeremiah and questioned him; and he answered them in the very
words the king had commanded. So they stopped questioning him, for
the conversation had not been overheard. 28 And Jeremiah remained
in the court of the guard until the day that Jerusalem was taken.
[Jeremiah 39]
Jeremiah and the fall of Jerusalem
1 In the ninth year of King Zedekiah of Judah, in the tenth month, King
Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon and all his army came against Jerusalem
and besieged it; 2 in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth
month, on the ninth day of the month, a breach was made in the city. 3
When Jerusalem was taken, all the officials of the king of Babylon
came and sat in the middle gate: Nergal-sharezer, Samgar-nebo,
Sarsechim the Rabsaris, Nergal-sharezer the Rabmag, with all the rest
of the officials of the king of Babylon. 4 When King Zedekiah of Judah
and all the soldiers saw them, they fled, going out of the city at night
by way of the king's garden through the gate between the two walls;
and they went toward the Arabah. 5 But the army of the Chaldeans
pursued them, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and
when they had taken him, they brought him up to King
Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon, at Riblah, in the land of Hamath; and he
passed sentence on him. 6 The king of Babylon slaughtered the sons of
Zedekiah at Riblah before his eyes; also the king of Babylon
slaughtered all the nobles of Judah. 7 He put out the eyes of Zedekiah,
and bound him in fetters to take him to Babylon. 8 The Chaldeans
burned the king's house and the houses of the people, and broke
down the walls of Jerusalem. 9 Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the
guard exiled to Babylon the rest of the people who were left in the
city, those who had deserted to him, and the people who remained. 10
Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left in the land of Judah some
of the poor people who owned nothing, and gave them vineyards and
fields at the same time.
11 King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon gave command concerning
Jeremiah through Nebuzaradan, the captain of the guard, saying, 12
"Take him, look after him well and do him no harm, but deal with him

1586

JEREMIAH 1587

as he may ask you." 13 So Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard,
Nebushazban the Rabsaris, Nergal-sharezer the Rabmag, and all the
chief officers of the king of Babylon sent 14 and took Jeremiah from
the court of the guard. They entrusted him to Gedaliah son of Ahikam
son of Shaphan to be brought home. So he stayed with his own
people.
15 The word of the LORD came to Jeremiah while he was confined in the
court of the guard: 16 Go and say to Ebed-melech the Ethiopian: Thus
says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: I am going to fulfill my words
against this city for evil and not for good, and they shall be
accomplished in your presence on that day. 17 But I will save you on
that day, says the LORD, and you shall not be handed over to those
whom you dread. 18 For I will surely save you, and you shall not fall by
the sword; but you shall have your life as a prize of war, because you
have trusted in me, says the LORD.
[Jeremiah 40]
1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD after Nebuzaradan
the captain of the guard had let him go from Ramah, when he took
him bound in fetters along with all the captives of Jerusalem and
Judah who were being exiled to Babylon. 2 The captain of the guard
took Jeremiah and said to him, "The LORD your God threatened this
place with this disaster; 3 and now the LORD has brought it about, and
has done as he said, because all of you sinned against the LORD and did
not obey his voice. Therefore this thing has come upon you. 4 Now
look, I have just released you today from the fetters on your hands. If
you wish to come with me to Babylon, come, and I will take good care
of you; but if you do not wish to come with me to Babylon, you need
not come. See, the whole land is before you; go wherever you think it
good and right to go. 5 If you remain, then return to Gedaliah son of
Ahikam son of Shaphan, whom the king of Babylon appointed
governor of the towns of Judah, and stay with him among the people;
or go wherever you think it right to go." So the captain of the guard
gave him an allowance of food and a present, and let him go. 6 Then
Jeremiah went to Gedaliah son of Ahikam at Mizpah, and stayed with
him among the people who were left in the land.

1587

JEREMIAH 1588

Hope for the future of God's people lies only with the Babylonian
exiles; the third revolt
7 When all the leaders of the forces in the open country and their
troops heard that the king of Babylon had appointed Gedaliah son of
Ahikam governor in the land, and had committed to him men, women,
and children, those of the poorest of the land who had not been taken
into exile to Babylon, 8 they went to Gedaliah at Mizpah — Ishmael
son of Nethaniah, Johanan son of Kareah, Seraiah son of Tanhumeth,
the sons of Ephai the Netophathite, Jezaniah son of the Maacathite,
they and their troops. 9 Gedaliah son of Ahikam son of Shaphan swore
to them and their troops, saying, "Do not be afraid to serve the
Chaldeans. Stay in the land and serve the king of Babylon, and it shall
go well with you. 10 As for me, I am staying at Mizpah to represent you
before the Chaldeans who come to us; but as for you, gather wine and
summer fruits and oil, and store them in your vessels, and live in the
towns that you have taken over." 11 Likewise, when all the Judeans
who were in Moab and among the Ammonites and in Edom and in
other lands heard that the king of Babylon had left a remnant in Judah
and had appointed Gedaliah son of Ahikam son of Shaphan as
governor over them, 12 then all the Judeans returned from all the
places to which they had been scattered and came to the land of
Judah, to Gedaliah at Mizpah; and they gathered wine and summer
fruits in great abundance.
13 Now Johanan son of Kareah and all the leaders of the forces in the
open country came to Gedaliah at Mizpah 14 and said to him, "Are you
at all aware that Baalis king of the Ammonites has sent Ishmael son of
Nethaniah to take your life?" But Gedaliah son of Ahikam would not
believe them. 15 Then Johanan son of Kareah spoke secretly to
Gedaliah at Mizpah, "Please let me go and kill Ishmael son of
Nethaniah, and no one else will know. Why should he take your life, so
that all the Judeans who are gathered around you would be scattered,
and the remnant of Judah would perish?" 16 But Gedaliah son of
Ahikam said to Johanan son of Kareah, "Do not do such a thing, for
you are telling a lie about Ishmael."

1588

JEREMIAH 1589

[Jeremiah 41]
1 In the seventh month, Ishmael son of Nethaniah son of Elishama, of
the royal family, one of the chief officers of the king, came with ten
men to Gedaliah son of Ahikam, at Mizpah. As they ate bread together
there at Mizpah, 2 Ishmael son of Nethaniah and the ten men with him
got up and struck down Gedaliah son of Ahikam son of Shaphan with
the sword and killed him, because the king of Babylon had appointed
him governor in the land. 3 Ishmael also killed all the Judeans who
were with Gedaliah at Mizpah, and the Chaldean soldiers who
happened to be there.
4 On the day after the murder of Gedaliah, before anyone knew of it, 5
eighty men arrived from Shechem and Shiloh and Samaria, with their
beards shaved and their clothes torn, and their bodies gashed, bringing
grain offerings and incense to present at the temple of the LORD. 6 And
Ishmael son of Nethaniah came out from Mizpah to meet them,
weeping as he came. As he met them, he said to them, "Come to
Gedaliah son of Ahikam." 7 When they reached the middle of the city,
Ishmael son of Nethaniah and the men with him slaughtered them,
and threw them into a cistern. 8 But there were ten men among them
who said to Ishmael, "Do not kill us, for we have stores of wheat,
barley, oil, and honey hidden in the fields." So he refrained, and did
not kill them along with their companions.
9 Now the cistern into which Ishmael had thrown all the bodies of the
men whom he had struck down was the large cistern that King Asa had
made for defense against King Baasha of Israel; Ishmael son of
Nethaniah filled that cistern with those whom he had killed. 10 Then
Ishmael took captive all the rest of the people who were in Mizpah,
the king's daughters and all the people who were left at Mizpah,
whom Nebuzaradan, the captain of the guard, had committed to
Gedaliah son of Ahikam. Ishmael son of Nethaniah took them captive
and set out to cross over to the Ammonites.
11 But when Johanan son of Kareah and all the leaders of the forces
with him heard of all the crimes that Ishmael son of Nethaniah had
done, 12 they took all their men and went to fight against Ishmael son

1589

JEREMIAH 1590

of Nethaniah. They came upon him at the great pool that is in Gibeon.
13 And when all the people who were with Ishmael saw Johanan son of
Kareah and all the leaders of the forces with him, they were glad. 14 So
all the people whom Ishmael had carried away captive from Mizpah
turned around and came back, and went to Johanan son of Kareah. 15
But Ishmael son of Nethaniah escaped from Johanan with eight men,
and went to the Ammonites. 16 Then Johanan son of Kareah and all
the leaders of the forces with him took all the rest of the people whom
Ishmael son of Nethaniah had carried away captive from Mizpah after
he had slain Gedaliah son of Ahikam — soldiers, women, children, and
eunuchs, whom Johanan brought back from Gibeon. 17 And they set
out, and stopped at Geruth Chimham near Bethlehem, intending to go
to Egypt 18 because of the Chaldeans; for they were afraid of them,
because Ishmael son of Nethaniah had killed Gedaliah son of Ahikam,
whom the king of Babylon had made governor over the land.
[Jeremiah 42]
Flight to Egypt
1 Then all the commanders of the forces, and Johanan son of Kareah
and Azariah son of Hoshaiah, and all the people from the least to the
greatest, approached 2 the prophet Jeremiah and said, "Be good
enough to listen to our plea, and pray to the LORD your God for us —
for all this remnant. For there are only a few of us left out of many, as
your eyes can see. 3 Let the LORD your God show us where we should
go and what we should do." 4 The prophet Jeremiah said to them,
"Very well: I am going to pray to the LORD your God as you request,
and whatever the LORD answers you I will tell you; I will keep nothing
back from you." 5 They in their turn said to Jeremiah, "May the LORD
be a true and faithful witness against us if we do not act according to
everything that the LORD your God sends us through you. 6 Whether it
is good or bad, we will obey the voice of the LORD our God to whom
we are sending you, in order that it may go well with us when we obey
the voice of the LORD our God."
7 At the end of ten days the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah. 8
Then he summoned Johanan son of Kareah and all the commanders of
the forces who were with him, and all the people from the least to the

1590

JEREMIAH 1591

greatest, 9 and said to them, "Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, to
whom you sent me to present your plea before him: 10 If you will only
remain in this land, then I will build you up and not pull you down; I
will plant you, and not pluck you up; for I am sorry for the disaster that
I have brought upon you. 11 Do not be afraid of the king of Babylon, as
you have been; do not be afraid of him, says the LORD, for I am with
you, to save you and to rescue you from his hand. 12 I will grant you
mercy, and he will have mercy on you and restore you to your native
soil. 13 But if you continue to say, 'We will not stay in this land,' thus
disobeying the voice of the LORD your God 14 and saying, 'No, we will
go to the land of Egypt, where we shall not see war, or hear the sound
of the trumpet, or be hungry for bread, and there we will stay,' 15 then
hear the word of the LORD, O remnant of Judah. Thus says the LORD of
hosts, the God of Israel: If you are determined to enter Egypt and go to
settle there, 16 then the sword that you fear shall overtake you there,
in the land of Egypt; and the famine that you dread shall follow close
after you into Egypt; and there you shall die. 17 All the people who
have determined to go to Egypt to settle there shall die by the sword,
by famine, and by pestilence; they shall have no remnant or survivor
from the disaster that I am bringing upon them.
18 "For thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Just as my anger
and my wrath were poured out on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so my
wrath will be poured out on you when you go to Egypt. You shall
become an object of execration and horror, of cursing and ridicule.
You shall see this place no more. 19 The LORD has said to you, O
remnant of Judah, Do not go to Egypt. Be well aware that I have
warned you today 20 that you have made a fatal mistake. For you
yourselves sent me to the LORD your God, saying, 'Pray for us to the
LORD our God, and whatever the LORD our God says, tell us and we will
do it.' 21 So I have told you today, but you have not obeyed the voice
of the LORD your God in anything that he sent me to tell you. 22 Be well
aware, then, that you shall die by the sword, by famine, and by
pestilence in the place where you desire to go and settle."

1591

JEREMIAH 1592

[Jeremiah 43]
1 When Jeremiah finished speaking to all the people all these words of
the LORD their God, with which the LORD their God had sent him to
them, 2 Azariah son of Hoshaiah and Johanan son of Kareah and all
the other insolent men said to Jeremiah, "You are telling a lie. The
LORD our God did not send you to say, 'Do not go to Egypt to settle
there'; 3 but Baruch son of Neriah is inciting you against us, to hand us
over to the Chaldeans, in order that they may kill us or take us into
exile in Babylon." 4 So Johanan son of Kareah and all the commanders
of the forces and all the people did not obey the voice of the LORD, to
stay in the land of Judah. 5 But Johanan son of Kareah and all the
commanders of the forces took all the remnant of Judah who had
returned to settle in the land of Judah from all the nations to which
they had been driven — 6 the men, the women, the children, the
princesses, and everyone whom Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard
had left with Gedaliah son of Ahikam son of Shaphan; also the prophet
Jeremiah and Baruch son of Neriah. 7 And they came into the land of
Egypt, for they did not obey the voice of the LORD. And they arrived at
Tahpanhes.
Jeremiah in Egypt
8 Then the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah in Tahpanhes: 9 Take
some large stones in your hands, and bury them in the clay pavement
that is at the entrance to Pharaoh's palace in Tahpanhes. Let the
Judeans see you do it, 10 and say to them, Thus says the LORD of hosts,
the God of Israel: I am going to send and take my servant King
Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon, and he will set his throne above these
stones that I have buried, and he will spread his royal canopy over
them. 11 He shall come and ravage the land of Egypt, giving
those who are destined for pestilence, to pestilence,
and those who are destined for captivity, to captivity,
and those who are destined for the sword, to the sword.
12 He shall kindle a fire in the temples of the gods of Egypt; and he
shall burn them and carry them away captive; and he shall pick clean
the land of Egypt, as a shepherd picks his cloak clean of vermin; and he
shall depart from there safely. 13 He shall break the obelisks of

1592

JEREMIAH 1593

Heliopolis, which is in the land of Egypt; and the temples of the gods
of Egypt he shall burn with fire.
[Jeremiah 44]
1 The word that came to Jeremiah for all the Judeans living in the land
of Egypt, at Migdol, at Tahpanhes, at Memphis, and in the land of
Pathros, 2 Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: You yourselves
have seen all the disaster that I have brought on Jerusalem and on all
the towns of Judah. Look at them; today they are a desolation, without
an inhabitant in them, 3 because of the wickedness that they
committed, provoking me to anger, in that they went to make
offerings and serve other gods that they had not known, neither they,
nor you, nor your ancestors. 4 Yet I persistently sent to you all my
servants the prophets, saying, "I beg you not to do this abominable
thing that I hate!" 5 But they did not listen or incline their ear, to turn
from their wickedness and make no offerings to other gods. 6 So my
wrath and my anger were poured out and kindled in the towns of
Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem; and they became a waste and a
desolation, as they still are today. 7 And now thus says the LORD God of
hosts, the God of Israel: Why are you doing such great harm to
yourselves, to cut off man and woman, child and infant, from the midst
of Judah, leaving yourselves without a remnant? 8 Why do you
provoke me to anger with the works of your hands, making offerings
to other gods in the land of Egypt where you have come to settle? Will
you be cut off and become an object of cursing and ridicule among all
the nations of the earth? 9 Have you forgotten the crimes of your
ancestors, of the kings of Judah, of their wives, your own crimes and
those of your wives, which they committed in the land of Judah and in
the streets of Jerusalem? 10 They have shown no contrition or fear to
this day, nor have they walked in my law and my statutes that I set
before you and before your ancestors.
11 Therefore thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: I am
determined to bring disaster on you, to bring all Judah to an end. 12 I
will take the remnant of Judah who are determined to come to the
land of Egypt to settle, and they shall perish, everyone; in the land of
Egypt they shall fall; by the sword and by famine they shall perish;

1593

JEREMIAH 1594

from the least to the greatest, they shall die by the sword and by
famine; and they shall become an object of execration and horror, of
cursing and ridicule. 13 I will punish those who live in the land of Egypt,
as I have punished Jerusalem, with the sword, with famine, and with
pestilence, 14 so that none of the remnant of Judah who have come to
settle in the land of Egypt shall escape or survive or return to the land
of Judah. Although they long to go back to live there, they shall not go
back, except some fugitives.
15 Then all the men who were aware that their wives had been making
offerings to other gods, and all the women who stood by, a great
assembly, all the people who lived in Pathros in the land of Egypt,
answered Jeremiah: 16 "As for the word that you have spoken to us in
the name of the LORD, we are not going to listen to you. 17 Instead, we
will do everything that we have vowed, make offerings to the queen
of heaven and pour out libations to her, just as we and our ancestors,
our kings and our officials, used to do in the towns of Judah and in the
streets of Jerusalem. We used to have plenty of food, and prospered,
and saw no misfortune. 18 But from the time we stopped making
offerings to the queen of heaven and pouring out libations to her, we
have lacked everything and have perished by the sword and by
famine." 19 And the women said, "Indeed we will go on making
offerings to the queen of heaven and pouring out libations to her; do
you think that we made cakes for her, marked with her image, and
poured out libations to her without our husbands' being involved?"
20 Then Jeremiah said to all the people, men and women, all the
people who were giving him this answer: 21 "As for the offerings that
you made in the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem, you
and your ancestors, your kings and your officials, and the people of the
land, did not the LORD remember them? Did it not come into his mind?
22 The LORD could no longer bear the sight of your evil doings, the
abominations that you committed; therefore your land became a
desolation and a waste and a curse, without inhabitant, as it is to this
day. 23 It is because you burned offerings, and because you sinned
against the LORD and did not obey the voice of the LORD or walk in his
law and in his statutes and in his decrees, that this disaster has befallen
you, as is still evident today."

1594

JEREMIAH 1595

24 Jeremiah said to all the people and all the women, "Hear the word
of the LORD, all you Judeans who are in the land of Egypt, 25 Thus says
the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: You and your wives have
accomplished in deeds what you declared in words, saying, 'We are
determined to perform the vows that we have made, to make
offerings to the queen of heaven and to pour out libations to her.' By
all means, keep your vows and make your libations! 26 Therefore hear
the word of the LORD, all you Judeans who live in the land of Egypt: Lo,
I swear by my great name, says the LORD, that my name shall no longer
be pronounced on the lips of any of the people of Judah in all the land
of Egypt, saying, 'As the Lord GOD lives.' 27 I am going to watch over
them for harm and not for good; all the people of Judah who are in
the land of Egypt shall perish by the sword and by famine, until not
one is left. 28 And those who escape the sword shall return from the
land of Egypt to the land of Judah, few in number; and all the remnant
of Judah, who have come to the land of Egypt to settle, shall know
whose words will stand, mine or theirs! 29 This shall be the sign to you,
says the LORD, that I am going to punish you in this place, in order that
you may know that my words against you will surely be carried out: 30
Thus says the LORD, I am going to give Pharaoh Hophra, king of Egypt,
into the hands of his enemies, those who seek his life, just as I gave
King Zedekiah of Judah into the hand of King Nebuchadrezzar of
Babylon, his enemy who sought his life."
[Jeremiah 45]
God's word to Baruch
1 The word that the prophet Jeremiah spoke to Baruch son of Neriah,
when he wrote these words in a scroll at the dictation of Jeremiah, in
the fourth year of King Jehoiakim son of Josiah of Judah: 2 Thus says
the LORD, the God of Israel, to you, O Baruch: 3 You said, "Woe is me!
The LORD has added sorrow to my pain; I am weary with my groaning,
and I find no rest." 4 Thus you shall say to him, "Thus says the LORD: I
am going to break down what I have built, and pluck up what I have
planted — that is, the whole land. 5 And you, do you seek great things
for yourself? Do not seek them; for I am going to bring disaster upon
all flesh, says the LORD; but I will give you your life as a prize of war in
every place to which you may go."

1595

JEREMIAH 1596

[Jeremiah 46]
Oracles against foreign nations
1 The word of the LORD that came to the prophet Jeremiah concerning
the nations.
Against Egypt
2 Concerning Egypt, about the army of Pharaoh Neco, king of Egypt,
which was by the river Euphrates at Carchemish and which King
Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon defeated in the fourth year of King
Jehoiakim son of Josiah of Judah:
3 Prepare buckler and shield,
and advance for battle!
4 Harness the horses;
mount the steeds!
Take your stations with your helmets,
whet your lances,
put on your coats of mail!
5 Why do I see them terrified?
They have fallen back;
their warriors are beaten down,
and have fled in haste.
They do not look back —
terror is all around!
says the LORD.
6 The swift cannot flee away,
nor can the warrior escape;
in the north by the river Euphrates
they have stumbled and fallen.
7 Who is this, rising like the Nile,
like rivers whose waters surge?
8 Egypt rises like the Nile,
like rivers whose waters surge.
It said, Let me rise, let me cover the earth,
let me destroy cities and their inhabitants.

1596

JEREMIAH 1597

9 Advance, O horses,
and dash madly, O chariots!
Let the warriors go forth:
Ethiopia and Put who carry the shield,
the Ludim, who draw the bow.
10 That day is the day of the Lord GOD of hosts,
a day of retribution,
to gain vindication from his foes.
The sword shall devour and be sated,
and drink its fill of their blood.
For the Lord GOD of hosts holds a sacrifice
in the land of the north by the river Euphrates.
11 Go up to Gilead, and take balm,
O virgin daughter Egypt!
In vain you have used many medicines;
there is no healing for you.
12 The nations have heard of your shame,
and the earth is full of your cry;
for warrior has stumbled against warrior;
both have fallen together.
13 The word that the LORD spoke to the prophet Jeremiah about the
coming of King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon to attack the land of
Egypt:
14 Declare in Egypt, and proclaim in Migdol;
proclaim in Memphis and Tahpanhes;
Say, "Take your stations and be ready,
for the sword shall devour those around you."
15 Why has Apis fled?
Why did your bull not stand?
— because the LORD thrust him down.
16 Your multitude stumbled and fell,
and one said to another,
"Come, let us go back to our own people
and to the land of our birth,
because of the destroying sword."
17 Give Pharaoh, king of Egypt, the name
"Braggart who missed his chance."

1597

JEREMIAH 1598

18 As I live, says the King,
whose name is the LORD of hosts,
one is coming
like Tabor among the mountains,
and like Carmel by the sea.
19 Pack your bags for exile,
sheltered daughter Egypt!
For Memphis shall become a waste,
a ruin, without inhabitant.
20 A beautiful heifer is Egypt —
a gadfly from the north lights upon her.
21 Even her mercenaries in her midst
are like fatted calves;
they too have turned and fled together,
they did not stand;
for the day of their calamity has come upon them,
the time of their punishment.
22 She makes a sound like a snake gliding away;
for her enemies march in force,
and come against her with axes,
like those who fell trees.
23 They shall cut down her forest,
says the LORD.,
though it is impenetrable,
because they are more numerous
than locusts;
they are without number.
24 Daughter Egypt shall be put to shame;
she shall be handed over to a people from the north.
25 The LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, said: See, I am bringing
punishment upon Amon of Thebes, and Pharaoh, and Egypt and her
gods and her kings, upon Pharaoh and those who trust in him. 26 I will
hand them over to those who seek their life, to King Nebuchadrezzar
of Babylon and his officers. Afterward Egypt shall be inhabited as in
the days of old, says the LORD.

1598

JEREMIAH 1599

27 But as for you, have no fear, my servant Jacob,
and do not be dismayed, O Israel;
for I am going to save you from far away,
and your offspring from the land of their captivity.
Jacob shall return and have quiet and ease,
and no one shall make him afraid.
28 As for you, have no fear, my servant Jacob,
says the LORD,
for I am with you.
I will make an end of all the nations
among which I have banished you,
but I will not make an end of you!
I will chastise you in just measure,
and I will by no means leave you unpunished.
[Jeremiah 47]
Against the Philistines
1 The word of the LORD that came to the prophet Jeremiah concerning
the Philistines, before Pharaoh attacked Gaza:
2 Thus says the LORD:
See, waters are rising out of the north
and shall become an overflowing torrent;
they shall overflow the land and all that fills it,
the city and those who live in it.
People shall cry out,
and all the inhabitants of the land shall wail.
3 At the noise of the stamping of the hoofs of his stallions,
at the clatter of his chariots, at the rumbling of their wheels,
parents do not turn back for children,
so feeble are their hands,
4 because of the day that is coming
to destroy all the Philistines,
to cut off from Tyre and Sidon
every helper that remains.
For the LORD is destroying the Philistines,
the remnant of the coastland of Caphtor.

1599

JEREMIAH 1600

5 Baldness has come upon Gaza,
Ashkelon is silenced.
O remnant of their power!
How long will you gash yourselves?
6 Ah, sword of the LORD!
How long until you are quiet?
Put yourself into your scabbard,
rest and be still!
7 How can it be quiet,
when the LORD has given it an order?
Against Ashkelon and against the seashore —
there he has appointed it.
[Jeremiah 48]
Against Moab
1 Concerning Moab.
Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel:
Alas for Nebo, it is laid waste!
Kiriathaim is put to shame, it is taken;
the fortress is put to shame and broken down;
2 the renown of Moab is no more.
In Heshbon they planned evil against her:
"Come, let us cut her off from being a nation!"
You also, O Madmen, shall be brought to silence;
the sword shall pursue you.
3 Hark! a cry from Horonaim,
"Desolation and great destruction!"
4 "Moab is destroyed!"
her little ones cry out.
5 For at the ascent of Luhith
they go up weeping bitterly;
for at the descent of Horonaim
they have heard the distressing cry of anguish.
6 Flee! Save yourselves!
Be like a wild ass in the desert!

1600

JEREMIAH 1601

7 Surely, because you trusted in your strongholds and your treasures,
you also shall be taken;
Chemosh shall go out into exile,
with his priests and his attendants.
8 The destroyer shall come upon every town,
and no town shall escape;
the valley shall perish,
and the plain shall be destroyed,
as the LORD has spoken.
9 Set aside salt for Moab,
for she will surely fall;
her towns shall become a desolation,
with no inhabitant in them.
10 Accursed is the one who is slack in doing the work of the LORD; and
accursed is the one who keeps back the sword from bloodshed.
11 Moab has been at ease from his youth,
settled like wine on its dregs;
he has not been emptied from vessel to vessel,
nor has he gone into exile;
therefore his flavor has remained
and his aroma is unspoiled.
12 Therefore, the time is surely coming, says the LORD, when I shall send
to him decanters to decant him, and empty his vessels, and break his
jars in pieces. 13 Then Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh, as the
house of Israel was ashamed of Bethel, their confidence.
14 How can you say, "We are heroes
and mighty warriors"?
15 The destroyer of Moab and his towns has come up,
and the choicest of his young men have gone down to slaughter,
says the King, whose name is the LORD of hosts.
16 The calamity of Moab is near at hand
and his doom approaches swiftly.

1601

JEREMIAH 1602

17 Mourn over him, all you his neighbors,
and all who know his name;
say, "How the mighty scepter is broken,
the glorious staff!"
18 Come down from glory,
and sit on the parched ground,
enthroned daughter Dibon!
For the destroyer of Moab has come up against you;
he has destroyed your strongholds.
19 Stand by the road and watch,
you inhabitant of Aroer!
Ask the man fleeing and the woman escaping;
say, "What has happened?"
20 Moab is put to shame, for it is broken down;
wail and cry!
Tell it by the Arnon,
that Moab is laid waste.
21 Judgment has come upon the tableland, upon Holon, and Jahzah,
and Mephaath, 22 and Dibon, and Nebo, and Beth-diblathaim, 23 and
Kiriathaim, and Beth-gamul, and Beth-meon, 24 and Kerioth, and
Bozrah, and all the towns of the land of Moab, far and near. 25 The
horn of Moab is cut off, and his arm is broken, says the LORD.
26 Make him drunk, because he magnified himself against the LORD; let
Moab wallow in his vomit; he too shall become a laughingstock. 27
Israel was a laughingstock for you, though he was not caught among
thieves; but whenever you spoke of him you shook your head!
28 Leave the towns, and live on the rock,
O inhabitants of Moab!
Be like the dove that nests
on the sides of the mouth of a gorge.
29 We have heard of the pride of Moab —
he is very proud —
of his loftiness, his pride, and his arrogance,
and the haughtiness of his heart.

1602

JEREMIAH 1603

30 I myself know his insolence, says the LORD;
his boasts are false,
his deeds are false.
31 Therefore I wail for Moab;
I cry out for all Moab;
for the people of Kir-heres I mourn.
32 More than for Jazer I weep for you,
O vine of Sibmah!
Your branches crossed over the sea,
reached as far as Jazer;
upon your summer fruits and your vintage
the destroyer has fallen.
33 Gladness and joy have been taken away
from the fruitful land of Moab;
I have stopped the wine from the wine presses;
no one treads them with shouts of joy;
the shouting is not the shout of joy.
34 Heshbon and Elealeh cry out; as far as Jahaz they utter their voice,
from Zoar to Horonaim and Eglath-shelishiyah. For even the waters of
Nimrim have become desolate. 35 And I will bring to an end in Moab,
says the LORD, those who offer sacrifice at a high place and make
offerings to their gods. 36 Therefore my heart moans for Moab like a
flute, and my heart moans like a flute for the people of Kir-heres; for
the riches they gained have perished.
37 For every head is shaved and every beard cut off; on all the hands
there are gashes, and on the loins sackcloth. 38 On all the housetops of
Moab and in the squares there is nothing but lamentation; for I have
broken Moab like a vessel that no one wants, says the LORD. 39 How it
is broken! How they wail! How Moab has turned his back in shame! So
Moab has become a derision and a horror to all his neighbors.
40 For thus says the LORD:
Look, he shall swoop down like an eagle,
and spread his wings against Moab;

1603

JEREMIAH 1604

41 the towns shall be taken
and the strongholds seized.
The hearts of the warriors of Moab, on that day,
shall be like the heart of a woman in labor.
42 Moab shall be destroyed as a people,
because he magnified himself against the LORD.
43 Terror, pit, and trap
are before you, O inhabitants of Moab!
says the LORD.
44 Everyone who flees from the terror
shall fall into the pit,
and everyone who climbs out of the pit
shall be caught in the trap.
For I will bring these things upon Moab
in the year of their punishment,
says the LORD.
45 In the shadow of Heshbon
fugitives stop exhausted;
for a fire has gone out from Heshbon,
a flame from the house of Sihon;
it has destroyed the forehead of Moab,
the scalp of the people of tumult.
46 Woe to you, O Moab!
The people of Chemosh have perished,
for your sons have been taken captive,
and your daughters into captivity.
47 Yet I will restore the fortunes of Moab
in the latter days, says the LORD.
Thus far is the judgment on Moab.

1604

JEREMIAH 1605

[Jeremiah 49]
Against Ammon
1 Concerning the Ammonites.
Thus says the LORD:
Has Israel no sons?
Has he no heir?
Why then has Milcom dispossessed Gad,
and his people settled in its towns?
2 Therefore, the time is surely coming,
says the LORD,
when I will sound the battle alarm
against Rabbah of the Ammonites;
it shall become a desolate mound,
and its villages shall be burned with fire;
then Israel shall dispossess those who dispossessed him,
says the LORD.
3 Wail, O Heshbon, for Ai is laid waste!
Cry out, O daughters of Rabbah!
Put on sackcloth,
lament, and slash yourselves with whips!
For Milcom shall go into exile,
with his priests and his attendants.
4 Why do you boast in your strength?
Your strength is ebbing,
O faithless daughter.
You trusted in your treasures, saying,
"Who will attack me?"
5 I am going to bring terror upon you,
says the Lord GOD of hosts,
from all your neighbors,
and you will be scattered, each headlong,
with no one to gather the fugitives.
6 But afterward I will restore the fortunes of the Ammonites, says the
LORD.

1605

JEREMIAH 1606

Against Edom
7 Concerning Edom.
Thus says the LORD of hosts:
Is there no longer wisdom in Teman?
Has counsel perished from the prudent?
Has their wisdom vanished?
8 Flee, turn back, get down low,
inhabitants of Dedan!
For I will bring the calamity of Esau upon him,
the time when I punish him.
9 If grape-gatherers came to you,
would they not leave gleanings?
If thieves came by night,
even they would pillage only what they wanted.
10 But as for me, I have stripped Esau bare,
I have uncovered his hiding places,
and he is not able to conceal himself.
His offspring are destroyed, his kinsfolk
and his neighbors; and he is no more.
11 Leave your orphans, I will keep them alive;
and let your widows trust in me.
12 For thus says the LORD: If those who do not deserve to drink the cup
still have to drink it, shall you be the one to go unpunished? You shall
not go unpunished; you must drink it. 13 For by myself I have sworn,
says the LORD, that Bozrah shall become an object of horror and
ridicule, a waste, and an object of cursing; and all her towns shall be
perpetual wastes.
14 I have heard tidings from the LORD,
and a messenger has been sent among the nations:
"Gather yourselves together and come against her,
and rise up for battle!"
15 For I will make you least among the nations,
despised by humankind.

1606

JEREMIAH 1607

16 The terror you inspire
and the pride of your heart have deceived you,
you who live in the clefts of the rock,
who hold the height of the hill.
Although you make your nest as high as the eagle's,
from there I will bring you down,
says the LORD.
17 Edom shall become an object of horror; everyone who passes by it
will be horrified and will hiss because of all its disasters. 18 As when
Sodom and Gomorrah and their neighbors were overthrown, says the
LORD, no one shall live there, nor shall anyone settle in it. 19 Like a lion
coming up from the thickets of the Jordan against a perennial pasture,
I will suddenly chase Edom away from it; and I will appoint over it
whomever I choose. For who is like me? Who can summon me? Who is
the shepherd who can stand before me? 20 Therefore hear the plan
that the LORD has made against Edom and the purposes that he has
formed against the inhabitants of Teman: Surely the little ones of the
flock shall be dragged away; surely their fold shall be appalled at their
fate. 21 At the sound of their fall the earth shall tremble; the sound of
their cry shall be heard at the Red Sea. 22 Look, he shall mount up and
swoop down like an eagle, and spread his wings against Bozrah, and
the heart of the warriors of Edom in that day shall be like the heart of
a woman in labor.
Against Damascus
23 Concerning Damascus.
Hamath and Arpad are confounded,
for they have heard bad news;
they melt in fear, they are troubled like the sea
that cannot be quiet.
24 Damascus has become feeble, she turned to flee,
and panic seized her;
anguish and sorrows have taken hold of her,
as of a woman in labor.

1607

JEREMIAH 1608

25 How the famous city is forsaken,
the joyful town!
26 Therefore her young men shall fall in her squares,
and all her soldiers shall be destroyed in that day,
says the LORD of hosts.
27 And I will kindle a fire at the wall of Damascus,
and it shall devour the strongholds of Ben-hadad.
Against Kedar and Hazor
28 Concerning Kedar and the kingdoms of Hazor that King
Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon defeated.
Thus says the LORD:
Rise up, advance against Kedar!
Destroy the people of the east!
29 Take their tents and their flocks,
their curtains and all their goods;
carry off their camels for yourselves,
and a cry shall go up: "Terror is all around!"
30 Flee, wander far away, hide in deep places,
O inhabitants of Hazor!
says the LORD.
For King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon
has made a plan against you
and formed a purpose against you.
31 Rise up, advance against a nation at ease,
that lives secure,
says the LORD,
that has no gates or bars,
that lives alone.

1608

JEREMIAH 1609

32 Their camels shall become booty,
their herds of cattle a spoil.
I will scatter to every wind
those who have shaven temples,
and I will bring calamity
against them from every side,
says the LORD.
33 Hazor shall become a lair of jackals,
an everlasting waste;
no one shall live there,
nor shall anyone settle in it.
Against Elam
34 The word of the LORD that came to the prophet Jeremiah concerning
Elam, at the beginning of the reign of King Zedekiah of Judah.
35 Thus says the LORD of hosts: I am going to break the bow of Elam,
the mainstay of their might; 36 and I will bring upon Elam the four
winds from the four quarters of heaven; and I will scatter them to all
these winds, and there shall be no nation to which the exiles from Elam
shall not come. 37 I will terrify Elam before their enemies, and before
those who seek their life; I will bring disaster upon them, my fierce
anger, says the LORD. I will send the sword after them, until I have
consumed them; 38 and I will set my throne in Elam, and destroy their
king and officials, says the LORD.
39 But in the latter days I will restore the fortunes of Elam, says the
LORD.
[Jeremiah 50]
Against Babylon
1 The word that the LORD spoke concerning Babylon, concerning the
land of the Chaldeans, by the prophet Jeremiah:

1609

JEREMIAH 1610

2 Declare among the nations and proclaim,
set up a banner and proclaim,
do not conceal it, say:
Babylon is taken,
Bel is put to shame,
Merodach is dismayed.
Her images are put to shame,
her idols are dismayed.
3 For out of the north a nation has come up against her; it shall make
her land a desolation, and no one shall live in it; both human beings
and animals shall flee away.
4 In those days and in that time, says the LORD, the people of Israel shall
come, they and the people of Judah together; they shall come weeping
as they seek the LORD their God. 5 They shall ask the way to Zion, with
faces turned toward it, and they shall come and join themselves to the
LORD by an everlasting covenant that will never be forgotten.
6 My people have been lost sheep; their shepherds have led them
astray, turning them away on the mountains; from mountain to hill
they have gone, they have forgotten their fold. 7 All who found them
have devoured them, and their enemies have said, "We are not guilty,
because they have sinned against the LORD, the true pasture, the LORD,
the hope of their ancestors."
8 Flee from Babylon, and go out of the land of the Chaldeans, and be
like male goats leading the flock. 9 For I am going to stir up and bring
against Babylon a company of great nations from the land of the
north; and they shall array themselves against her; from there she shall
be taken. Their arrows are like the arrows of a skilled warrior who does
not return empty-handed. 10 Chaldea shall be plundered; all who
plunder her shall be sated, says the LORD.

1610

JEREMIAH 1611

11 Though you rejoice, though you exult,
O plunderers of my heritage,
though you frisk about like a heifer on the grass,
and neigh like stallions,
12 your mother shall be utterly shamed,
and she who bore you shall be disgraced.
Lo, she shall be the last of the nations,
a wilderness, dry land, and a desert.
13 Because of the wrath of the LORD she shall not be inhabited,
but shall be an utter desolation;
everyone who passes by Babylon shall be appalled
and hiss because of all her wounds.
14 Take up your positions around Babylon,
all you that bend the bow;
shoot at her, spare no arrows,
for she has sinned against the LORD.
15 Raise a shout against her from all sides,
"She has surrendered;
her bulwarks have fallen,
her walls are thrown down."
For this is the vengeance of the LORD:
take vengeance on her,
do to her as she has done.
16 Cut off from Babylon the sower,
and the wielder of the sickle in time of harvest;
because of the destroying sword
all of them shall return to their own people,
and all of them shall flee to their own land.
17 Israel is a hunted sheep driven away by lions. First the king of Assyria
devoured it, and now at the end King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon has
gnawed its bones. 18 Therefore, thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of
Israel: I am going to punish the king of Babylon and his land, as I
punished the king of Assyria. 19 I will restore Israel to its pasture, and it
shall feed on Carmel and in Bashan, and on the hills of Ephraim and in
Gilead its hunger shall be satisfied. 20 In those days and at that time,
says the LORD, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought, and there shall be

1611

JEREMIAH 1612

none; and the sins of Judah, and none shall be found; for I will pardon
the remnant that I have spared.
21 Go up to the land of Merathaim;
go up against her,
and attack the inhabitants of Pekod
and utterly destroy the last of them,
says the LORD;
do all that I have commanded you.
22 The noise of battle is in the land,
and great destruction!
23 How the hammer of the whole earth
is cut down and broken!
How Babylon has become
a horror among the nations!
24 You set a snare for yourself and you were caught, O Babylon,
but you did not know it;
you were discovered and seized,
because you challenged the LORD.
25 The LORD has opened his armory,
and brought out the weapons of his wrath,
for the Lord GOD of hosts has a task to do
in the land of the Chaldeans.
26 Come against her from every quarter;
open her granaries;
pile her up like heaps of grain, and destroy her utterly;
let nothing be left of her.
27 Kill all her bulls,
let them go down to the slaughter.
Alas for them, their day has come,
the time of their punishment!
28 Listen! Fugitives and refugees from the land of Babylon are coming
to declare in Zion the vengeance of the LORD our God, vengeance for
his temple.

1612

JEREMIAH 1613

29 Summon archers against Babylon, all who bend the bow. Encamp all
around her; let no one escape. Repay her according to her deeds; just
as she has done, do to her — for she has arrogantly defied the LORD,
the Holy One of Israel. 30 Therefore her young men shall fall in her
squares, and all her soldiers shall be destroyed on that day, says the
LORD.
31 I am against you, O arrogant one,
says the Lord GOD of hosts;
for your day has come,
the time when I will punish you.
32 The arrogant one shall stumble and fall,
with no one to raise him up,
and I will kindle a fire in his cities,
and it will devour everything around him.
33 Thus says the LORD of hosts: The people of Israel are oppressed, and
so too are the people of Judah; all their captors have held them fast
and refuse to let them go. 34 Their Redeemer is strong; the LORD of
hosts is his name. He will surely plead their cause, that he may give rest
to the earth, but unrest to the inhabitants of Babylon.
35 A sword against the Chaldeans, says the LORD,
and against the inhabitants of Babylon,
and against her officials and her sages!
36 A sword against the diviners,
so that they may become fools!
A sword against her warriors,
so that they may be destroyed!
37 A sword against her horses and against her chariots,
and against all the foreign troops in her midst,
so that they may become women!
A sword against all her treasures,
that they may be plundered!
38 A drought against her waters,
that they may be dried up!
For it is a land of images,
and they go mad over idols.

1613

JEREMIAH 1614

39 Therefore wild animals shall live with hyenas in Babylon, and
ostriches shall inhabit her; she shall never again be peopled, or
inhabited for all generations. 40 As when God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah and their neighbors, says the LORD, so no one shall live there,
nor shall anyone settle in her.
41 Look, a people is coming from the north;
a mighty nation and many kings
are stirring from the farthest parts of the earth.
42 They wield bow and spear,
they are cruel and have no mercy.
The sound of them is like the roaring sea;
they ride upon horses,
set in array as a warrior for battle,
against you, O daughter Babylon!
43 The king of Babylon heard news of them,
and his hands fell helpless;
anguish seized him,
pain like that of a woman in labor.
44 Like a lion coming up from the thickets of the Jordan against a
perennial pasture, I will suddenly chase them away from her; and I will
appoint over her whomever I choose. For who is like me? Who can
summon me? Who is the shepherd who can stand before me? 45
Therefore hear the plan that the LORD has made against Babylon, and
the purposes that he has formed against the land of the Chaldeans:
Surely the little ones of the flock shall be dragged away; surely their
fold shall be appalled at their fate. 46 At the sound of the capture of
Babylon the earth shall tremble, and her cry shall be heard among the
nations.

1614

JEREMIAH 1615

[Jeremiah 51]
God's judgment against Babylon
1 Thus says the LORD:
I am going to stir up a destructive wind
against Babylon
and against the inhabitants of Leb-qamai;
2 and I will send winnowers to Babylon,
and they shall winnow her.
They shall empty her land
when they come against her from every side
on the day of trouble.
3 Let not the archer bend his bow,
and let him not array himself in his coat of mail.
Do not spare her young men;
utterly destroy her entire army.
4 They shall fall down slain in the land of the Chaldeans,
and wounded in her streets.
5 Israel and Judah have not been forsaken
by their God, the LORD of hosts,
though their land is full of guilt
before the Holy One of Israel.
6 Flee from the midst of Babylon,
save your lives, each of you!
Do not perish because of her guilt,
for this is the time of the LORD's vengeance;
he is repaying her what is due.
7 Babylon was a golden cup in the LORD's hand,
making all the earth drunken;
the nations drank of her wine,
and so the nations went mad.
8 Suddenly Babylon has fallen and is shattered;
wail for her!
Bring balm for her wound;
perhaps she may be healed.

1615

JEREMIAH 1616

9 We tried to heal Babylon,
but she could not be healed.
Forsake her, and let each of us go
to our own country;
for her judgment has reached up to heaven
and has been lifted up even to the skies.
10 The LORD has brought forth our vindication;
come, let us declare in Zion
the work of the LORD our God.
11 Sharpen the arrows!
Fill the quivers!
The LORD has stirred up the spirit of the kings of the Medes, because his
purpose concerning Babylon is to destroy it, for that is the vengeance
of the LORD, vengeance for his temple.
12 Raise a standard against the walls of Babylon;
make the watch strong;
post sentinels;
prepare the ambushes;
for the LORD has both planned and done
what he spoke concerning the inhabitants of Babylon.
13 You who live by mighty waters,
rich in treasures,
your end has come,
the thread of your life is cut.
14 The LORD of hosts has sworn by himself:
Surely I will fill you with troops like a swarm of locusts,
and they shall raise a shout of victory over you.
15 It is he who made the earth by his power,
who established the world by his wisdom,
and by his understanding stretched out the heavens.
16 When he utters his voice there is a tumult of waters in the heavens,
and he makes the mist rise from the ends of the earth.
He makes lightnings for the rain,
and he brings out the wind from his storehouses.

1616

JEREMIAH 1617

17 Everyone is stupid and without knowledge;
goldsmiths are all put to shame by their idols;
for their images are false,
and there is no breath in them.
18 They are worthless, a work of delusion;
at the time of their punishment they shall perish.
19 Not like these is the LORD, the portion of Jacob,
for he is the one who formed all things,
and Israel is the tribe of his inheritance;
the LORD of hosts is his name.
20 You are my war club, my weapon of battle:
with you I smash nations;
with you I destroy kingdoms;
21 with you I smash the horse and its rider;
with you I smash the chariot and the charioteer;
22 with you I smash man and woman;
with you I smash the old man and the boy;
with you I smash the young man and the girl;
23 with you I smash shepherds and their flocks;
with you I smash farmers and their teams;
with you I smash governors and deputies.
24 I will repay Babylon and all the inhabitants of Chaldea before your
very eyes for all the wrong that they have done in Zion, says the LORD.
25 I am against you, O destroying mountain,
says the LORD,
that destroys the whole earth;
I will stretch out my hand against you,
and roll you down from the crags,
and make you a burned-out mountain.
26 No stone shall be taken from you for a corner
and no stone for a foundation,
but you shall be a perpetual waste,
says the LORD.

1617

JEREMIAH 1618

27 Raise a standard in the land,
blow the trumpet among the nations;
prepare the nations for war against her,
summon against her the kingdoms,
Ararat, Minni, and Ashkenaz;
appoint a marshal against her,
bring up horses like bristling locusts.
28 Prepare the nations for war against her,
the kings of the Medes, with their governors and deputies,
and every land under their dominion.
29 The land trembles and writhes,
for the LORD's purposes against Babylon stand,
to make the land of Babylon a desolation,
without inhabitant.
30 The warriors of Babylon have given up fighting,
they remain in their strongholds;
their strength has failed,
they have become women;
her buildings are set on fire,
her bars are broken.
31 One runner runs to meet another,
and one messenger to meet another,
to tell the king of Babylon
that his city is taken from end to end:
32 the fords have been seized,
the marshes have been burned with fire,
and the soldiers are in panic.
33 For thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel:
Daughter Babylon is like a threshing floor
at the time when it is trodden;
yet a little while
and the time of her harvest will come.

1618

JEREMIAH 1619

34 "King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon has devoured me,
he has crushed me;
he has made me an empty vessel,
he has swallowed me like a monster;
he has filled his belly with my delicacies,
he has spewed me out.
35 May my torn flesh be avenged on Babylon,"
the inhabitants of Zion shall say.
"May my blood be avenged on the inhabitants of Chaldea,"
Jerusalem shall say.
36 Therefore thus says the LORD:
I am going to defend your cause
and take vengeance for you.
I will dry up her sea
and make her fountain dry;
37 and Babylon shall become a heap of ruins,
a den of jackals,
an object of horror and of hissing,
without inhabitant.
38 Like lions they shall roar together;
they shall growl like lions' whelps.
39 When they are inflamed, I will set out their drink
and make them drunk, until they become merry
and then sleep a perpetual sleep
and never wake, says the LORD.
40 I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter,
like rams and goats.
41 How Sheshach is taken,
the pride of the whole earth seized!
How Babylon has become
an object of horror among the nations!
42 The sea has risen over Babylon;
she has been covered by its tumultuous waves.

1619

JEREMIAH 1620

43 Her cities have become an object of horror,
a land of drought and a desert,
a land in which no one lives,
and through which no mortal passes.
44 I will punish Bel in Babylon,
and make him disgorge what he has swallowed.
The nations shall no longer stream to him;
the wall of Babylon has fallen.
45 Come out of her, my people!
Save your lives, each of you,
from the fierce anger of the LORD!
46 Do not be fainthearted or fearful
at the rumors heard in the land —
one year one rumor comes,
the next year another,
rumors of violence in the land
and of ruler against ruler.
47 Assuredly, the days are coming
when I will punish the images of Babylon;
her whole land shall be put to shame,
and all her slain shall fall in her midst.
48 Then the heavens and the earth,
and all that is in them,
shall shout for joy over Babylon;
for the destroyers shall come against them out of the north,
says the LORD.
49 Babylon must fall for the slain of Israel,
as the slain of all the earth have fallen because of Babylon.
50 You survivors of the sword,
go, do not linger!
Remember the LORD in a distant land,
and let Jerusalem come into your mind:

1620

JEREMIAH 1621

51 We are put to shame, for we have heard insults;
dishonor has covered our face,
for aliens have come
into the holy places of the LORD's house.
52 Therefore the time is surely coming, says the LORD,
when I will punish her idols,
and through all her land
the wounded shall groan.
53 Though Babylon should mount up to heaven,
and though she should fortify her strong height,
from me destroyers would come upon her,
says the LORD.
54 Listen! — a cry from Babylon!
A great crashing from the land of the Chaldeans!
55 For the LORD is laying Babylon waste,
and stilling her loud clamor.
Their waves roar like mighty waters,
the sound of their clamor resounds;
56 for a destroyer has come against her,
against Babylon;
her warriors are taken,
their bows are broken;
for the LORD is a God of recompense,
he will repay in full.
57 I will make her officials and her sages drunk,
also her governors, her deputies, and her warriors;
they shall sleep a perpetual sleep and never wake,
says the King, whose name is the LORD of hosts.
58 Thus says the LORD of hosts:
The broad wall of Babylon
shall be leveled to the ground,
and her high gates
shall be burned with fire.
The peoples exhaust themselves for nothing,
and the nations weary themselves only for fire.

1621

JEREMIAH 1622

59 The word that the prophet Jeremiah commanded Seraiah son of
Neriah son of Mahseiah, when he went with King Zedekiah of Judah to
Babylon, in the fourth year of his reign. Seraiah was the quartermaster.
60 Jeremiah wrote in a scroll all the disasters that would come on
Babylon, all these words that are written concerning Babylon. 61 And
Jeremiah said to Seraiah: "When you come to Babylon, see that you
read all these words, 62 and say, 'O LORD, you yourself threatened to
destroy this place so that neither human beings nor animals shall live in
it, and it shall be desolate forever.' 63 When you finish reading this
scroll, tie a stone to it, and throw it into the middle of the Euphrates,
64 and say, 'Thus shall Babylon sink, to rise no more, because of the
disasters that I am bringing on her.'"
Thus far are the words of Jeremiah.
[Jeremiah 52]
Historical appendix
1 Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he began to reign; he
reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. His mother's name was Hamutal
daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. 2 He did what was evil in the sight of
the LORD, just as Jehoiakim had done. 3 Indeed, Jerusalem and Judah so
angered the LORD that he expelled them from his presence.
Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon. 4 And in the ninth year
of his reign, in the tenth month, on the tenth day of the month, King
Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon came with all his army against Jerusalem,
and they laid siege to it; they built siegeworks against it all around. 5
So the city was besieged until the eleventh year of King Zedekiah. 6 On
the ninth day of the fourth month the famine became so severe in the
city that there was no food for the people of the land. 7 Then a breach
was made in the city wall; and all the soldiers fled and went out from
the city by night by the way of the gate between the two walls, by the
king's garden, though the Chaldeans were all around the city. They
went in the direction of the Arabah. 8 But the army of the Chaldeans
pursued the king, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and
all his army was scattered, deserting him. 9 Then they captured the
king, and brought him up to the king of Babylon at Riblah in the land

1622

JEREMIAH 1623

of Hamath, and he passed sentence on him. 10 The king of Babylon
killed the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, and also killed all the
officers of Judah at Riblah. 11 He put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and
bound him in fetters, and the king of Babylon took him to Babylon,
and put him in prison until the day of his death.
12 In the fifth month, on the tenth day of the month — which was the
nineteenth year of King Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon —
Nebuzaradan the captain of the bodyguard who served the king of
Babylon, entered Jerusalem. 13 He burned the house of the LORD, the
king's house, and all the houses of Jerusalem; every great house he
burned down. 14 All the army of the Chaldeans, who were with the
captain of the guard, broke down all the walls around Jerusalem. 15
Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried into exile some of the
poorest of the people and the rest of the people who were left in the
city and the deserters who had defected to the king of Babylon,
together with the rest of the artisans. 16 But Nebuzaradan the captain
of the guard left some of the poorest people of the land to be
vinedressers and tillers of the soil.
17 The pillars of bronze that were in the house of the LORD, and the
stands and the bronze sea that were in the house of the LORD, the
Chaldeans broke in pieces, and carried all the bronze to Babylon. 18
They took away the pots, the shovels, the snuffers, the basins, the
ladles, and all the vessels of bronze used in the temple service. 19 The
captain of the guard took away the small bowls also, the firepans, the
basins, the pots, the lampstands, the ladles, and the bowls for libation,
both those of gold and those of silver. 20 As for the two pillars, the
one sea, the twelve bronze bulls that were under the sea, and the
stands, which King Solomon had made for the house of the LORD, the
bronze of all these vessels was beyond weighing. 21 As for the pillars,
the height of the one pillar was eighteen cubits, its circumference was
twelve cubits; it was hollow and its thickness was four fingers. 22 Upon
it was a capital of bronze; the height of the capital was five cubits;
latticework and pomegranates, all of bronze, encircled the top of the
capital. And the second pillar had the same, with pomegranates. 23
There were ninety-six pomegranates on the sides; all the pomegranates
encircling the latticework numbered one hundred.

1623

JEREMIAH 1624

24 The captain of the guard took the chief priest Seraiah, the second
priest Zephaniah, and the three guardians of the threshold; 25 and
from the city he took an officer who had been in command of the
soldiers, and seven men of the king's council who were found in the
city; the secretary of the commander of the army who mustered the
people of the land; and sixty men of the people of the land who were
found inside the city. 26 Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard
took them, and brought them to the king of Babylon at Riblah. 27 And
the king of Babylon struck them down, and put them to death at
Riblah in the land of Hamath. So Judah went into exile out of its land.
28 This is the number of the people whom Nebuchadrezzar took into
exile: in the seventh year, three thousand twenty-three Judeans; 29 in
the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar he took into exile from
Jerusalem eight hundred thirty-two persons; 30 in the twenty-third
year of Nebuchadrezzar, Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took
into exile of the Judeans seven hundred forty-five persons; all the
persons were four thousand six hundred.
31 In the thirty-seventh year of the exile of King Jehoiachin of Judah, in
the twelfth month, on the twenty-fifth day of the month, King Evilmerodach of Babylon, in the year he began to reign, showed favor to
King Jehoiachin of Judah and brought him out of prison; 32 he spoke
kindly to him, and gave him a seat above the seats of the other kings
who were with him in Babylon. 33 So Jehoiachin put aside his prison
clothes, and every day of his life he dined regularly at the king's table.
34 For his allowance, a regular daily allowance was given him by the
king of Babylon, as long as he lived, up to the day of his death.

1624

LAMENTATIONS 1625

LAMENTATIONS
Introduction
Lamentations is a sequence of five lyric poems that lament the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Babylonians in 586 BCE (see 2 Kings
25.8-21). The dense and highly charged poetry constitutes some of the
Bible's most violent and brutal pieces of writing. Though mostly lacking
traditional statements of hope, the poems do manifest a stubborn and
tenacious hold on life.
Several of the ancient versions (the Greek, Latin, and Aramaic
translations) attribute the authorship of these poems to Jeremiah,
which accounts for their placements after the book of Jeremiah in the
Christian canon. Although Jeremiah was active during the last days of
the kingdom of Judah and spoke in moving and emotional terms of
the coming destruction of Jerusalem and the nation (Jer 8.18-9.1; 9.1722), it is unlikely that he is the author of the poems found in the book
of Lamentations. The language, forms of expression, and religious
perspectives do not seem to be quite like those expressed in Jeremiah's
own prophetic poetry. Moreover, the oldest Hebrew manuscripts of
Lamentations do not mention Jeremiah or associate him with the book.
In the Jewish canon Lamentations is placed with the prophets, but in
the third section of the canon, the Writings. Thus it is more likely that
the tradition connection Jeremiah with Lamentations is a reflection of
the common practice in antiquity of ascribing authorship of
anonymous materials to well-known figures, for example, David and
the Psalms or Solomon and the books of Proverbs and Song of Songs.
The poems of Lamentations may be dated to the sixth century,
probably between 586 and 520 BCE, when the Temple was rebuilt.
They were likely composed in Palestine for the community that
remained in the land after the catastrophe.

1625

LAMENTATIONS 1626

In later Jewish tradition Lamentations was counted as one of the five
festival scrolls (Megillot), together with the Song of Songs, Ruth,
Ecclesiastes, and Esther. Lamentations is read as part of the liturgy of
the "Ninth of Ab," the day that commemorates the destruction of the
Second Temple by the Romans in 70 CE. In Christian tradition readings
from Lamentations are part of the liturgies of Holy Week.
Lamentations draws on a variety of literary genres, including
communal and individual laments, the funeral dirge, and wisdom
traditions, but gets its overarching shape and much of its imagery and
subject matter from the city lament, a genre best known from ancient
Mesopotamia (e.g., the "Lamentation over the Destruction of Ur," the
"Lamentation over the Destruction of Sumer and Ur," and the "Nippur
Lament"). Lamentations, however, differs from most of the
Mesopotamian city laments, which end happily in celebration or
restoration and the return of the gods. It ends tragically: The Lord
remains silent and absent throughout, and there is no suggestion of
the restoration of Jerusalem or its Temple.
The imagery of Lamentations evokes a sense of fragmentation and
discontinuity, reflecting the suffering of the past. There is no narrative
structure to give shape to the raw emotions expressed, nor even a clear
rhetorical movement from grief to hope, such as one often finds in
laments in Psalms. Although the poetic meter varies throughout the
book, much of the poetry is composed in "qinah" meter in which the
lines are unbalanced, giving a sense of language broken off in grief. In
counterpoint to such a sense of fragmentation, however, the formal
structures of the poetic form itself produce a strong sense of
coherence. The first four chapters of Lamentations are each composed
as an alphabetic acrostic, a formals scheme in which the initial word of
each stanza begins with successive letters of the Hebrew alphabet,
twenty-two in all (ch 5, though not an acrostic, also contains twentytwo verses). In ch 3 all three verses of each stanza begin with the same
letter (vv. 1-3 with an "alep," vv. 4-6 with "bet," etc.). The alphabetic
acrostic functions as the material, physical container of this poetry,
literally holding each poem's component verses together and
conveying a strong sense of closure through its clear structure and
fixed length. Yet the acrostic conveys meaning symbolically as well. The

1626

LAMENTATIONS 1627

poet's whole attempt to render the chaos of his world into language,
to contain his fragmented lyrics within the frame of the alphabetic
acrostic, thus becomes an attempts to control and contain, and
ultimately to transform, the suffering and hurt that engulfed
Jerusalem and its inhabitants.

[Lamentations 1]
Lament over Zion
1 How lonely sits the city
that once was full of people!
How like a widow she has become,
she that was great among the nations!
She that was a princess among the provinces
has become a vassal.
2 She weeps bitterly in the night,
with tears on her cheeks;
among all her lovers
she has no one to comfort her;
all her friends have dealt treacherously with her,
they have become her enemies.
3 Judah has gone into exile with suffering
and hard servitude;
she lives now among the nations,
and finds no resting place;
her pursuers have all overtaken her
in the midst of her distress.

1627

LAMENTATIONS 1628

4 The roads to Zion mourn,
for no one comes to the festivals;
all her gates are desolate,
her priests groan;
her young girls grieve,
and her lot is bitter.
5 Her foes have become the masters,
her enemies prosper,
because the LORD has made her suffer
for the multitude of her transgressions;
her children have gone away,
captives before the foe.
6 From daughter Zion has departed
all her majesty.
Her princes have become like stags
that find no pasture;
they fled without strength
before the pursuer.
7 Jerusalem remembers,
in the days of her affliction and wandering,
all the precious things
that were hers in days of old.
When her people fell into the hand of the foe,
and there was no one to help her,
the foe looked on mocking
over her downfall.
8 Jerusalem sinned grievously,
so she has become a mockery;
all who honored her despise her,
for they have seen her nakedness;
she herself groans,
and turns her face away.

1628

LAMENTATIONS 1629

9 Her uncleanness was in her skirts;
she took no thought of her future;
her downfall was appalling,
with none to comfort her.
"O LORD, look at my affliction,
for the enemy has triumphed!"
10 Enemies have stretched out their hands
over all her precious things;
she has even seen the nations
invade her sanctuary,
those whom you forbade
to enter your congregation.
11 All her people groan
as they search for bread;
they trade their treasures for food
to revive their strength.
Look, O LORD, and see
how worthless I have become.
The city's lament
12 Is it nothing to you, all you who pass by?
Look and see
if there is any sorrow like my sorrow,
which was brought upon me,
which the LORD inflicted
on the day of his fierce anger.
13 From on high he sent fire;
it went deep into my bones;
he spread a net for my feet;
he turned me back;
he has left me stunned,
faint all day long.

1629

LAMENTATIONS 1630

14 My transgressions were bound into a yoke;
by his hand they were fastened together;
they weigh on my neck,
sapping my strength;
the Lord handed me over
to those whom I cannot withstand.
15 The LORD has rejected
all my warriors in the midst of me;
he proclaimed a time against me
to crush my young men;
the Lord has trodden as in a wine press
the virgin daughter Judah.
16 For these things I weep;
my eyes flow with tears;
for a comforter is far from me,
one to revive my courage;
my children are desolate,
for the enemy has prevailed.
17 Zion stretches out her hands,
but there is no one to comfort her;
the LORD has commanded against Jacob
that his neighbors should become his foes;
Jerusalem has become
a filthy thing among them.
18 The LORD is in the right,
for I have rebelled against his word;
but hear, all you peoples,
and behold my suffering;
my young women and young men
have gone into captivity.

1630

LAMENTATIONS 1631

19 I called to my lovers
but they deceived me;
my priests and elders
perished in the city
while seeking food
to revive their strength.
20 See, O LORD, how distressed I am;
my stomach churns,
my heart is wrung within me,
because I have been very rebellious.
In the street the sword bereaves;
in the house it is like death.
21 They heard how I was groaning,
with no one to comfort me.
All my enemies heard of my trouble;
they are glad that you have done it.
Bring on the day you have announced,
and let them be as I am.
22 Let all their evil doing come before you;
and deal with them
as you have dealt with me
because of all my transgressions;
for my groans are many
and my heart is faint.
[Lamentations 2]
The Lord battles against Jerusalem
1 How the Lord in his anger
has humiliated daughter Zion!
He has thrown down from heaven to earth
the splendor of Israel;
he has not remembered his footstool
in the day of his anger.

1631

LAMENTATIONS 1632

2 The Lord has destroyed without mercy
all the dwellings of Jacob;
in his wrath he has broken down
the strongholds of daughter Judah;
he has brought down to the ground in dishonor
the kingdom and its rulers.
3 He has cut down in fierce anger
all the might of Israel;
he has withdrawn his right hand from them
in the face of the enemy;
he has burned like a flaming fire in Jacob,
consuming all around.
4 He has bent his bow like an enemy,
with his right hand set like a foe;
he has killed all in whom we took pride
in the tent of daughter Zion;
he has poured out his fury like fire.
5 The Lord has become like an enemy;
he has destroyed Israel.
He has destroyed all its palaces,
laid in ruins its strongholds,
and multiplied in daughter Judah
mourning and lamentation.
6 He has broken down his booth like a garden,
he has destroyed his tabernacle;
the LORD has abolished in Zion
festival and sabbath,
and in his fierce indignation has spurned
king and priest.

1632

LAMENTATIONS 1633

7 The Lord has scorned his altar,
disowned his sanctuary;
he has delivered into the hand of the enemy
the walls of her palaces;
a clamor was raised in the house of the LORD
as on a day of festival.
8 The LORD determined to lay in ruins
the wall of daughter Zion;
he stretched the line;
he did not withhold his hand from destroying;
he caused rampart and wall to lament;
they languish together.
9 Her gates have sunk into the ground;
he has ruined and broken her bars;
her king and princes are among the nations;
guidance is no more,
and her prophets obtain
no vision from the LORD.
10 The elders of daughter Zion
sit on the ground in silence;
they have thrown dust on their heads
and put on sackcloth;
the young girls of Jerusalem
have bowed their heads to the ground.
Reactions to the suffering
11 My eyes are spent with weeping;
my stomach churns;
my bile is poured out on the ground
because of the destruction of my people,
because infants and babes faint
in the streets of the city.

1633

LAMENTATIONS 1634

12 They cry to their mothers,
"Where is bread and wine?"
as they faint like the wounded
in the streets of the city,
as their life is poured out
on their mothers' bosom.
13 What can I say for you, to what compare you,
O daughter Jerusalem?
To what can I liken you, that I may comfort you,
O virgin daughter Zion?
For vast as the sea is your ruin;
who can heal you?
14 Your prophets have seen for you
false and deceptive visions;
they have not exposed your iniquity
to restore your fortunes,
but have seen oracles for you
that are false and misleading.
15 All who pass along the way
clap their hands at you;
they hiss and wag their heads
at daughter Jerusalem;
"Is this the city that was called
the perfection of beauty,
the joy of all the earth?"
16 All your enemies
open their mouths against you;
they hiss, they gnash their teeth,
they cry: "We have devoured her!
Ah, this is the day we longed for;
at last we have seen it!"

1634

LAMENTATIONS 1635

17 The LORD has done what he purposed,
he has carried out his threat;
as he ordained long ago,
he has demolished without pity;
he has made the enemy rejoice over you,
and exalted the might of your foes.
18 Cry aloud to the Lord!
O wall of daughter Zion!
Let tears stream down like a torrent
day and night!
Give yourself no rest,
your eyes no respite!
19 Arise, cry out in the night,
at the beginning of the watches!
Pour out your heart like water
before the presence of the Lord!
Lift your hands to him
for the lives of your children,
who faint for hunger
at the head of every street.
Zion's address
20 Look, O LORD, and consider!
To whom have you done this?
Should women eat their offspring,
the children they have borne?
Should priest and prophet be killed
in the sanctuary of the Lord?
21 The young and the old are lying
on the ground in the streets;
my young women and my young men
have fallen by the sword;
in the day of your anger you have killed them,
slaughtering without mercy.

1635

LAMENTATIONS 1636

22 You invited my enemies from all around
as if for a day of festival;
and on the day of the anger of the LORD
no one escaped or survived;
those whom I bore and reared
my enemy has destroyed.
[Lamentations 3]
The complaint of the 'one who has seen affliction'
1 I am one who has seen affliction
under the rod of God's wrath;
2 he has driven and brought me
into darkness without any light;
3 against me alone he turns his hand,
again and again, all day long.
4 He has made my flesh and my skin waste away,
and broken my bones;
5 he has besieged and enveloped me
with bitterness and tribulation;
6 he has made me sit in darkness
like the dead of long ago.
7 He has walled me about so that I cannot escape;
he has put heavy chains on me;
8 though I call and cry for help,
he shuts out my prayer;
9 he has blocked my ways with hewn stones,
he has made my paths crooked.
10 He is a bear lying in wait for me,
a lion in hiding;
11 he led me off my way and tore me to pieces;
he has made me desolate;
12 he bent his bow and set me
as a mark for his arrow.

1636

LAMENTATIONS 1637

13 He shot into my vitals
the arrows of his quiver;
14 I have become the laughingstock of all my people,
the object of their taunt-songs all day long.
15 He has filled me with bitterness,
he has sated me with wormwood.
16 He has made my teeth grind on gravel,
and made me cower in ashes;
17 my soul is bereft of peace;
I have forgotten what happiness is;
18 so I say, "Gone is my glory,
and all that I had hoped for from the LORD."
19 The thought of my affliction and my homelessness
is wormwood and gall!
20 My soul continually thinks of it
and is bowed down within me.
21 But this I call to mind,
and therefore I have hope:
22 The steadfast love of the LORD never ceases,
his mercies never come to an end;
23 they are new every morning;
great is your faithfulness.
24 "The LORD is my portion," says my soul,
"therefore I will hope in him."
Sapiential consolation
25 The LORD is good to those who wait for him,
to the soul that seeks him.
26 It is good that one should wait quietly
for the salvation of the LORD.
27 It is good for one to bear
the yoke in youth,
28 to sit alone in silence
when the Lord has imposed it,

1637

LAMENTATIONS 1638

29 to put one's mouth to the dust
(there may yet be hope),
30 to give one's cheek to the smiter,
and be filled with insults.
31 For the Lord will not
reject forever.
32 Although he causes grief, he will have compassion
according to the abundance of his steadfast love;
33 for he does not willingly afflict
or grieve anyone.
34 When all the prisoners of the land
are crushed under foot,
35 when human rights are perverted
in the presence of the Most High,
36 when one's case is subverted
— does the Lord not see it?
37 Who can command and have it done,
if the Lord has not ordained it?
38 Is it not from the mouth of the Most High
that good and bad come?
39 Why should any who draw breath complain
about the punishment of their sins?
Communal lament
40 Let us test and examine our ways,
and return to the LORD.
41 Let us lift up our hearts as well as our hands
to God in heaven.
42 We have transgressed and rebelled,
and you have not forgiven.
43 You have wrapped yourself with anger and pursued us,
killing without pity;
44 you have wrapped yourself with a cloud
so that no prayer can pass through.

1638

LAMENTATIONS 1639

45 You have made us filth and rubbish
among the peoples.
46 All our enemies
have opened their mouths against us;
47 panic and pitfall have come upon us,
devastation and destruction.
Individual lament
48 My eyes flow with rivers of tears
because of the destruction of my people.
49 My eyes will flow without ceasing,
without respite,
50 until the LORD from heaven
looks down and sees.
51 My eyes cause me grief
at the fate of all the young women in my city.
52 Those who were my enemies without cause
have hunted me like a bird;
53 they flung me alive into a pit
and hurled stones on me;
54 water closed over my head;
I said, "I am lost."
55 I called on your name, O LORD,
from the depths of the pit;
56 you heard my plea, "Do not close your ear
to my cry for help, but give me relief!"
57 You came near when I called on you;
you said, "Do not fear!"
58 You have taken up my cause, O Lord,
you have redeemed my life.
59 You have seen the wrong done to me, O LORD;
judge my cause.

1639

LAMENTATIONS 1640

60 You have seen all their malice,
all their plots against me.
61 You have heard their taunts, O LORD,
all their plots against me.
62 The whispers and murmurs of my assailants
are against me all day long.
63 Whether they sit or rise — see,
I am the object of their taunt-songs.
Final invectives
64 Pay them back for their deeds, O LORD,
according to the work of their hands!
65 Give them anguish of heart;
your curse be on them!
66 Pursue them in anger and destroy them
from under the LORD's heavens.
[Lamentations 4]
The suffering of the population
1 How the gold has grown dim,
how the pure gold is changed!
The sacred stones lie scattered
at the head of every street.
2 The precious children of Zion,
worth their weight in fine gold —
how they are reckoned as earthen pots,
the work of a potter's hands!
3 Even the jackals offer the breast
and nurse their young,
but my people has become cruel,
like the ostriches in the wilderness.

1640

LAMENTATIONS 1641

4 The tongue of the infant sticks
to the roof of its mouth for thirst;
the children beg for food,
but no one gives them anything.
5 Those who feasted on delicacies
perish in the streets;
those who were brought up in purple
cling to ash heaps.
6 For the chastisement of my people has been greater
than the punishment of Sodom,
which was overthrown in a moment,
though no hand was laid on it.
7 Her princes were purer than snow,
whiter than milk;
their bodies were more ruddy than coral,
their hair like sapphire.
8 Now their visage is blacker than soot;
they are not recognized in the streets.
Their skin has shriveled on their bones;
it has become as dry as wood.
9 Happier were those pierced by the sword
than those pierced by hunger,
whose life drains away, deprived
of the produce of the field.
10 The hands of compassionate women
have boiled their own children;
they became their food
in the destruction of my people.

1641

LAMENTATIONS 1642

11 The LORD gave full vent to his wrath;
he poured out his hot anger,
and kindled a fire in Zion
that consumed its foundations.
12 The kings of the earth did not believe,
nor did any of the inhabitants of the world,
that foe or enemy could enter
the gates of Jerusalem.
13 It was for the sins of her prophets
and the iniquities of her priests,
who shed the blood of the righteous
in the midst of her.
14 Blindly they wandered through the streets,
so defiled with blood
that no one was able
to touch their garments.
15 "Away! Unclean!" people shouted at them;
"Away! Away! Do not touch!"
So they became fugitives and wanderers;
it was said among the nations,
"They shall stay here no longer."
16 The LORD himself has scattered them,
he will regard them no more;
no honor was shown to the priests,
no favor to the elders.
Communal voice
17 Our eyes failed, ever watching
vainly for help;
we were watching eagerly
for a nation that could not save.

1642

LAMENTATIONS 1643

18 They dogged our steps
so that we could not walk in our streets;
our end drew near; our days were numbered;
for our end had come.
19 Our pursuers were swifter
than the eagles in the heavens;
they chased us on the mountains,
they lay in wait for us in the wilderness.
20 The LORD's anointed, the breath of our life,
was taken in their pits —
the one of whom we said, "Under his shadow
we shall live among the nations."
21 Rejoice and be glad, O daughter Edom,
you that live in the land of Uz;
but to you also the cup shall pass;
you shall become drunk and strip yourself bare.
22 The punishment of your iniquity, O daughter Zion, is accomplished,
he will keep you in exile no longer;
but your iniquity, O daughter Edom, he will punish,
he will uncover your sins.
[Lamentations 5]
Address
1 Remember, O LORD, what has befallen us;
look, and see our disgrace!
The complaint
2 Our inheritance has been turned over to strangers,
our homes to aliens.
3 We have become orphans, fatherless;
our mothers are like widows.

1643

LAMENTATIONS 1644

4 We must pay for the water we drink;
the wood we get must be bought.
5 With a yoke on our necks we are hard driven;
we are weary, we are given no rest.
6 We have made a pact with Egypt and Assyria,
to get enough bread.
7 Our ancestors sinned; they are no more,
and we bear their iniquities.
8 Slaves rule over us;
there is no one to deliver us from their hand.
9 We get our bread at the peril of our lives,
because of the sword in the wilderness.
10 Our skin is black as an oven
from the scorching heat of famine.
11 Women are raped in Zion,
virgins in the towns of Judah.
12 Princes are hung up by their hands;
no respect is shown to the elders.
13 Young men are compelled to grind,
and boys stagger under loads of wood.
14 The old men have left the city gate,
the young men their music.
15 The joy of our hearts has ceased;
our dancing has been turned to mourning.
16 The crown has fallen from our head;
woe to us, for we have sinned!
17 Because of this our hearts are sick,
because of these things our eyes have grown dim:
18 because of Mount Zion, which lies desolate;
jackals prowl over it.
Conclusion
19 But you, O LORD, reign forever;
your throne endures to all generations.
20 Why have you forgotten us completely?
Why have you forsaken us these many days?

1644

LAMENTATIONS 1645

21 Restore us to yourself, O LORD, that we may be restored;
renew our days as of old —
22 unless you have utterly rejected us,
and are angry with us beyond measure.

1645

EZEKIEL 1646

EZEKIEL
Introduction
The prophecies in the book of Ezekiel are among the most fascinating
and puzzling writings in the Bible. The prophet expresses his thought
through a variety of literary forms — signs, visions, allegories,
denunciations, and legal arguments, among others. He sometimes uses
bizarre or extreme imagery and elaborates it to an almost excessive
point. He has inspired fear, awe, and wonder in readers because he
attempts not merely to name, but also to embody, God's sovereignty,
holiness, and mystery in words that come close to the limits of
expression.
At first this variety, intricacy, and elaboration can seem confusing. It is
easy to get lost in Ezekiel's images and forget his larger concerns; it is
easy as well to pick out striking passages and ignore the context of the
book as a whole. But Ezekiel makes a coherent effort to deal with
profound and difficult issues: Has God abandoned Jerusalem and the
Temple? Does the suffering of the people of Judah have a purpose?
How should the people understand their tragic history? And, perhaps
most important, how can God now move on with God's people, in a
transformed and renewed state? To understand how Ezekiel addresses
these questions, we must consider not only the situation in which he
found himself, but also the traditions and beliefs to which he looked
for answers. The complexity of the book becomes clearer when we
understand that it is the carefully written composition of one with a
profound respect for the texts of his tradition, and that it has been
carefully put together and preserved for the instruction of later
readers.
Ezekiel wrote his prophecies, and his followers edited, expanded, and
preserved them, in the sixth century BCE in Babylon, during the exile of
the Judeans from their homeland. The exile thus forms the historical
1646

EZEKIEL 1647

context of the book, and at several points, particularly in the allegory
in 17.1-24, Ezekiel refers to the Babylonian subjugation of Judah.
The Babylonians under Nebuchadrezzar II (who ruled 605-562 BCE)
defeated the Egyptians in 605 BCE. The Egyptians had allied with the
great Assyrian Empire, which the Babylonians destroyed between 614
and 609 BCE. Although these victories made Babylon the leading
political power in Syria-Palestine, including the territory of Judah, the
Judeans, often acting in concert with other neighboring states,
eventually rebelled. The Babylonians, in an escalating response to the
continued efforts of the Judeans to throw them off, exiled the Judeans
in two phases, separated about a decade apart. They first besieged
Jerusalem under Jehoiakim, who died before Jerusalem fell in 597.
When the Babylonians took over the city, his son, Jehoiachin, along
with most of the Judean ruling class, was exiled to Babylon. The
Babylonians installed a puppet king, Zedekiah; when he, too,
attempted to rebel, they destroyed Jerusalem and the Temple, deposed
the rest of the rulers, and exiled much of the population except the
poorest to Babylon in 586 BCE.
Ezekiel was among the first group of exiles, taken to Babylonia in 597
BCE. Even so, he remained well informed about events in Judah, and
his prophecies concern both expatriates and those who remained
behind. He could address both communities as a single entity, since
they were in ready contact with each other, and both were
passionately concerned about the fate of Jerusalem. Neither group
accepted Ezekiel's indictment of their guilt or believe his prophecies
about Jerusalem's coming destruction. After the destruction in fact
took place, the prophet's words turned to themes of renewed hope
and restoration.
Ezekiel and his school, the followers who edited and preserved his
prophecies, were members of a specific lineage of priests in Israel
known as Zadokites (see 1.1-3; 44.15-31). At the time of Ezekiel's exile
the Zadokites, who were steeped in the traditions of Jerusalemite royal
theology, controlled the Israelite high priesthood and held power at
the Jerusalem Temple. These Jerusalem priests were proponents of
"Zion theology," the traditions that emphasized God's choice of

1647

EZEKIEL 1648

Jerusalem as Zion, the holy (restored and redeemed city of God) city,
and the protection for Jerusalem that resulted from this choice (see 2
Sam 7.4-17; Ps 46; 132). These traditions also stressed God's
unconditional choice of Davidic monarchy and of Abraham's
descendants.
The exile of the Judean rulers and the destruction of Jerusalem directly
challenged this theology, since they called into question God's eternal
promises to Zion. Ezekiel answered these challenges with cosmic,
eschatological, and apocalyptic visions of a rebuilt Zion that fulfilled
the promises of God's eternal protection despite the fall of the earthly
Jerusalem (see 1.22-25, 26-28; 37.28; 38.12; 43.7; 48.35). In these visions
particularly, Ezekiel anticipated much that was yet to come in the
biblical writings, including later developments of apocalypticism (Dan
7-12, and the New Testament book of Revelation).
The specific language and laws of the priests and the traditions of the
Temple heavily influenced Ezekiel as a Zadokite. A significant body of
these laws, the so-called "Holiness Collection" (HC), can be found in
the Pentateuch. HC is in the form of a vassal-covenant, a type of
agreement in which guarantees on one side are specifically linked to
responsibilities on the other. For Ezekiel this covenant form proved
invaluable in interpreting the exile, since it allowed for the possibility
that defilement, injustice, and covenant infidelity on Israel's part could
lead to judgment and even exile without annulling God's eternal
promises to Israel (Lev 26.42). The HC material stresses the unique
sacredness of the people and land of Israel, in the midst of which the
Lord dwells. This sacredness includes not only ritual and worship, but
also morality and social justice.
The Holiness Collection extends beyond the confines of Lev 17-26
(known as the "Holiness Code"), and includes other parts of the
Pentateuch often identified as belongs to the Priestly source (P).
Authoritative, written traditions such as HC profoundly influenced
Ezekiel, an influence that extended to the character of the book of
Ezekiel itself.

1648

EZEKIEL 1649

The prophet and his followers, composed the book in writing and
preserved it for the specific purpose of instructing readers at a later
time. The written composition and the careful preservation of Ezekiel
contrast with much of the other prophetic literature in the Hebrew
Bible, which was spoken directly to a contemporaneous audience.
Many of the words of prophets such as Isaiah were only written down
some considerable time after they had been spoken; therefore they
could be, and often were, modified to adapt them to situations that
arose in later times. In Ezekiel, however, there are clear indications of
an originally written composition and of an early intention to preserve
the text. For instance, the thoroughgoing chronological notations
show that Ezekiel and his followers took great care to demonstrate the
timeliness and veracity of Ezekiel's oracles, and thereby their authority
as prophecy. This care for the written text and its accurate
transmission, as well as for the preservation of authoritative traditions
such as the HC material, mark a breakthrough in the development of
written scripture in Israel, and therefore help us to understand the
historical processes that created the biblical canon over the centuries.
Ezekiel's character as a literary text makes it a complex book to read
and interpret. Much of the other prophetic literature, as oral literature,
generally uses less elaborate forms; Ezekiel, however, is made up of
intricate, deliberately composed literary creations. Although some
scholarship has viewed such literary ornamentation and intricacy as
indicating confused layers of literary growth, newer readings have
discovered literary integrity in the texts, even when the final form has
resulted from a process of transmission and editing. One of the
characteristic features of the book is the frequent repetition of key
words or phrases (e.g., "mortal" [lit. "son of man"], "for the sake of my
holy name," "So that you/they will know that I am the Lord").
Important aspects of the theology of Ezekiel are reinforced by the
repetition of these and other formulas.
The style of Ezekiel is often "non-mimetic": It does not always render
reality by immediate representation. Instead, it probes behind of
beyond observable things and events, using metaphors and mythic
poetry to portray the underlying structure of existence or the
transcendent realities beneath both plain sensory observation and

1649

EZEKIEL 1650

historical records. The visions of Ezekiel show both inner and outer
realities, abolishing or going beyond normal sensory and temporal
bounds.
Because of these literary qualities, reading Ezekiel requires a
sophisticated approach, in order to avoid mistaking some of the
descriptions for historical events, observable behaviors, or factual
reports. For example, some interpretations of Ezekiel's behavior take it
as evidence of a disoriented or abnormal personality. But the
descriptions of these acts — muteness, for example, or holding
prolonged, agonizing postures — are not evidence of psychopathology
but are instead literary images that have rich theological import (see
3.22-27; 4.4-8).
The book of Ezekiel is complex, but fortunately its organization and
outline are agreeably simple. Chapters 1-24 are set before the fall of
Jerusalem, and are largely prophecies of doom against the city and
against Judah. An extended body of material on Ezekiel's call to
prophesy begins this section in chs 1-3. Chapters 25-32 are prophecies
against foreign nations, forming a bridge between Ezekiel's initial
message of doom and his ultimate message of hope. The hope comes
in the prophecies of restoration, chs 33-48, dating from the time after
Jerusalem's fall. Clearly the capture and destruction of Jerusalem in 586
BCE was the critical moment in Ezekiel's prophetic career. The
prophecies of restoration include an apocalyptic passage (chs 38-39)
and an extended blueprint for the restored Temple and land (chs 4048).

[Ezekiel 1]
Part I: The call of Ezekiel; superscription
1 In the thirtieth year, in the fourth month, on the fifth day of the
month, as I was among the exiles by the river Chebar, the heavens
were opened, and I saw visions of God. 2 On the fifth day of the month
(it was the fifth year of the exile of King Jehoiachin), 3 the word of the

1650

EZEKIEL 1651

LORD came to the priest Ezekiel son of Buzi, in the land of the
Chaldeans by the river Chebar; and the hand of the LORD was on him
there.
The throne-chariot vision
4 As I looked, a stormy wind came out of the north: a great cloud with
brightness around it and fire flashing forth continually, and in the
middle of the fire, something like gleaming amber. 5 In the middle of
it was something like four living creatures. This was their appearance:
they were of human form. 6 Each had four faces, and each of them had
four wings. 7 Their legs were straight, and the soles of their feet were
like the sole of a calf's foot; and they sparkled like burnished bronze. 8
Under their wings on their four sides they had human hands. And the
four had their faces and their wings thus: 9 their wings touched one
another; each of them moved straight ahead, without turning as they
moved. 10 As for the appearance of their faces: the four had the face
of a human being, the face of a lion on the right side, the face of an ox
on the left side, and the face of an eagle; 11 such were their faces. Their
wings were spread out above; each creature had two wings, each of
which touched the wing of another, while two covered their bodies. 12
Each moved straight ahead; wherever the spirit would go, they went,
without turning as they went. 13 In the middle of the living creatures
there was something that looked like burning coals of fire, like torches
moving to and fro among the living creatures; the fire was bright, and
lightning issued from the fire. 14 The living creatures darted to and fro,
like a flash of lightning.
15 As I looked at the living creatures, I saw a wheel on the earth beside
the living creatures, one for each of the four of them. 16 As for the
appearance of the wheels and their construction: their appearance was
like the gleaming of beryl; and the four had the same form, their
construction being something like a wheel within a wheel. 17 When
they moved, they moved in any of the four directions without veering
as they moved. 18 Their rims were tall and awesome, for the rims of all
four were full of eyes all around. 19 When the living creatures moved,
the wheels moved beside them; and when the living creatures rose
from the earth, the wheels rose. 20 Wherever the spirit would go, they

1651

EZEKIEL 1652

went, and the wheels rose along with them; for the spirit of the living
creatures was in the wheels. 21 When they moved, the others moved;
when they stopped, the others stopped; and when they rose from the
earth, the wheels rose along with them; for the spirit of the living
creatures was in the wheels.
22 Over the heads of the living creatures there was something like a
dome, shining like crystal, spread out above their heads. 23 Under the
dome their wings were stretched out straight, one toward another;
and each of the creatures had two wings covering its body. 24 When
they moved, I heard the sound of their wings like the sound of mighty
waters, like the thunder of the Almighty, a sound of tumult like the
sound of an army; when they stopped, they let down their wings. 25
And there came a voice from above the dome over their heads; when
they stopped, they let down their wings.
26 And above the dome over their heads there was something like a
throne, in appearance like sapphire; and seated above the likeness of a
throne was something that seemed like a human form. 27 Upward
from what appeared like the loins I saw something like gleaming
amber, something that looked like fire enclosed all around; and
downward from what looked like the loins I saw something that
looked like fire, and there was a splendor all around. 28 Like the bow
in a cloud on a rainy day, such was the appearance of the splendor all
around. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the
LORD.
Ezekiel's commissioning
When I saw it, I fell on my face, and I heard the voice of someone
speaking.
[Ezekiel 2]
1 He said to me: O mortal, stand up on your feet, and I will speak with
you. 2 And when he spoke to me, a spirit entered into me and set me
on my feet; and I heard him speaking to me. 3 He said to me, Mortal, I
am sending you to the people of Israel, to a nation of rebels who have

1652

EZEKIEL 1653

rebelled against me; they and their ancestors have transgressed against
me to this very day. 4 The descendants are impudent and stubborn. I
am sending you to them, and you shall say to them, "Thus says the
Lord GOD." 5 Whether they hear or refuse to hear (for they are a
rebellious house), they shall know that there has been a prophet
among them. 6 And you, O mortal, do not be afraid of them, and do
not be afraid of their words, though briers and thorns surround you
and you live among scorpions; do not be afraid of their words, and do
not be dismayed at their looks, for they are a rebellious house. 7 You
shall speak my words to them, whether they hear or refuse to hear; for
they are a rebellious house.
8 But you, mortal, hear what I say to you; do not be rebellious like that
rebellious house; open your mouth and eat what I give you. 9 I looked,
and a hand was stretched out to me, and a written scroll was in it. 10
He spread it before me; it had writing on the front and on the back,
and written on it were words of lamentation and mourning and woe.
[Ezekiel 3]
1 He said to me, O mortal, eat what is offered to you; eat this scroll,
and go, speak to the house of Israel. 2 So I opened my mouth, and he
gave me the scroll to eat. 3 He said to me, Mortal, eat this scroll that I
give you and fill your stomach with it. Then I ate it; and in my mouth it
was as sweet as honey.
4 He said to me: Mortal, go to the house of Israel and speak my very
words to them. 5 For you are not sent to a people of obscure speech
and difficult language, but to the house of Israel — 6 not to many
peoples of obscure speech and difficult language, whose words you
cannot understand. Surely, if I sent you to them, they would listen to
you. 7 But the house of Israel will not listen to you, for they are not
willing to listen to me; because all the house of Israel have a hard
forehead and a stubborn heart. 8 See, I have made your face hard
against their faces, and your forehead hard against their foreheads. 9
Like the hardest stone, harder than flint, I have made your forehead;
do not fear them or be dismayed at their looks, for they are a
rebellious house. 10 He said to me: Mortal, all my words that I shall

1653

EZEKIEL 1654

speak to you receive in your heart and hear with your ears; 11 then go
to the exiles, to your people, and speak to them. Say to them, "Thus
says the Lord GOD"; whether they hear or refuse to hear.
Ezekiel returns to his people
12 Then the spirit lifted me up, and as the glory of the LORD rose from
its place, I heard behind me the sound of loud rumbling; 13 it was the
sound of the wings of the living creatures brushing against one
another, and the sound of the wheels beside them, that sounded like a
loud rumbling. 14 The spirit lifted me up and bore me away; I went in
bitterness in the heat of my spirit, the hand of the LORD being strong
upon me. 15 I came to the exiles at Tel-abib, who lived by the river
Chebar. And I sat there among them, stunned, for seven days.
The sentinel
16 At the end of seven days, the word of the LORD came to me: 17
Mortal, I have made you a sentinel for the house of Israel; whenever
you hear a word from my mouth, you shall give them warning from
me. 18 If I say to the wicked, "You shall surely die," and you give them
no warning, or speak to warn the wicked from their wicked way, in
order to save their life, those wicked persons shall die for their iniquity;
but their blood I will require at your hand. 19 But if you warn the
wicked, and they do not turn from their wickedness, or from their
wicked way, they shall die for their iniquity; but you will have saved
your life. 20 Again, if the righteous turn from their righteousness and
commit iniquity, and I lay a stumbling block before them, they shall
die; because you have not warned them, they shall die for their sin,
and their righteous deeds that they have done shall not be
remembered; but their blood I will require at your hand. 21 If, however,
you warn the righteous not to sin, and they do not sin, they shall surely
live, because they took warning; and you will have saved your life.
Ezekiel's speechlessness
22 Then the hand of the LORD was upon me there; and he said to me,
Rise up, go out into the valley, and there I will speak with you. 23 So I

1654

EZEKIEL 1655

rose up and went out into the valley; and the glory of the LORD stood
there, like the glory that I had seen by the river Chebar; and I fell on
my face. 24 The spirit entered into me, and set me on my feet; and he
spoke with me and said to me: Go, shut yourself inside your house. 25
As for you, mortal, cords shall be placed on you, and you shall be
bound with them, so that you cannot go out among the people; 26 and
I will make your tongue cling to the roof of your mouth, so that you
shall be speechless and unable to reprove them; for they are a
rebellious house. 27 But when I speak with you, I will open your mouth,
and you shall say to them, "Thus says the Lord GOD"; let those who will
hear, hear; and let those who refuse to hear, refuse; for they are a
rebellious house.
[Ezekiel 4]
Part II: Prophecies of doom against Judah and Jerusalem; symbolic
actions describing the coming siege of Jerusalem
1 And you, O mortal, take a brick and set it before you. On it portray a
city, Jerusalem; 2 and put siegeworks against it, and build a siege wall
against it, and cast up a ramp against it; set camps also against it, and
plant battering rams against it all around. 3 Then take an iron plate
and place it as an iron wall between you and the city; set your face
toward it, and let it be in a state of siege, and press the siege against it.
This is a sign for the house of Israel.
4 Then lie on your left side, and place the punishment of the house of
Israel upon it; you shall bear their punishment for the number of the
days that you lie there. 5 For I assign to you a number of days, three
hundred ninety days, equal to the number of the years of their
punishment; and so you shall bear the punishment of the house of
Israel. 6 When you have completed these, you shall lie down a second
time, but on your right side, and bear the punishment of the house of
Judah; forty days I assign you, one day for each year. 7 You shall set
your face toward the siege of Jerusalem, and with your arm bared you
shall prophesy against it. 8 See, I am putting cords on you so that you
cannot turn from one side to the other until you have completed the
days of your siege.

1655

EZEKIEL 1656

9 And you, take wheat and barley, beans and lentils, millet and spelt;
put them into one vessel, and make bread for yourself. During the
number of days that you lie on your side, three hundred ninety days,
you shall eat it. 10 The food that you eat shall be twenty shekels a day
by weight; at fixed times you shall eat it. 11 And you shall drink water
by measure, one-sixth of a hin; at fixed times you shall drink. 12 You
shall eat it as a barley-cake, baking it in their sight on human dung. 13
The LORD said, "Thus shall the people of Israel eat their bread, unclean,
among the nations to which I will drive them." 14 Then I said, "Ah Lord
GOD! I have never defiled myself; from my youth up until now I have
never eaten what died of itself or was torn by animals, nor has carrion
flesh come into my mouth." 15 Then he said to me, "See, I will let you
have cow's dung instead of human dung, on which you may prepare
your bread."
16 Then he said to me, Mortal, I am going to break the staff of bread in
Jerusalem; they shall eat bread by weight and with fearfulness; and
they shall drink water by measure and in dismay. 17 Lacking bread and
water, they will look at one another in dismay, and waste away under
their punishment.
[Ezekiel 5]
1 And you, O mortal, take a sharp sword; use it as a barber's razor and
run it over your head and your beard; then take balances for weighing,
and divide the hair. 2 One third of the hair you shall burn in the fire
inside the city, when the days of the siege are completed; one third
you shall take and strike with the sword all around the city; and one
third you shall scatter to the wind, and I will unsheathe the sword after
them. 3 Then you shall take from these a small number, and bind them
in the skirts of your robe. 4 From these, again, you shall take some,
throw them into the fire and burn them up; from there a fire will come
out against all the house of Israel.
5 Thus says the Lord GOD: This is Jerusalem; I have set her in the center
of the nations, with countries all around her. 6 But she has rebelled
against my ordinances and my statutes, becoming more wicked than
the nations and the countries all around her, rejecting my ordinances

1656

EZEKIEL 1657

and not following my statutes. 7 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD:
Because you are more turbulent than the nations that are all around
you, and have not followed my statutes or kept my ordinances, but
have acted according to the ordinances of the nations that are all
around you; 8 therefore thus says the Lord GOD: I, I myself, am coming
against you; I will execute judgments among you in the sight of the
nations. 9 And because of all your abominations, I will do to you what I
have never yet done, and the like of which I will never do again. 10
Surely, parents shall eat their children in your midst, and children shall
eat their parents; I will execute judgments on you, and any of you who
survive I will scatter to every wind. 11 Therefore, as I live, says the Lord
GOD, surely, because you have defiled my sanctuary with all your
detestable things and with all your abominations — therefore I will cut
you down; my eye will not spare, and I will have no pity. 12 One third
of you shall die of pestilence or be consumed by famine among you;
one third shall fall by the sword around you; and one third I will scatter
to every wind and will unsheathe the sword after them.
13 My anger shall spend itself, and I will vent my fury on them and
satisfy myself; and they shall know that I, the LORD, have spoken in my
jealousy, when I spend my fury on them. 14 Moreover I will make you a
desolation and an object of mocking among the nations around you, in
the sight of all that pass by. 15 You shall be a mockery and a taunt, a
warning and a horror, to the nations around you, when I execute
judgments on you in anger and fury, and with furious punishments —
I, the LORD, have spoken — 16 when I loose against you my deadly
arrows of famine, arrows for destruction, which I will let loose to
destroy you, and when I bring more and more famine upon you, and
break your staff of bread. 17 I will send famine and wild animals
against you, and they will rob you of your children; pestilence and
bloodshed shall pass through you; and I will bring the sword upon you.
I, the LORD, have spoken.

1657

EZEKIEL 1658

[Ezekiel 6]
Two prophecies against Israel's idolatry
1 The word of the LORD came to me: 2 O mortal, set your face toward
the mountains of Israel, and prophesy against them, 3 and say, You
mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD! Thus says the Lord
GOD to the mountains and the hills, to the ravines and the valleys: I, I
myself will bring a sword upon you, and I will destroy your high places.
4 Your altars shall become desolate, and your incense stands shall be
broken; and I will throw down your slain in front of your idols. 5 I will
lay the corpses of the people of Israel in front of their idols; and I will
scatter your bones around your altars. 6 Wherever you live, your towns
shall be waste and your high places ruined, so that your altars will be
waste and ruined, your idols broken and destroyed, your incense stands
cut down, and your works wiped out. 7 The slain shall fall in your
midst; then you shall know that I am the LORD.
8 But I will spare some. Some of you shall escape the sword among the
nations and be scattered through the countries. 9 Those of you who
escape shall remember me among the nations where they are carried
captive, how I was crushed by their wanton heart that turned away
from me, and their wanton eyes that turned after their idols. Then they
will be loathsome in their own sight for the evils that they have
committed, for all their abominations. 10 And they shall know that I
am the LORD; I did not threaten in vain to bring this disaster upon
them.
11 Thus says the Lord GOD: Clap your hands and stamp your foot, and
say, Alas for all the vile abominations of the house of Israel! For they
shall fall by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence. 12 Those far off
shall die of pestilence; those nearby shall fall by the sword; and any
who are left and are spared shall die of famine. Thus I will spend my
fury upon them. 13 And you shall know that I am the LORD, when their
slain lie among their idols around their altars, on every high hill, on all
the mountain tops, under every green tree, and under every leafy oak,
wherever they offered pleasing odor to all their idols. 14 I will stretch
out my hand against them, and make the land desolate and waste,

1658

EZEKIEL 1659

throughout all their settlements, from the wilderness to Riblah. Then
they shall know that I am the LORD.
[Ezekiel 7]
Prophecies on the approaching end
1 The word of the LORD came to me: 2 You, O mortal, thus says the Lord
GOD to the land of Israel:
An end! The end has come
upon the four corners of the land.
3 Now the end is upon you,
I will let loose my anger upon you;
I will judge you according to your ways,
I will punish you for all your abominations.
4 My eye will not spare you, I will have no pity.
I will punish you for your ways,
while your abominations are among you.
Then you shall know that I am the LORD.
5 Thus says the Lord GOD:
Disaster after disaster! See, it comes.
6
An end has come, the end has come.
It has awakened against you; see, it comes!
7 Your doom has come to you,
O inhabitant of the land.
The time has come, the day is near —
of tumult, not of reveling on the mountains.
8 Soon now I will pour out my wrath upon you;
I will spend my anger against you.
I will judge you according to your ways,
and punish you for all your abominations.
9 My eye will not spare; I will have no pity.
I will punish you according to your ways,
while your abominations are among you.
Then you shall know that it is I the LORD who strike.
10 See, the day! See, it comes!
Your doom has gone out.
The rod has blossomed, pride has budded.

1659

EZEKIEL 1660

11 Violence has grown into a rod of wickedness.
None of them shall remain,
not their abundance, not their wealth;
no pre-eminence among them.
12 The time has come, the day draws near;
let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn,
for wrath is upon all their multitude.
13 For the sellers shall not return to what has been sold as long as they
remain alive. For the vision concerns all their multitude; it shall not be
revoked. Because of their iniquity, they cannot maintain their lives.
14 They have blown the horn and made everything ready;
but no one goes to battle,
for my wrath is upon all their multitude.
15 The sword is outside, pestilence and famine are inside;
those in the field die by the sword;
those in the city — famine and pestilence devour them.
16 If any survivors escape,
they shall be found on the mountains
like doves of the valleys,
all of them moaning over their iniquity.
17 All hands shall grow feeble,
all knees turn to water.
18 They shall put on sackcloth,
horror shall cover them.
Shame shall be on all faces,
baldness on all their heads.
19 They shall fling their silver into the streets,
their gold shall be treated as unclean.
Their silver and gold cannot save them on the day of the wrath of the
LORD. They shall not satisfy their hunger or fill their stomachs with it.
For it was the stumbling block of their iniquity. 20 From their beautiful
ornament, in which they took pride, they made their abominable
images, their detestable things; therefore I will make of it an unclean
thing to them.
21 I will hand it over to strangers as booty,
to the wicked of the earth as plunder;
they shall profane it.

1660

EZEKIEL 1661

22 I will avert my face from them,
so that they may profane my treasured place;
the violent shall enter it,
they shall profane it.
23 Make a chain!
For the land is full of bloody crimes;
the city is full of violence.
24 I will bring the worst of the nations
to take possession of their houses.
I will put an end to the arrogance of the strong,
and their holy places shall be profaned.
25 When anguish comes, they will seek peace,
but there shall be none.
26 Disaster comes upon disaster,
rumor follows rumor;
they shall keep seeking a vision from the prophet;
instruction shall perish from the priest,
and counsel from the elders.
27 The king shall mourn,
the prince shall be wrapped in despair,
and the hands of the people of the land shall tremble.
According to their way I will deal with them;
according to their own judgments I will judge them.
And they shall know that I am the LORD.
[Ezekiel 8]
The Temple visions; the vision of idolatry
1 In the sixth year, in the sixth month, on the fifth day of the month, as
I sat in my house, with the elders of Judah sitting before me, the hand
of the Lord GOD fell upon me there. 2 I looked, and there was a figure
that looked like a human being; below what appeared to be its loins it
was fire, and above the loins it was like the appearance of brightness,
like gleaming amber. 3 It stretched out the form of a hand, and took
me by a lock of my head; and the spirit lifted me up between earth and
heaven, and brought me in visions of God to Jerusalem, to the
entrance of the gateway of the inner court that faces north, to the seat
of the image of jealousy, which provokes to jealousy. 4 And the glory

1661

EZEKIEL 1662

of the God of Israel was there, like the vision that I had seen in the
valley.
5 Then God said to me, "O mortal, lift up your eyes now in the
direction of the north." So I lifted up my eyes toward the north, and
there, north of the altar gate, in the entrance, was this image of
jealousy. 6 He said to me, "Mortal, do you see what they are doing, the
great abominations that the house of Israel are committing here, to
drive me far from my sanctuary? Yet you will see still greater
abominations."
7 And he brought me to the entrance of the court; I looked, and there
was a hole in the wall. 8 Then he said to me, "Mortal, dig through the
wall"; and when I dug through the wall, there was an entrance. 9 He
said to me, "Go in, and see the vile abominations that they are
committing here." 10 So I went in and looked; there, portrayed on the
wall all around, were all kinds of creeping things, and loathsome
animals, and all the idols of the house of Israel. 11 Before them stood
seventy of the elders of the house of Israel, with Jaazaniah son of
Shaphan standing among them. Each had his censer in his hand, and
the fragrant cloud of incense was ascending. 12 Then he said to me,
"Mortal, have you seen what the elders of the house of Israel are doing
in the dark, each in his room of images? For they say, 'The LORD does
not see us, the LORD has forsaken the land.'" 13 He said also to me,
"You will see still greater abominations that they are committing."
14 Then he brought me to the entrance of the north gate of the house
of the LORD; women were sitting there weeping for Tammuz. 15 Then
he said to me, "Have you seen this, O mortal? You will see still greater
abominations than these."
16 And he brought me into the inner court of the house of the LORD;
there, at the entrance of the temple of the LORD, between the porch
and the altar, were about twenty-five men, with their backs to the
temple of the LORD, and their faces toward the east, prostrating
themselves to the sun toward the east. 17 Then he said to me, "Have
you seen this, O mortal? Is it not bad enough that the house of Judah
commits the abominations done here? Must they fill the land with

1662

EZEKIEL 1663

violence, and provoke my anger still further? See, they are putting the
branch to their nose! 18 Therefore I will act in wrath; my eye will not
spare, nor will I have pity; and though they cry in my hearing with a
loud voice, I will not listen to them."
[Ezekiel 9]
The punishment of the guilty
1 Then he cried in my hearing with a loud voice, saying, "Draw near,
you executioners of the city, each with his destroying weapon in his
hand." 2 And six men came from the direction of the upper gate,
which faces north, each with his weapon for slaughter in his hand;
among them was a man clothed in linen, with a writing case at his side.
They went in and stood beside the bronze altar.
3 Now the glory of the God of Israel had gone up from the cherub on
which it rested to the threshold of the house. The LORD called to the
man clothed in linen, who had the writing case at his side; 4 and said
to him, "Go through the city, through Jerusalem, and put a mark on
the foreheads of those who sigh and groan over all the abominations
that are committed in it." 5 To the others he said in my hearing, "Pass
through the city after him, and kill; your eye shall not spare, and you
shall show no pity. 6 Cut down old men, young men and young
women, little children and women, but touch no one who has the
mark. And begin at my sanctuary." So they began with the elders who
were in front of the house. 7 Then he said to them, "Defile the house,
and fill the courts with the slain. Go!" So they went out and killed in
the city. 8 While they were killing, and I was left alone, I fell prostrate
on my face and cried out, "Ah Lord GOD! will you destroy all who
remain of Israel as you pour out your wrath upon Jerusalem?" 9 He
said to me, "The guilt of the house of Israel and Judah is exceedingly
great; the land is full of bloodshed and the city full of perversity; for
they say, 'The LORD has forsaken the land, and the LORD does not see.'
10 As for me, my eye will not spare, nor will I have pity, but I will bring
down their deeds upon their heads."
11 Then the man clothed in linen, with the writing case at his side,
brought back word, saying, "I have done as you commanded me."

1663

EZEKIEL 1664

[Ezekiel 10]
The departure of the LORD's glory from the Temple
1 Then I looked, and above the dome that was over the heads of the
cherubim there appeared above them something like a sapphire, in
form resembling a throne. 2 He said to the man clothed in linen, "Go
within the wheelwork underneath the cherubim; fill your hands with
burning coals from among the cherubim, and scatter them over the
city." He went in as I looked on. 3 Now the cherubim were standing on
the south side of the house when the man went in; and a cloud filled
the inner court. 4 Then the glory of the LORD rose up from the cherub
to the threshold of the house; the house was filled with the cloud, and
the court was full of the brightness of the glory of the LORD. 5 The
sound of the wings of the cherubim was heard as far as the outer
court, like the voice of God Almighty when he speaks.
6 When he commanded the man clothed in linen, "Take fire from
within the wheelwork, from among the cherubim," he went in and
stood beside a wheel. 7 And a cherub stretched out his hand from
among the cherubim to the fire that was among the cherubim, took
some of it and put it into the hands of the man clothed in linen, who
took it and went out. 8 The cherubim appeared to have the form of a
human hand under their wings.
9 I looked, and there were four wheels beside the cherubim, one
beside each cherub; and the appearance of the wheels was like
gleaming beryl. 10 And as for their appearance, the four looked alike,
something like a wheel within a wheel. 11 When they moved, they
moved in any of the four directions without veering as they moved;
but in whatever direction the front wheel faced, the others followed
without veering as they moved. 12 Their entire body, their rims, their
spokes, their wings, and the wheels — the wheels of the four of them
— were full of eyes all around. 13 As for the wheels, they were called in
my hearing "the wheelwork." 14 Each one had four faces: the first face
was that of the cherub, the second face was that of a human being,
the third that of a lion, and the fourth that of an eagle.

1664

EZEKIEL 1665

15 The cherubim rose up. These were the living creatures that I saw by
the river Chebar. 16 When the cherubim moved, the wheels moved
beside them; and when the cherubim lifted up their wings to rise up
from the earth, the wheels at their side did not veer. 17 When they
stopped, the others stopped, and when they rose up, the others rose
up with them; for the spirit of the living creatures was in them.
18 Then the glory of the LORD went out from the threshold of the
house and stopped above the cherubim. 19 The cherubim lifted up
their wings and rose up from the earth in my sight as they went out
with the wheels beside them. They stopped at the entrance of the east
gate of the house of the LORD; and the glory of the God of Israel was
above them.
20 These were the living creatures that I saw underneath the God of
Israel by the river Chebar; and I knew that they were cherubim. 21 Each
had four faces, each four wings, and underneath their wings
something like human hands. 22 As for what their faces were like, they
were the same faces whose appearance I had seen by the river Chebar.
Each one moved straight ahead.
[Ezekiel 11]
Judgment and promise; a disputation over the city
1 The spirit lifted me up and brought me to the east gate of the house
of the LORD, which faces east. There, at the entrance of the gateway,
were twenty-five men; among them I saw Jaazaniah son of Azzur, and
Pelatiah son of Benaiah, officials of the people. 2 He said to me,
"Mortal, these are the men who devise iniquity and who give wicked
counsel in this city; 3 they say, 'The time is not near to build houses; this
city is the pot, and we are the meat.' 4 Therefore prophesy against
them; prophesy, O mortal."
5 Then the spirit of the LORD fell upon me, and he said to me, "Say,
Thus says the LORD: This is what you think, O house of Israel; I know the
things that come into your mind. 6 You have killed many in this city,
and have filled its streets with the slain. 7 Therefore thus says the Lord
GOD: The slain whom you have placed within it are the meat, and this

1665

EZEKIEL 1666

city is the pot; but you shall be taken out of it. 8 You have feared the
sword; and I will bring the sword upon you, says the Lord GOD. 9 I will
take you out of it and give you over to the hands of foreigners, and
execute judgments upon you. 10 You shall fall by the sword; I will
judge you at the border of Israel. And you shall know that I am the
LORD. 11 This city shall not be your pot, and you shall not be the meat
inside it; I will judge you at the border of Israel. 12 Then you shall know
that I am the LORD, whose statutes you have not followed, and whose
ordinances you have not kept, but you have acted according to the
ordinances of the nations that are around you."
13 Now, while I was prophesying, Pelatiah son of Benaiah died. Then I
fell down on my face, cried with a loud voice, and said, "Ah Lord GOD!
will you make a full end of the remnant of Israel?"
The future lies with the exiles
14 Then the word of the LORD came to me: 15 Mortal, your kinsfolk,
your own kin, your fellow exiles, the whole house of Israel, all of them,
are those of whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, "They have
gone far from the LORD; to us this land is given for a possession." 16
Therefore say: Thus says the Lord GOD: Though I removed them far
away among the nations, and though I scattered them among the
countries, yet I have been a sanctuary to them for a little while in the
countries where they have gone. 17 Therefore say: Thus says the Lord
GOD: I will gather you from the peoples, and assemble you out of the
countries where you have been scattered, and I will give you the land
of Israel. 18 When they come there, they will remove from it all its
detestable things and all its abominations. 19 I will give them one
heart, and put a new spirit within them; I will remove the heart of
stone from their flesh and give them a heart of flesh, 20 so that they
may follow my statutes and keep my ordinances and obey them. Then
they shall be my people, and I will be their God. 21 But as for those
whose heart goes after their detestable things and their abominations,
I will bring their deeds upon their own heads, says the Lord GOD.

1666

EZEKIEL 1667

Conclusion of the Temple visions
22 Then the cherubim lifted up their wings, with the wheels beside
them; and the glory of the God of Israel was above them. 23 And the
glory of the LORD ascended from the middle of the city, and stopped on
the mountain east of the city. 24 The spirit lifted me up and brought
me in a vision by the spirit of God into Chaldea, to the exiles. Then the
vision that I had seen left me. 25 And I told the exiles all the things that
the LORD had shown me.
[Ezekiel 12]
Two symbolic actions: First symbol, an exile's baggage
1 The word of the LORD came to me: 2 Mortal, you are living in the
midst of a rebellious house, who have eyes to see but do not see, who
have ears to hear but do not hear; 3 for they are a rebellious house.
Therefore, mortal, prepare for yourself an exile's baggage, and go into
exile by day in their sight; you shall go like an exile from your place to
another place in their sight. Perhaps they will understand, though they
are a rebellious house. 4 You shall bring out your baggage by day in
their sight, as baggage for exile; and you shall go out yourself at
evening in their sight, as those do who go into exile. 5 Dig through the
wall in their sight, and carry the baggage through it. 6 In their sight
you shall lift the baggage on your shoulder, and carry it out in the
dark; you shall cover your face, so that you may not see the land; for I
have made you a sign for the house of Israel.
7 I did just as I was commanded. I brought out my baggage by day, as
baggage for exile, and in the evening I dug through the wall with my
own hands; I brought it out in the dark, carrying it on my shoulder in
their sight.
8 In the morning the word of the LORD came to me: 9 Mortal, has not
the house of Israel, the rebellious house, said to you, "What are you
doing?" 10 Say to them, "Thus says the Lord GOD: This oracle concerns
the prince in Jerusalem and all the house of Israel in it." 11 Say, "I am a
sign for you: as I have done, so shall it be done to them; they shall go
into exile, into captivity." 12 And the prince who is among them shall

1667

EZEKIEL 1668

lift his baggage on his shoulder in the dark, and shall go out; he shall
dig through the wall and carry it through; he shall cover his face, so
that he may not see the land with his eyes. 13 I will spread my net over
him, and he shall be caught in my snare; and I will bring him to
Babylon, the land of the Chaldeans, yet he shall not see it; and he shall
die there. 14 I will scatter to every wind all who are around him, his
helpers and all his troops; and I will unsheathe the sword behind them.
15 And they shall know that I am the LORD, when I disperse them
among the nations and scatter them through the countries. 16 But I will
let a few of them escape from the sword, from famine and pestilence,
so that they may tell of all their abominations among the nations
where they go; then they shall know that I am the LORD.
Second symbol, eating with trembling
17 The word of the LORD came to me: 18 Mortal, eat your bread with
quaking, and drink your water with trembling and with fearfulness; 19
and say to the people of the land, Thus says the Lord GOD concerning
the inhabitants of Jerusalem in the land of Israel: They shall eat their
bread with fearfulness, and drink their water in dismay, because their
land shall be stripped of all it contains, on account of the violence of all
those who live in it. 20 The inhabited cities shall be laid waste, and the
land shall become a desolation; and you shall know that I am the LORD.
Disputations about prophecy
21 The word of the LORD came to me: 22 Mortal, what is this proverb of
yours about the land of Israel, which says, "The days are prolonged,
and every vision comes to nothing"? 23 Tell them therefore, "Thus says
the Lord GOD: I will put an end to this proverb, and they shall use it no
more as a proverb in Israel." But say to them, The days are near, and
the fulfillment of every vision. 24 For there shall no longer be any false
vision or flattering divination within the house of Israel. 25 But I the
LORD will speak the word that I speak, and it will be fulfilled. It will no
longer be delayed; but in your days, O rebellious house, I will speak the
word and fulfill it, says the Lord GOD.

1668

EZEKIEL 1669

26 The word of the LORD came to me: 27 Mortal, the house of Israel is
saying, "The vision that he sees is for many years ahead; he prophesies
for distant times." 28 Therefore say to them, Thus says the Lord GOD:
None of my words will be delayed any longer, but the word that I
speak will be fulfilled, says the Lord GOD.
[Ezekiel 13]
Oracles against false prophecy
1 The word of the LORD came to me: 2 Mortal, prophesy against the
prophets of Israel who are prophesying; say to those who prophesy out
of their own imagination: "Hear the word of the LORD!" 3 Thus says the
Lord GOD, Alas for the senseless prophets who follow their own spirit,
and have seen nothing! 4 Your prophets have been like jackals among
ruins, O Israel. 5 You have not gone up into the breaches, or repaired a
wall for the house of Israel, so that it might stand in battle on the day
of the LORD. 6 They have envisioned falsehood and lying divination;
they say, "Says the LORD," when the LORD has not sent them, and yet
they wait for the fulfillment of their word! 7 Have you not seen a false
vision or uttered a lying divination, when you have said, "Says the
LORD," even though I did not speak?
8 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Because you have uttered
falsehood and envisioned lies, I am against you, says the Lord GOD. 9
My hand will be against the prophets who see false visions and utter
lying divinations; they shall not be in the council of my people, nor be
enrolled in the register of the house of Israel, nor shall they enter the
land of Israel; and you shall know that I am the Lord GOD. 10 Because,
in truth, because they have misled my people, saying, "Peace," when
there is no peace; and because, when the people build a wall, these
prophets smear whitewash on it. 11 Say to those who smear whitewash
on it that it shall fall. There will be a deluge of rain, great hailstones
will fall, and a stormy wind will break out. 12 When the wall falls, will it
not be said to you, "Where is the whitewash you smeared on it?" 13
Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: In my wrath I will make a stormy
wind break out, and in my anger there shall be a deluge of rain, and
hailstones in wrath to destroy it. 14 I will break down the wall that you
have smeared with whitewash, and bring it to the ground, so that its

1669

EZEKIEL 1670

foundation will be laid bare; when it falls, you shall perish within it;
and you shall know that I am the LORD. 15 Thus I will spend my wrath
upon the wall, and upon those who have smeared it with whitewash;
and I will say to you, The wall is no more, nor those who smeared it —
16 the prophets of Israel who prophesied concerning Jerusalem and
saw visions of peace for it, when there was no peace, says the Lord
GOD.
Against sorceresses
17 As for you, mortal, set your face against the daughters of your
people, who prophesy out of their own imagination; prophesy against
them 18 and say, Thus says the Lord GOD: Woe to the women who sew
bands on all wrists, and make veils for the heads of persons of every
height, in the hunt for human lives! Will you hunt down lives among
my people, and maintain your own lives? 19 You have profaned me
among my people for handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread,
putting to death persons who should not die and keeping alive persons
who should not live, by your lies to my people, who listen to lies.
20 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: I am against your bands with
which you hunt lives; I will tear them from your arms, and let the lives
go free, the lives that you hunt down like birds. 21 I will tear off your
veils, and save my people from your hands; they shall no longer be prey
in your hands; and you shall know that I am the LORD. 22 Because you
have disheartened the righteous falsely, although I have not
disheartened them, and you have encouraged the wicked not to turn
from their wicked way and save their lives; 23 therefore you shall no
longer see false visions or practice divination; I will save my people
from your hand. Then you will know that I am the LORD.
[Ezekiel 14]
A legal case involving consultation
1 Certain elders of Israel came to me and sat down before me. 2 And
the word of the LORD came to me: 3 Mortal, these men have taken their
idols into their hearts, and placed their iniquity as a stumbling block
before them; shall I let myself be consulted by them? 4 Therefore speak

1670

EZEKIEL 1671

to them, and say to them, Thus says the Lord GOD: Any of those of the
house of Israel who take their idols into their hearts and place their
iniquity as a stumbling block before them, and yet come to the
prophet — I the LORD will answer those who come with the multitude
of their idols, 5 in order that I may take hold of the hearts of the house
of Israel, all of whom are estranged from me through their idols.
6 Therefore say to the house of Israel, Thus says the Lord GOD: Repent
and turn away from your idols; and turn away your faces from all your
abominations. 7 For any of those of the house of Israel, or of the aliens
who reside in Israel, who separate themselves from me, taking their
idols into their hearts and placing their iniquity as a stumbling block
before them, and yet come to a prophet to inquire of me by him, I the
LORD will answer them myself. 8 I will set my face against them; I will
make them a sign and a byword and cut them off from the midst of my
people; and you shall know that I am the LORD.
9 If a prophet is deceived and speaks a word, I, the LORD, have deceived
that prophet, and I will stretch out my hand against him, and will
destroy him from the midst of my people Israel. 10 And they shall bear
their punishment — the punishment of the inquirer and the
punishment of the prophet shall be the same — 11 so that the house of
Israel may no longer go astray from me, nor defile themselves any
more with all their transgressions. Then they shall be my people, and I
will be their God, says the Lord GOD.
The inevitability of God's judgment
12 The word of the LORD came to me: 13 Mortal, when a land sins
against me by acting faithlessly, and I stretch out my hand against it,
and break its staff of bread and send famine upon it, and cut off from
it human beings and animals, 14 even if Noah, Daniel, and Job, these
three, were in it, they would save only their own lives by their
righteousness, says the Lord GOD. 15 If I send wild animals through the
land to ravage it, so that it is made desolate, and no one may pass
through because of the animals; 16 even if these three men were in it,
as I live, says the Lord GOD, they would save neither sons nor daughters;
they alone would be saved, but the land would be desolate. 17 Or if I

1671

EZEKIEL 1672

bring a sword upon that land and say, "Let a sword pass through the
land," and I cut off human beings and animals from it; 18 though these
three men were in it, as I live, says the Lord GOD, they would save
neither sons nor daughters, but they alone would be saved. 19 Or if I
send a pestilence into that land, and pour out my wrath upon it with
blood, to cut off humans and animals from it; 20 even if Noah, Daniel,
and Job were in it, as I live, says the Lord GOD, they would save neither
son nor daughter; they would save only their own lives by their
righteousness.
21 For thus says the Lord GOD: How much more when I send upon
Jerusalem my four deadly acts of judgment, sword, famine, wild
animals, and pestilence, to cut off humans and animals from it! 22 Yet,
survivors shall be left in it, sons and daughters who will be brought
out; they will come out to you. When you see their ways and their
deeds, you will be consoled for the evil that I have brought upon
Jerusalem, for all that I have brought upon it. 23 They shall console
you, when you see their ways and their deeds; and you shall know that
it was not without cause that I did all that I have done in it, says the
Lord GOD.
[Ezekiel 15]
Analogy of the useless vine
1 The word of the LORD came to me:
2 O mortal, how does the wood of the vine surpass all other wood —
the vine branch that is among the trees of the forest?
3 Is wood taken from it to make anything?
Does one take a peg from it on which to hang any object?
4 It is put in the fire for fuel;
when the fire has consumed both ends of it
and the middle of it is charred,
is it useful for anything?
5 When it was whole it was used for nothing;
how much less — when the fire has consumed it,
and it is charred —
can it ever be used for anything!

1672

EZEKIEL 1673

6 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Like the wood of the vine among
the trees of the forest, which I have given to the fire for fuel, so I will
give up the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 7 I will set my face against them;
although they escape from the fire, the fire shall still consume them;
and you shall know that I am the LORD, when I set my face against
them. 8 And I will make the land desolate, because they have acted
faithlessly, says the Lord GOD.
[Ezekiel 16]
The allegory of the unfaithful wife; Jerusalem, the Foundling
1 The word of the LORD came to me: 2 Mortal, make known to
Jerusalem her abominations, 3 and say, Thus says the Lord GOD to
Jerusalem: Your origin and your birth were in the land of the
Canaanites; your father was an Amorite, and your mother a Hittite. 4
As for your birth, on the day you were born your navel cord was not
cut, nor were you washed with water to cleanse you, nor rubbed with
salt, nor wrapped in cloths. 5 No eye pitied you, to do any of these
things for you out of compassion for you; but you were thrown out in
the open field, for you were abhorred on the day you were born.
6 I passed by you, and saw you flailing about in your blood. As you lay
in your blood, I said to you, "Live! 7 and grow up like a plant of the
field." You grew up and became tall and arrived at full womanhood;
your breasts were formed, and your hair had grown; yet you were
naked and bare.
The beautiful bride
8 I passed by you again and looked on you; you were at the age for
love. I spread the edge of my cloak over you, and covered your
nakedness: I pledged myself to you and entered into a covenant with
you, says the Lord GOD, and you became mine. 9 Then I bathed you
with water and washed off the blood from you, and anointed you with
oil. 10 I clothed you with embroidered cloth and with sandals of fine
leather; I bound you in fine linen and covered you with rich fabric. 11 I
adorned you with ornaments: I put bracelets on your arms, a chain on
your neck, 12 a ring on your nose, earrings in your ears, and a beautiful

1673

EZEKIEL 1674

crown upon your head. 13 You were adorned with gold and silver,
while your clothing was of fine linen, rich fabric, and embroidered
cloth. You had choice flour and honey and oil for food. You grew
exceedingly beautiful, fit to be a queen. 14 Your fame spread among
the nations on account of your beauty, for it was perfect because of my
splendor that I had bestowed on you, says the Lord GOD.
Sexual betrayal
15 But you trusted in your beauty, and played the whore because of
your fame, and lavished your whorings on any passer-by. 16 You took
some of your garments, and made for yourself colorful shrines, and on
them played the whore; nothing like this has ever been or ever shall
be. 17 You also took your beautiful jewels of my gold and my silver that
I had given you, and made for yourself male images, and with them
played the whore; 18 and you took your embroidered garments to
cover them, and set my oil and my incense before them. 19 Also my
bread that I gave you — I fed you with choice flour and oil and honey
— you set it before them as a pleasing odor; and so it was, says the
Lord GOD. 20 You took your sons and your daughters, whom you had
borne to me, and these you sacrificed to them to be devoured. As if
your whorings were not enough! 21 You slaughtered my children and
delivered them up as an offering to them. 22 And in all your
abominations and your whorings you did not remember the days of
your youth, when you were naked and bare, flailing about in your
blood.
23 After all your wickedness (woe, woe to you! says the Lord GOD), 24
you built yourself a platform and made yourself a lofty place in every
square; 25 at the head of every street you built your lofty place and
prostituted your beauty, offering yourself to every passer-by, and
multiplying your whoring. 26 You played the whore with the
Egyptians, your lustful neighbors, multiplying your whoring, to
provoke me to anger. 27 Therefore I stretched out my hand against
you, reduced your rations, and gave you up to the will of your enemies,
the daughters of the Philistines, who were ashamed of your lewd
behavior. 28 You played the whore with the Assyrians, because you
were insatiable; you played the whore with them, and still you were

1674

EZEKIEL 1675

not satisfied. 29 You multiplied your whoring with Chaldea, the land of
merchants; and even with this you were not satisfied.
30 How sick is your heart, says the Lord GOD, that you did all these
things, the deeds of a brazen whore; 31 building your platform at the
head of every street, and making your lofty place in every square! Yet
you were not like a whore, because you scorned payment. 32
Adulterous wife, who receives strangers instead of her husband! 33
Gifts are given to all whores; but you gave your gifts to all your lovers,
bribing them to come to you from all around for your whorings. 34 So
you were different from other women in your whorings: no one
solicited you to play the whore; and you gave payment, while no
payment was given to you; you were different.
35 Therefore, O whore, hear the word of the LORD: 36 Thus says the
Lord GOD, Because your lust was poured out and your nakedness
uncovered in your whoring with your lovers, and because of all your
abominable idols, and because of the blood of your children that you
gave to them, 37 therefore, I will gather all your lovers, with whom you
took pleasure, all those you loved and all those you hated; I will gather
them against you from all around, and will uncover your nakedness to
them, so that they may see all your nakedness. 38 I will judge you as
women who commit adultery and shed blood are judged, and bring
blood upon you in wrath and jealousy. 39 I will deliver you into their
hands, and they shall throw down your platform and break down your
lofty places; they shall strip you of your clothes and take your beautiful
objects and leave you naked and bare. 40 They shall bring up a mob
against you, and they shall stone you and cut you to pieces with their
swords. 41 They shall burn your houses and execute judgments on you
in the sight of many women; I will stop you from playing the whore,
and you shall also make no more payments. 42 So I will satisfy my fury
on you, and my jealousy shall turn away from you; I will be calm, and
will be angry no longer. 43 Because you have not remembered the days
of your youth, but have enraged me with all these things; therefore, I
have returned your deeds upon your head, says the Lord GOD.

1675

EZEKIEL 1676

Additional accusation
Have you not committed lewdness beyond all your abominations? 44
See, everyone who uses proverbs will use this proverb about you, "Like
mother, like daughter." 45 You are the daughter of your mother, who
loathed her husband and her children; and you are the sister of your
sisters, who loathed their husbands and their children. Your mother
was a Hittite and your father an Amorite. 46 Your elder sister is
Samaria, who lived with her daughters to the north of you; and your
younger sister, who lived to the south of you, is Sodom with her
daughters. 47 You not only followed their ways, and acted according
to their abominations; within a very little time you were more corrupt
than they in all your ways. 48 As I live, says the Lord GOD, your sister
Sodom and her daughters have not done as you and your daughters
have done. 49 This was the guilt of your sister Sodom: she and her
daughters had pride, excess of food, and prosperous ease, but did not
aid the poor and needy. 50 They were haughty, and did abominable
things before me; therefore I removed them when I saw it. 51 Samaria
has not committed half your sins; you have committed more
abominations than they, and have made your sisters appear righteous
by all the abominations that you have committed. 52 Bear your
disgrace, you also, for you have brought about for your sisters a more
favorable judgment; because of your sins in which you acted more
abominably than they, they are more in the right than you. So be
ashamed, you also, and bear your disgrace, for you have made your
sisters appear righteous.
53 I will restore their fortunes, the fortunes of Sodom and her
daughters and the fortunes of Samaria and her daughters, and I will
restore your own fortunes along with theirs, 54 in order that you may
bear your disgrace and be ashamed of all that you have done,
becoming a consolation to them. 55 As for your sisters, Sodom and her
daughters shall return to their former state, Samaria and her daughters
shall return to their former state, and you and your daughters shall
return to your former state. 56 Was not your sister Sodom a byword in
your mouth in the day of your pride, 57 before your wickedness was
uncovered? Now you are a mockery to the daughters of Aram and all
her neighbors, and to the daughters of the Philistines, those all around

1676

EZEKIEL 1677

who despise you. 58 You must bear the penalty of your lewdness and
your abominations, says the LORD.
59 Yes, thus says the Lord GOD: I will deal with you as you have done,
you who have despised the oath, breaking the covenant; 60 yet I will
remember my covenant with you in the days of your youth, and I will
establish with you an everlasting covenant. 61 Then you will remember
your ways, and be ashamed when I take your sisters, both your elder
and your younger, and give them to you as daughters, but not on
account of my covenant with you. 62 I will establish my covenant with
you, and you shall know that I am the LORD, 63 in order that you may
remember and be confounded, and never open your mouth again
because of your shame, when I forgive you all that you have done, says
the Lord GOD.
[Ezekiel 17]
The allegorical fable of the eagles
1 The word of the LORD came to me: 2 O mortal, propound a riddle, and
speak an allegory to the house of Israel. 3 Say: Thus says the Lord GOD:
A great eagle, with great wings and long pinions,
rich in plumage of many colors,
came to the Lebanon.
He took the top of the cedar,
4
broke off its topmost shoot;
he carried it to a land of trade,
set it in a city of merchants.
5 Then he took a seed from the land,
placed it in fertile soil;
a plant by abundant waters,
he set it like a willow twig.

1677

EZEKIEL 1678

6 It sprouted and became a vine
spreading out, but low;
its branches turned toward him,
its roots remained where it stood.
So it became a vine;
it brought forth branches,
put forth foliage.
7 There was another great eagle,
with great wings and much plumage.
And see! This vine stretched out
its roots toward him;
it shot out its branches toward him,
so that he might water it.
From the bed where it was planted
8
it was transplanted
to good soil by abundant waters,
so that it might produce branches
and bear fruit
and become a noble vine.
9 Say: Thus says the Lord GOD:
Will it prosper?
Will he not pull up its roots,
cause its fruit to rot and wither,
its fresh sprouting leaves to fade?
No strong arm or mighty army will be needed
to pull it from its roots.
10 When it is transplanted, will it thrive?
When the east wind strikes it,
will it not utterly wither,
wither on the bed where it grew?
The interpretation
11 Then the word of the LORD came to me: 12 Say now to the rebellious
house: Do you not know what these things mean? Tell them: The king
of Babylon came to Jerusalem, took its king and its officials, and
brought them back with him to Babylon. 13 He took one of the royal

1678

EZEKIEL 1679

offspring and made a covenant with him, putting him under oath (he
had taken away the chief men of the land), 14 so that the kingdom
might be humble and not lift itself up, and that by keeping his
covenant it might stand. 15 But he rebelled against him by sending
ambassadors to Egypt, in order that they might give him horses and a
large army. Will he succeed? Can one escape who does such things?
Can he break the covenant and yet escape? 16 As I live, says the Lord
GOD, surely in the place where the king resides who made him king,
whose oath he despised, and whose covenant with him he broke — in
Babylon he shall die. 17 Pharaoh with his mighty army and great
company will not help him in war, when ramps are cast up and siege
walls built to cut off many lives. 18 Because he despised the oath and
broke the covenant, because he gave his hand and yet did all these
things, he shall not escape. 19 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: As I
live, I will surely return upon his head my oath that he despised, and
my covenant that he broke. 20 I will spread my net over him, and he
shall be caught in my snare; I will bring him to Babylon and enter into
judgment with him there for the treason he has committed against me.
21 All the pick of his troops shall fall by the sword, and the survivors
shall be scattered to every wind; and you shall know that I, the LORD,
have spoken.
The fable expanded
22 Thus says the Lord GOD:
I myself will take a sprig
from the lofty top of a cedar;
I will set it out.
I will break off a tender one
from the topmost of its young twigs;
I myself will plant it
on a high and lofty mountain.

1679

EZEKIEL 1680

23 On the mountain height of Israel
I will plant it,
in order that it may produce boughs and bear fruit,
and become a noble cedar.
Under it every kind of bird will live;
in the shade of its branches will nest
winged creatures of every kind.
24 All the trees of the field shall know
that I am the LORD.
I bring low the high tree,
I make high the low tree;
I dry up the green tree
and make the dry tree flourish.
I the LORD have spoken;
I will accomplish it.
[Ezekiel 18]
Being accountable
1 The word of the LORD came to me: 2 What do you mean by repeating
this proverb concerning the land of Israel, "The parents have eaten
sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge"? 3 As I live, says
the Lord GOD, this proverb shall no more be used by you in Israel. 4
Know that all lives are mine; the life of the parent as well as the life of
the child is mine: it is only the person who sins that shall die.
5 If a man is righteous and does what is lawful and right — 6 if he does
not eat upon the mountains or lift up his eyes to the idols of the house
of Israel, does not defile his neighbor's wife or approach a woman
during her menstrual period, 7 does not oppress anyone, but restores
to the debtor his pledge, commits no robbery, gives his bread to the
hungry and covers the naked with a garment, 8 does not take advance
or accrued interest, withholds his hand from iniquity, executes true
justice between contending parties, 9 follows my statutes, and is
careful to observe my ordinances, acting faithfully — such a one is
righteous; he shall surely live, says the Lord GOD.

1680

EZEKIEL 1681

10 If he has a son who is violent, a shedder of blood, 11 who does any
of these things (though his father does none of them), who eats upon
the mountains, defiles his neighbor's wife, 12 oppresses the poor and
needy, commits robbery, does not restore the pledge, lifts up his eyes
to the idols, commits abomination, 13 takes advance or accrued
interest; shall he then live? He shall not. He has done all these
abominable things; he shall surely die; his blood shall be upon himself.
14 But if this man has a son who sees all the sins that his father has
done, considers, and does not do likewise, 15 who does not eat upon
the mountains or lift up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel,
does not defile his neighbor's wife, 16 does not wrong anyone, exacts
no pledge, commits no robbery, but gives his bread to the hungry and
covers the naked with a garment, 17 withholds his hand from iniquity,
takes no advance or accrued interest, observes my ordinances, and
follows my statutes; he shall not die for his father's iniquity; he shall
surely live. 18 As for his father, because he practiced extortion, robbed
his brother, and did what is not good among his people, he dies for his
iniquity.
19 Yet you say, "Why should not the son suffer for the iniquity of the
father?" When the son has done what is lawful and right, and has
been careful to observe all my statutes, he shall surely live. 20 The
person who sins shall die. A child shall not suffer for the iniquity of a
parent, nor a parent suffer for the iniquity of a child; the righteousness
of the righteous shall be his own, and the wickedness of the wicked
shall be his own.
21 But if the wicked turn away from all their sins that they have
committed and keep all my statutes and do what is lawful and right,
they shall surely live; they shall not die. 22 None of the transgressions
that they have committed shall be remembered against them; for the
righteousness that they have done they shall live. 23 Have I any
pleasure in the death of the wicked, says the Lord GOD, and not rather
that they should turn from their ways and live? 24 But when the
righteous turn away from their righteousness and commit iniquity and
do the same abominable things that the wicked do, shall they live?
None of the righteous deeds that they have done shall be

1681

EZEKIEL 1682

remembered; for the treachery of which they are guilty and the sin
they have committed, they shall die.
25 Yet you say, "The way of the Lord is unfair." Hear now, O house of
Israel: Is my way unfair? Is it not your ways that are unfair? 26 When
the righteous turn away from their righteousness and commit iniquity,
they shall die for it; for the iniquity that they have committed they
shall die. 27 Again, when the wicked turn away from the wickedness
they have committed and do what is lawful and right, they shall save
their life. 28 Because they considered and turned away from all the
transgressions that they had committed, they shall surely live; they shall
not die. 29 Yet the house of Israel says, "The way of the Lord is unfair."
O house of Israel, are my ways unfair? Is it not your ways that are
unfair?
30 Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel, all of you according to
your ways, says the Lord GOD. Repent and turn from all your
transgressions; otherwise iniquity will be your ruin. 31 Cast away from
you all the transgressions that you have committed against me, and get
yourselves a new heart and a new spirit! Why will you die, O house of
Israel? 32 For I have no pleasure in the death of anyone, says the Lord
GOD. Turn, then, and live.
[Ezekiel 19]
Two funeral dirges
1 As for you, raise up a lamentation for the princes of Israel, 2 and say:
What a lioness was your mother
among lions!
She lay down among young lions,
rearing her cubs.
3 She raised up one of her cubs;
he became a young lion,
and he learned to catch prey;
he devoured humans.

1682

EZEKIEL 1683

4 The nations sounded an alarm against him;
he was caught in their pit;
and they brought him with hooks
to the land of Egypt.
5 When she saw that she was thwarted,
that her hope was lost,
she took another of her cubs
and made him a young lion.
6 He prowled among the lions;
he became a young lion,
and he learned to catch prey;
he devoured people.
7 And he ravaged their strongholds,
and laid waste their towns;
the land was appalled, and all in it,
at the sound of his roaring.
8 The nations set upon him
from the provinces all around;
they spread their net over him;
he was caught in their pit.
9 With hooks they put him in a cage,
and brought him to the king of Babylon;
they brought him into custody,
so that his voice should be heard no more
on the mountains of Israel.
10 Your mother was like a vine in a vineyard
transplanted by the water,
fruitful and full of branches
from abundant water.
11 Its strongest stem became
a ruler's scepter;
it towered aloft
among the thick boughs;
it stood out in its height
with its mass of branches.

1683

EZEKIEL 1684

12 But it was plucked up in fury,
cast down to the ground;
the east wind dried it up;
its fruit was stripped off,
its strong stem was withered;
the fire consumed it.
13 Now it is transplanted into the wilderness,
into a dry and thirsty land.
14 And fire has gone out from its stem,
has consumed its branches and fruit,
so that there remains in it no strong stem,
no scepter for ruling.
This is a lamentation, and it is used as a lamentation.
[Ezekiel 20]
Israel's pattern of rebellion
1 In the seventh year, in the fifth month, on the tenth day of the
month, certain elders of Israel came to consult the LORD, and sat down
before me. 2 And the word of the LORD came to me: 3 Mortal, speak to
the elders of Israel, and say to them: Thus says the Lord GOD: Why are
you coming? To consult me? As I live, says the Lord GOD, I will not be
consulted by you. 4 Will you judge them, mortal, will you judge them?
Then let them know the abominations of their ancestors, 5 and say to
them: Thus says the Lord GOD: On the day when I chose Israel, I swore
to the offspring of the house of Jacob — making myself known to
them in the land of Egypt — I swore to them, saying, I am the LORD
your God. 6 On that day I swore to them that I would bring them out
of the land of Egypt into a land that I had searched out for them, a
land flowing with milk and honey, the most glorious of all lands. 7 And
I said to them, Cast away the detestable things your eyes feast on,
every one of you, and do not defile yourselves with the idols of Egypt; I
am the LORD your God. 8 But they rebelled against me and would not
listen to me; not one of them cast away the detestable things their
eyes feasted on, nor did they forsake the idols of Egypt.

1684

EZEKIEL 1685

Then I thought I would pour out my wrath upon them and spend my
anger against them in the midst of the land of Egypt. 9 But I acted for
the sake of my name, that it should not be profaned in the sight of the
nations among whom they lived, in whose sight I made myself known
to them in bringing them out of the land of Egypt. 10 So I led them out
of the land of Egypt and brought them into the wilderness. 11 I gave
them my statutes and showed them my ordinances, by whose
observance everyone shall live. 12 Moreover I gave them my sabbaths,
as a sign between me and them, so that they might know that I the
LORD sanctify them. 13 But the house of Israel rebelled against me in
the wilderness; they did not observe my statutes but rejected my
ordinances, by whose observance everyone shall live; and my sabbaths
they greatly profaned.
Then I thought I would pour out my wrath upon them in the
wilderness, to make an end of them. 14 But I acted for the sake of my
name, so that it should not be profaned in the sight of the nations, in
whose sight I had brought them out. 15 Moreover I swore to them in
the wilderness that I would not bring them into the land that I had
given them, a land flowing with milk and honey, the most glorious of
all lands, 16 because they rejected my ordinances and did not observe
my statutes, and profaned my sabbaths; for their heart went after their
idols. 17 Nevertheless my eye spared them, and I did not destroy them
or make an end of them in the wilderness.
18 I said to their children in the wilderness, Do not follow the statutes
of your parents, nor observe their ordinances, nor defile yourselves
with their idols. 19 I the LORD am your God; follow my statutes, and be
careful to observe my ordinances, 20 and hallow my sabbaths that they
may be a sign between me and you, so that you may know that I the
LORD am your God. 21 But the children rebelled against me; they did
not follow my statutes, and were not careful to observe my ordinances,
by whose observance everyone shall live; they profaned my sabbaths.
Then I thought I would pour out my wrath upon them and spend my
anger against them in the wilderness. 22 But I withheld my hand, and
acted for the sake of my name, so that it should not be profaned in the
sight of the nations, in whose sight I had brought them out. 23

1685

EZEKIEL 1686

Moreover I swore to them in the wilderness that I would scatter them
among the nations and disperse them through the countries, 24
because they had not executed my ordinances, but had rejected my
statutes and profaned my sabbaths, and their eyes were set on their
ancestors' idols. 25 Moreover I gave them statutes that were not good
and ordinances by which they could not live. 26 I defiled them through
their very gifts, in their offering up all their firstborn, in order that I
might horrify them, so that they might know that I am the LORD.
27 Therefore, mortal, speak to the house of Israel and say to them,
Thus says the Lord GOD: In this again your ancestors blasphemed me, by
dealing treacherously with me. 28 For when I had brought them into
the land that I swore to give them, then wherever they saw any high
hill or any leafy tree, there they offered their sacrifices and presented
the provocation of their offering; there they sent up their pleasing
odors, and there they poured out their drink offerings. 29 (I said to
them, What is the high place to which you go? So it is called Bamah to
this day.) 30 Therefore say to the house of Israel, Thus says the Lord
GOD: Will you defile yourselves after the manner of your ancestors and
go astray after their detestable things? 31 When you offer your gifts
and make your children pass through the fire, you defile yourselves
with all your idols to this day. And shall I be consulted by you, O house
of Israel? As I live, says the Lord GOD, I will not be consulted by you.
32 What is in your mind shall never happen — the thought, "Let us be
like the nations, like the tribes of the countries, and worship wood and
stone."
33 As I live, says the Lord GOD, surely with a mighty hand and an
outstretched arm, and with wrath poured out, I will be king over you.
34 I will bring you out from the peoples and gather you out of the
countries where you are scattered, with a mighty hand and an
outstretched arm, and with wrath poured out; 35 and I will bring you
into the wilderness of the peoples, and there I will enter into judgment
with you face to face. 36 As I entered into judgment with your
ancestors in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so I will enter into
judgment with you, says the Lord GOD. 37 I will make you pass under
the staff, and will bring you within the bond of the covenant. 38 I will

1686

EZEKIEL 1687

purge out the rebels among you, and those who transgress against me;
I will bring them out of the land where they reside as aliens, but they
shall not enter the land of Israel. Then you shall know that I am the
LORD.
Final reconciliation
39 As for you, O house of Israel, thus says the Lord GOD: Go serve your
idols, everyone of you now and hereafter, if you will not listen to me;
but my holy name you shall no more profane with your gifts and your
idols.
40 For on my holy mountain, the mountain height of Israel, says the
Lord GOD, there all the house of Israel, all of them, shall serve me in the
land; there I will accept them, and there I will require your
contributions and the choicest of your gifts, with all your sacred things.
41 As a pleasing odor I will accept you, when I bring you out from the
peoples, and gather you out of the countries where you have been
scattered; and I will manifest my holiness among you in the sight of the
nations. 42 You shall know that I am the LORD, when I bring you into
the land of Israel, the country that I swore to give to your ancestors. 43
There you shall remember your ways and all the deeds by which you
have polluted yourselves; and you shall loathe yourselves for all the
evils that you have committed. 44 And you shall know that I am the
LORD, when I deal with you for my name's sake, not according to your
evil ways, or corrupt deeds, O house of Israel, says the Lord GOD.
Sword prophecies; the sword against all flesh
45 The word of the LORD came to me: 46 Mortal, set your face toward
the south, preach against the south, and prophesy against the forest
land in the Negeb; 47 say to the forest of the Negeb, Hear the word of
the LORD: Thus says the Lord GOD, I will kindle a fire in you, and it shall
devour every green tree in you and every dry tree; the blazing flame
shall not be quenched, and all faces from south to north shall be
scorched by it. 48 All flesh shall see that I the LORD have kindled it; it
shall not be quenched. 49 Then I said, "Ah Lord GOD! they are saying of
me, 'Is he not a maker of allegories?'"

1687

EZEKIEL 1688

[Ezekiel 21]
Song of the sword
1 The word of the LORD came to me: 2 Mortal, set your face toward
Jerusalem and preach against the sanctuaries; prophesy against the
land of Israel 3 and say to the land of Israel, Thus says the LORD: I am
coming against you, and will draw my sword out of its sheath, and will
cut off from you both righteous and wicked. 4 Because I will cut off
from you both righteous and wicked, therefore my sword shall go out
of its sheath against all flesh from south to north; 5 and all flesh shall
know that I the LORD have drawn my sword out of its sheath; it shall
not be sheathed again. 6 Moan therefore, mortal; moan with breaking
heart and bitter grief before their eyes. 7 And when they say to you,
"Why do you moan?" you shall say, "Because of the news that has
come. Every heart will melt and all hands will be feeble, every spirit will
faint and all knees will turn to water. See, it comes and it will be
fulfilled," says the Lord GOD.
8 And the word of the LORD came to me: 9 Mortal, prophesy and say:
Thus says the Lord; Say:
A sword, a sword is sharpened,
it is also polished;
10 it is sharpened for slaughter,
honed to flash like lightning!
How can we make merry?
You have despised the rod,
and all discipline.
11 The sword is given to be polished,
to be grasped in the hand;
it is sharpened, the sword is polished,
to be placed in the slayer's hand.

1688

EZEKIEL 1689

12 Cry and wail, O mortal,
for it is against my people;
it is against all Israel's princes;
they are thrown to the sword,
together with my people.
Ah! Strike the thigh!
13 For consider: What! If you despise the rod, will it not happen? says
the Lord GOD.
14 And you, mortal, prophesy;
strike hand to hand.
Let the sword fall twice, thrice;
it is a sword for killing.
A sword for great slaughter —
it surrounds them;
15 therefore hearts melt
and many stumble.
At all their gates I have set
the point of the sword.
Ah! It is made for flashing,
it is polished for slaughter.
16 Attack to the right!
Engage to the left!
— wherever your edge is directed.
17 I too will strike hand to hand,
I will satisfy my fury;
I the LORD have spoken.
The sword of Nebuchadrezzar
18 The word of the LORD came to me: 19 Mortal, mark out two roads for
the sword of the king of Babylon to come; both of them shall issue
from the same land. And make a signpost, make it for a fork in the
road leading to a city; 20 mark out the road for the sword to come to
Rabbah of the Ammonites or to Judah and to Jerusalem the fortified.
21 For the king of Babylon stands at the parting of the way, at the fork
in the two roads, to use divination; he shakes the arrows, he consults
the teraphim, he inspects the liver. 22 Into his right hand comes the lot
for Jerusalem, to set battering rams, to call out for slaughter, for

1689

EZEKIEL 1690

raising the battle cry, to set battering rams against the gates, to cast up
ramps, to build siege towers. 23 But to them it will seem like a false
divination; they have sworn solemn oaths; but he brings their guilt to
remembrance, bringing about their capture.
24 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Because you have brought your
guilt to remembrance, in that your transgressions are uncovered, so
that in all your deeds your sins appear — because you have come to
remembrance, you shall be taken in hand.
25 As for you, vile, wicked prince of Israel,
you whose day has come,
the time of final punishment,
26 thus says the Lord GOD:
Remove the turban, take off the crown;
things shall not remain as they are.
Exalt that which is low,
abase that which is high.
27 A ruin, a ruin, a ruin —
I will make it!
(Such has never occurred.)
Until he comes whose right it is;
to him I will give it.
28 As for you, mortal, prophesy, and say, Thus says the Lord GOD
concerning the Ammonites, and concerning their reproach; say:
A sword, a sword! Drawn for slaughter,
polished to consume, to flash like lightning.
29 Offering false visions for you,
divining lies for you,
they place you over the necks
of the vile, wicked ones —
those whose day has come,
the time of final punishment.
30 Return it to its sheath!
In the place where you were created,
in the land of your origin,
I will judge you.

1690

EZEKIEL 1691

31 I will pour out my indignation upon you,
with the fire of my wrath
I will blow upon you.
I will deliver you into brutish hands,
those skillful to destroy.
32 You shall be fuel for the fire,
your blood shall enter the earth;
you shall be remembered no more,
for I the LORD have spoken.
[Ezekiel 22]
Prophecies of judgment
1 The word of the LORD came to me: 2 You, mortal, will you judge, will
you judge the bloody city? Then declare to it all its abominable deeds.
3 You shall say, Thus says the Lord GOD: A city! Shedding blood within
itself; its time has come; making its idols, defiling itself. 4 You have
become guilty by the blood that you have shed, and defiled by the
idols that you have made; you have brought your day near, the
appointed time of your years has come. Therefore I have made you a
disgrace before the nations, and a mockery to all the countries. 5 Those
who are near and those who are far from you will mock you, you
infamous one, full of tumult.
6 The princes of Israel in you, everyone according to his power, have
been bent on shedding blood. 7 Father and mother are treated with
contempt in you; the alien residing within you suffers extortion; the
orphan and the widow are wronged in you. 8 You have despised my
holy things, and profaned my sabbaths. 9 In you are those who slander
to shed blood, those in you who eat upon the mountains, who commit
lewdness in your midst. 10 In you they uncover their fathers' nakedness;
in you they violate women in their menstrual periods. 11 One commits
abomination with his neighbor's wife; another lewdly defiles his
daughter-in-law; another in you defiles his sister, his father's daughter.
12 In you, they take bribes to shed blood; you take both advance
interest and accrued interest, and make gain of your neighbors by
extortion; and you have forgotten me, says the Lord GOD.

1691

EZEKIEL 1692

13 See, I strike my hands together at the dishonest gain you have made,
and at the blood that has been shed within you. 14 Can your courage
endure, or can your hands remain strong in the days when I shall deal
with you? I the LORD have spoken, and I will do it. 15 I will scatter you
among the nations and disperse you through the countries, and I will
purge your filthiness out of you. 16 And I shall be profaned through
you in the sight of the nations; and you shall know that I am the LORD.
Israel is dross
17 The word of the LORD came to me: 18 Mortal, the house of Israel has
become dross to me; all of them, silver, bronze, tin, iron, and lead. In
the smelter they have become dross. 19 Therefore thus says the Lord
GOD: Because you have all become dross, I will gather you into the
midst of Jerusalem. 20 As one gathers silver, bronze, iron, lead, and tin
into a smelter, to blow the fire upon them in order to melt them; so I
will gather you in my anger and in my wrath, and I will put you in and
melt you. 21 I will gather you and blow upon you with the fire of my
wrath, and you shall be melted within it. 22 As silver is melted in a
smelter, so you shall be melted in it; and you shall know that I the LORD
have poured out my wrath upon you.
All classes are corrupt
23 The word of the LORD came to me: 24 Mortal, say to it: You are a
land that is not cleansed, not rained upon in the day of indignation. 25
Its princes within it are like a roaring lion tearing the prey; they have
devoured human lives; they have taken treasure and precious things;
they have made many widows within it. 26 Its priests have done
violence to my teaching and have profaned my holy things; they have
made no distinction between the holy and the common, neither have
they taught the difference between the unclean and the clean, and
they have disregarded my sabbaths, so that I am profaned among
them. 27 Its officials within it are like wolves tearing the prey, shedding
blood, destroying lives to get dishonest gain. 28 Its prophets have
smeared whitewash on their behalf, seeing false visions and divining
lies for them, saying, "Thus says the Lord GOD," when the LORD has not
spoken. 29 The people of the land have practiced extortion and

1692

EZEKIEL 1693

committed robbery; they have oppressed the poor and needy, and
have extorted from the alien without redress. 30 And I sought for
anyone among them who would repair the wall and stand in the
breach before me on behalf of the land, so that I would not destroy it;
but I found no one. 31 Therefore I have poured out my indignation
upon them; I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath; I have
returned their conduct upon their heads, says the Lord GOD.
[Ezekiel 23]
The allegory of the sisters, Oholah and Oholibah
1 The word of the LORD came to me: 2 Mortal, there were two women,
the daughters of one mother; 3 they played the whore in Egypt; they
played the whore in their youth; their breasts were caressed there, and
their virgin bosoms were fondled. 4 Oholah was the name of the elder
and Oholibah the name of her sister. They became mine, and they bore
sons and daughters. As for their names, Oholah is Samaria, and
Oholibah is Jerusalem.
5 Oholah played the whore while she was mine; she lusted after her
lovers the Assyrians, warriors 6 clothed in blue, governors and
commanders, all of them handsome young men, mounted horsemen. 7
She bestowed her favors upon them, the choicest men of Assyria all of
them; and she defiled herself with all the idols of everyone for whom
she lusted. 8 She did not give up her whorings that she had practiced
since Egypt; for in her youth men had lain with her and fondled her
virgin bosom and poured out their lust upon her. 9 Therefore I
delivered her into the hands of her lovers, into the hands of the
Assyrians, for whom she lusted. 10 These uncovered her nakedness;
they seized her sons and her daughters; and they killed her with the
sword. Judgment was executed upon her, and she became a byword
among women.
11 Her sister Oholibah saw this, yet she was more corrupt than she in
her lusting and in her whorings, which were worse than those of her
sister. 12 She lusted after the Assyrians, governors and commanders,
warriors clothed in full armor, mounted horsemen, all of them
handsome young men. 13 And I saw that she was defiled; they both

1693

EZEKIEL 1694

took the same way. 14 But she carried her whorings further; she saw
male figures carved on the wall, images of the Chaldeans portrayed in
vermilion, 15 with belts around their waists, with flowing turbans on
their heads, all of them looking like officers — a picture of Babylonians
whose native land was Chaldea. 16 When she saw them she lusted after
them, and sent messengers to them in Chaldea. 17 And the Babylonians
came to her into the bed of love, and they defiled her with their lust;
and after she defiled herself with them, she turned from them in
disgust. 18 When she carried on her whorings so openly and flaunted
her nakedness, I turned in disgust from her, as I had turned from her
sister. 19 Yet she increased her whorings, remembering the days of her
youth, when she played the whore in the land of Egypt 20 and lusted
after her paramours there, whose members were like those of donkeys,
and whose emission was like that of stallions. 21 Thus you longed for
the lewdness of your youth, when the Egyptians fondled your bosom
and caressed your young breasts.
22 Therefore, O Oholibah, thus says the Lord GOD: I will rouse against
you your lovers from whom you turned in disgust, and I will bring them
against you from every side: 23 the Babylonians and all the Chaldeans,
Pekod and Shoa and Koa, and all the Assyrians with them, handsome
young men, governors and commanders all of them, officers and
warriors, all of them riding on horses. 24 They shall come against you
from the north with chariots and wagons and a host of peoples; they
shall set themselves against you on every side with buckler, shield, and
helmet, and I will commit the judgment to them, and they shall judge
you according to their ordinances. 25 I will direct my indignation
against you, in order that they may deal with you in fury. They shall cut
off your nose and your ears, and your survivors shall fall by the sword.
They shall seize your sons and your daughters, and your survivors shall
be devoured by fire. 26 They shall also strip you of your clothes and
take away your fine jewels. 27 So I will put an end to your lewdness
and your whoring brought from the land of Egypt; you shall not long
for them, or remember Egypt any more. 28 For thus says the Lord GOD:
I will deliver you into the hands of those whom you hate, into the
hands of those from whom you turned in disgust; 29 and they shall
deal with you in hatred, and take away all the fruit of your labor, and
leave you naked and bare, and the nakedness of your whorings shall

1694

EZEKIEL 1695

be exposed. Your lewdness and your whorings 30 have brought this
upon you, because you played the whore with the nations, and
polluted yourself with their idols. 31 You have gone the way of your
sister; therefore I will give her cup into your hand. 32 Thus says the
Lord GOD:
You shall drink your sister's cup,
deep and wide;
you shall be scorned and derided,
it holds so much.
33 You shall be filled with drunkenness and sorrow.
A cup of horror and desolation is the cup of your sister Samaria;
34 you shall drink it and drain it out,
and gnaw its sherds,
and tear out your breasts;
for I have spoken, says the Lord GOD. 35 Therefore thus says the Lord
GOD: Because you have forgotten me and cast me behind your back,
therefore bear the consequences of your lewdness and whorings.
Subordinate oracle
36 The LORD said to me: Mortal, will you judge Oholah and Oholibah?
Then declare to them their abominable deeds. 37 For they have
committed adultery, and blood is on their hands; with their idols they
have committed adultery; and they have even offered up to them for
food the children whom they had borne to me. 38 Moreover this they
have done to me: they have defiled my sanctuary on the same day and
profaned my sabbaths. 39 For when they had slaughtered their
children for their idols, on the same day they came into my sanctuary
to profane it. This is what they did in my house.
40 They even sent for men to come from far away, to whom a
messenger was sent, and they came. For them you bathed yourself,
painted your eyes, and decked yourself with ornaments; 41 you sat on a
stately couch, with a table spread before it on which you had placed
my incense and my oil. 42 The sound of a raucous multitude was
around her, with many of the rabble brought in drunken from the
wilderness; and they put bracelets on the arms of the women, and
beautiful crowns upon their heads.

1695

EZEKIEL 1696

43 Then I said, Ah, she is worn out with adulteries, but they carry on
their sexual acts with her. 44 For they have gone in to her, as one goes
in to a whore. Thus they went in to Oholah and to Oholibah, wanton
women. 45 But righteous judges shall declare them guilty of adultery
and of bloodshed; because they are adulteresses and blood is on their
hands.
46 For thus says the Lord GOD: Bring up an assembly against them, and
make them an object of terror and of plunder. 47 The assembly shall
stone them and with their swords they shall cut them down; they shall
kill their sons and their daughters, and burn up their houses. 48 Thus
will I put an end to lewdness in the land, so that all women may take
warning and not commit lewdness as you have done. 49 They shall
repay you for your lewdness, and you shall bear the penalty for your
sinful idolatry; and you shall know that I am the Lord GOD.
[Ezekiel 24]
The allegory of the pot
1 In the ninth year, in the tenth month, on the tenth day of the month,
the word of the LORD came to me: 2 Mortal, write down the name of
this day, this very day. The king of Babylon has laid siege to Jerusalem
this very day. 3 And utter an allegory to the rebellious house and say to
them, Thus says the Lord GOD:
Set on the pot, set it on,
pour in water also;
4 put in it the pieces,
all the good pieces, the thigh and the shoulder;
fill it with choice bones.
5 Take the choicest one of the flock,
pile the logs under it;
boil its pieces,
seethe also its bones in it.

1696

EZEKIEL 1697

6 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD:
Woe to the bloody city,
the pot whose rust is in it,
whose rust has not gone out of it!
Empty it piece by piece,
making no choice at all.
7 For the blood she shed is inside it;
she placed it on a bare rock;
she did not pour it out on the ground,
to cover it with earth.
8 To rouse my wrath, to take vengeance,
I have placed the blood she shed
on a bare rock,
so that it may not be covered.
9 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD:
Woe to the bloody city!
I will even make the pile great.
10 Heap up the logs, kindle the fire;
boil the meat well, mix in the spices,
let the bones be burned.
11 Stand it empty upon the coals,
so that it may become hot, its copper glow,
its filth melt in it, its rust be consumed.
12 In vain I have wearied myself;
its thick rust does not depart.
To the fire with its rust!
13 Yet, when I cleansed you in your filthy lewdness,
you did not become clean from your filth;
you shall not again be cleansed
until I have satisfied my fury upon you.
14 I the LORD have spoken; the time is coming, I will act. I will not
refrain, I will not spare, I will not relent. According to your ways and
your doings I will judge you, says the Lord GOD.

1697

EZEKIEL 1698

The sign of the death of Ezekiel's wife
15 The word of the LORD came to me: 16 Mortal, with one blow I am
about to take away from you the delight of your eyes; yet you shall not
mourn or weep, nor shall your tears run down. 17 Sigh, but not aloud;
make no mourning for the dead. Bind on your turban, and put your
sandals on your feet; do not cover your upper lip or eat the bread of
mourners. 18 So I spoke to the people in the morning, and at evening
my wife died. And on the next morning I did as I was commanded.
19 Then the people said to me, "Will you not tell us what these things
mean for us, that you are acting this way?" 20 Then I said to them: The
word of the LORD came to me: 21 Say to the house of Israel, Thus says
the Lord GOD: I will profane my sanctuary, the pride of your power, the
delight of your eyes, and your heart's desire; and your sons and your
daughters whom you left behind shall fall by the sword. 22 And you
shall do as I have done; you shall not cover your upper lip or eat the
bread of mourners. 23 Your turbans shall be on your heads and your
sandals on your feet; you shall not mourn or weep, but you shall pine
away in your iniquities and groan to one another. 24 Thus Ezekiel shall
be a sign to you; you shall do just as he has done. When this comes,
then you shall know that I am the Lord GOD.
The release from speechlessness predicted
25 And you, mortal, on the day when I take from them their
stronghold, their joy and glory, the delight of their eyes and their
heart's affection, and also their sons and their daughters, 26 on that
day, one who has escaped will come to you to report to you the news.
27 On that day your mouth shall be opened to the one who has
escaped, and you shall speak and no longer be silent. So you shall be a
sign to them; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

1698

EZEKIEL 1699

[Ezekiel 25]
Part III: Oracles against the nations; oracles against Ammon, Moab,
Edom, and Philistia
1 The word of the LORD came to me: 2 Mortal, set your face toward the
Ammonites and prophesy against them. 3 Say to the Ammonites, Hear
the word of the Lord GOD: Thus says the Lord GOD, Because you said,
"Aha!" over my sanctuary when it was profaned, and over the land of
Israel when it was made desolate, and over the house of Judah when it
went into exile; 4 therefore I am handing you over to the people of the
east for a possession. They shall set their encampments among you and
pitch their tents in your midst; they shall eat your fruit, and they shall
drink your milk. 5 I will make Rabbah a pasture for camels and Ammon
a fold for flocks. Then you shall know that I am the LORD. 6 For thus
says the Lord GOD: Because you have clapped your hands and stamped
your feet and rejoiced with all the malice within you against the land
of Israel, 7 therefore I have stretched out my hand against you, and will
hand you over as plunder to the nations. I will cut you off from the
peoples and will make you perish out of the countries; I will destroy
you. Then you shall know that I am the LORD.
8 Thus says the Lord GOD: Because Moab said, The house of Judah is
like all the other nations, 9 therefore I will lay open the flank of Moab
from the towns on its frontier, the glory of the country, Bethjeshimoth, Baal-meon, and Kiriathaim. 10 I will give it along with
Ammon to the people of the east as a possession. Thus Ammon shall be
remembered no more among the nations, 11 and I will execute
judgments upon Moab. Then they shall know that I am the LORD.
12 Thus says the Lord GOD: Because Edom acted revengefully against
the house of Judah and has grievously offended in taking vengeance
upon them, 13 therefore thus says the Lord GOD, I will stretch out my
hand against Edom, and cut off from it humans and animals, and I will
make it desolate; from Teman even to Dedan they shall fall by the
sword. 14 I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people
Israel; and they shall act in Edom according to my anger and according
to my wrath; and they shall know my vengeance, says the Lord GOD.

1699

EZEKIEL 1700

15 Thus says the Lord GOD: Because with unending hostilities the
Philistines acted in vengeance, and with malice of heart took revenge
in destruction; 16 therefore thus says the Lord GOD, I will stretch out my
hand against the Philistines, cut off the Cherethites, and destroy the
rest of the seacoast. 17 I will execute great vengeance on them with
wrathful punishments. Then they shall know that I am the LORD, when I
lay my vengeance on them.
[Ezekiel 26]
Oracles against Tyre; Tyre is to be destroyed by Nebuchadrezzar
1 In the eleventh year, on the first day of the month, the word of the
LORD came to me: 2 Mortal, because Tyre said concerning Jerusalem,
"Aha, broken is the gateway of the peoples;
it has swung open to me;
I shall be replenished,
now that it is wasted,"
3 therefore, thus says the Lord GOD:
See, I am against you, O Tyre!
I will hurl many nations against you,
as the sea hurls its waves.
4 They shall destroy the walls of Tyre
and break down its towers.
I will scrape its soil from it
and make it a bare rock.
5 It shall become, in the midst of the sea,
a place for spreading nets.
I have spoken, says the Lord GOD.
It shall become plunder for the nations,
6
and its daughter-towns in the country
shall be killed by the sword.
Then they shall know that I am the LORD.
7 For thus says the Lord GOD: I will bring against Tyre from the north
King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon, king of kings, together with horses,
chariots, cavalry, and a great and powerful army.

1700

EZEKIEL 1701

8 Your daughter-towns in the country
he shall put to the sword.
He shall set up a siege wall against you,
cast up a ramp against you,
and raise a roof of shields against you.
9 He shall direct the shock of his battering rams against your walls
and break down your towers with his axes.
10 His horses shall be so many
that their dust shall cover you.
At the noise of cavalry, wheels, and chariots
your very walls shall shake,
when he enters your gates
like those entering a breached city.
11 With the hoofs of his horses
he shall trample all your streets.
He shall put your people to the sword,
and your strong pillars shall fall to the ground.
12 They will plunder your riches
and loot your merchandise;
they shall break down your walls
and destroy your fine houses.
Your stones and timber and soil
they shall cast into the water.
13 I will silence the music of your songs;
the sound of your lyres shall be heard no more.
14 I will make you a bare rock;
you shall be a place for spreading nets.
You shall never again be rebuilt,
for I the LORD have spoken,
says the Lord GOD.
15 Thus says the Lord GOD to Tyre: Shall not the coastlands shake at the
sound of your fall, when the wounded groan, when slaughter goes on
within you? 16 Then all the princes of the sea shall step down from
their thrones; they shall remove their robes and strip off their
embroidered garments. They shall clothe themselves with trembling,
and shall sit on the ground; they shall tremble every moment, and be

1701

EZEKIEL 1702

appalled at you. 17 And they shall raise a lamentation over you, and say
to you:
How you have vanished from the seas,
O city renowned,
once mighty on the sea,
you and your inhabitants,
who imposed your terror
on all the mainland!
18 Now the coastlands tremble
on the day of your fall;
the coastlands by the sea
are dismayed at your passing.
19 For thus says the Lord GOD: When I make you a city laid waste, like
cities that are not inhabited, when I bring up the deep over you, and
the great waters cover you, 20 then I will thrust you down with those
who descend into the Pit, to the people of long ago, and I will make
you live in the world below, among primeval ruins, with those who go
down to the Pit, so that you will not be inhabited or have a place in
the land of the living. 21 I will bring you to a dreadful end, and you
shall be no more; though sought for, you will never be found again,
says the Lord GOD.
[Ezekiel 27]
Dirge over the ship Tyre
1 The word of the LORD came to me: 2 Now you, mortal, raise a
lamentation over Tyre, 3 and say to Tyre, which sits at the entrance to
the sea, merchant of the peoples on many coastlands, Thus says the
Lord GOD:
O Tyre, you have said,
"I am perfect in beauty."
4 Your borders are in the heart of the seas;
your builders made perfect your beauty.
5 They made all your planks
of fir trees from Senir;
they took a cedar from Lebanon
to make a mast for you.

1702

EZEKIEL 1703

6 From oaks of Bashan
they made your oars;
they made your deck of pines
from the coasts of Cyprus,
inlaid with ivory.
7 Of fine embroidered linen from Egypt
was your sail,
serving as your ensign;
blue and purple from the coasts of Elishah
was your awning.
8 The inhabitants of Sidon and Arvad
were your rowers;
skilled men of Zemer were within you,
they were your pilots.
9 The elders of Gebal and its artisans were within you,
caulking your seams;
all the ships of the sea with their mariners were within you,
to barter for your wares.
10 Paras and Lud and Put
were in your army,
your mighty warriors;
they hung shield and helmet in you;
they gave you splendor.
11 Men of Arvad and Helech
were on your walls all around;
men of Gamad were at your towers.
They hung their quivers all around your walls;
they made perfect your beauty.
12 Tarshish did business with you out of the abundance of your great
wealth; silver, iron, tin, and lead they exchanged for your wares. 13
Javan, Tubal, and Meshech traded with you; they exchanged human
beings and vessels of bronze for your merchandise. 14 Beth-togarmah
exchanged for your wares horses, war horses, and mules. 15 The
Rhodians traded with you; many coastlands were your own special
markets; they brought you in payment ivory tusks and ebony. 16 Edom
did business with you because of your abundant goods; they
exchanged for your wares turquoise, purple, embroidered work, fine

1703

EZEKIEL 1704

linen, coral, and rubies. 17 Judah and the land of Israel traded with you;
they exchanged for your merchandise wheat from Minnith, millet,
honey, oil, and balm. 18 Damascus traded with you for your abundant
goods — because of your great wealth of every kind — wine of
Helbon, and white wool. 19 Vedan and Javan from Uzal entered into
trade for your wares; wrought iron, cassia, and sweet cane were
bartered for your merchandise. 20 Dedan traded with you in
saddlecloths for riding. 21 Arabia and all the princes of Kedar were
your favored dealers in lambs, rams, and goats; in these they did
business with you. 22 The merchants of Sheba and Raamah traded with
you; they exchanged for your wares the best of all kinds of spices, and
all precious stones, and gold. 23 Haran, Canneh, Eden, the merchants of
Sheba, Asshur, and Chilmad traded with you. 24 These traded with you
in choice garments, in clothes of blue and embroidered work, and in
carpets of colored material, bound with cords and made secure; in
these they traded with you. 25 The ships of Tarshish traveled for you in
your trade.
So you were filled and heavily laden
in the heart of the seas.
26 Your rowers have brought you
into the high seas.
The east wind has wrecked you
in the heart of the seas.
27 Your riches, your wares, your merchandise,
your mariners and your pilots,
your caulkers, your dealers in merchandise,
and all your warriors within you,
with all the company
that is with you,
sink into the heart of the seas
on the day of your ruin.
28 At the sound of the cry of your pilots
the countryside shakes,
29 and down from their ships
come all that handle the oar.
The mariners and all the pilots of the sea
stand on the shore

1704

EZEKIEL 1705

30 and wail aloud over you,
and cry bitterly.
They throw dust on their heads
and wallow in ashes;
31 they make themselves bald for you,
and put on sackcloth,
and they weep over you in bitterness of soul,
with bitter mourning.
32 In their wailing they raise a lamentation for you,
and lament over you:
"Who was ever destroyed like Tyre
in the midst of the sea?
33 When your wares came from the seas,
you satisfied many peoples;
with your abundant wealth and merchandise
you enriched the kings of the earth.
34 Now you are wrecked by the seas,
in the depths of the waters;
your merchandise and all your crew
have sunk with you.
35 All the inhabitants of the coastlands
are appalled at you;
and their kings are horribly afraid,
their faces are convulsed.
36 The merchants among the peoples hiss at you;
you have come to a dreadful end
and shall be no more forever."

1705

EZEKIEL 1706

[Ezekiel 28]
Oracle against the leader of Tyre
1 The word of the LORD came to me: 2 Mortal, say to the prince of Tyre,
Thus says the Lord GOD:
Because your heart is proud
and you have said, "I am a god;
I sit in the seat of the gods,
in the heart of the seas,"
yet you are but a mortal, and no god,
though you compare your mind
with the mind of a god.
3 You are indeed wiser than Daniel;
no secret is hidden from you;
4 by your wisdom and your understanding
you have amassed wealth for yourself,
and have gathered gold and silver
into your treasuries.
5 By your great wisdom in trade
you have increased your wealth,
and your heart has become proud in your wealth.
6 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD:
Because you compare your mind
with the mind of a god,
7 therefore, I will bring strangers against you,
the most terrible of the nations;
they shall draw their swords against the beauty of your wisdom
and defile your splendor.
8 They shall thrust you down to the Pit,
and you shall die a violent death
in the heart of the seas.
9 Will you still say, "I am a god,"
in the presence of those who kill you,
though you are but a mortal, and no god,
in the hands of those who wound you?
10 You shall die the death of the uncircumcised
by the hand of foreigners;
for I have spoken, says the Lord GOD.

1706

EZEKIEL 1707

A dirge over the king of Tyre
11 Moreover the word of the LORD came to me: 12 Mortal, raise a
lamentation over the king of Tyre, and say to him, Thus says the Lord
GOD:
You were the signet of perfection,
full of wisdom and perfect in beauty.
13 You were in Eden, the garden of God;
every precious stone was your covering,
carnelian, chrysolite, and moonstone,
beryl, onyx, and jasper,
sapphire, turquoise, and emerald;
and worked in gold were your settings
and your engravings.
On the day that you were created
they were prepared.
14 With an anointed cherub as guardian I placed you;
you were on the holy mountain of God;
you walked among the stones of fire.
15 You were blameless in your ways
from the day that you were created,
until iniquity was found in you.
16 In the abundance of your trade
you were filled with violence, and you sinned;
so I cast you as a profane thing from the mountain of God,
and the guardian cherub drove you out
from among the stones of fire.
17 Your heart was proud because of your beauty;
you corrupted your wisdom for the sake of your splendor.
I cast you to the ground;
I exposed you before kings,
to feast their eyes on you.

1707

EZEKIEL 1708

18 By the multitude of your iniquities,
in the unrighteousness of your trade,
you profaned your sanctuaries.
So I brought out fire from within you;
it consumed you,
and I turned you to ashes on the earth
in the sight of all who saw you.
19 All who know you among the peoples
are appalled at you;
you have come to a dreadful end
and shall be no more forever.
Oracle against Sidon
20 The word of the LORD came to me: 21 Mortal, set your face toward
Sidon, and prophesy against it, 22 and say, Thus says the Lord GOD:
I am against you, O Sidon,
and I will gain glory in your midst.
They shall know that I am the LORD
when I execute judgments in it,
and manifest my holiness in it;
23 for I will send pestilence into it,
and bloodshed into its streets;
and the dead shall fall in its midst,
by the sword that is against it on every side.
And they shall know that I am the LORD.
24 The house of Israel shall no longer find a pricking brier or a piercing
thorn among all their neighbors who have treated them with
contempt. And they shall know that I am the Lord GOD.
25 Thus says the Lord GOD: When I gather the house of Israel from the
peoples among whom they are scattered, and manifest my holiness in
them in the sight of the nations, then they shall settle on their own soil
that I gave to my servant Jacob. 26 They shall live in safety in it, and
shall build houses and plant vineyards. They shall live in safety, when I
execute judgments upon all their neighbors who have treated them
with contempt. And they shall know that I am the LORD their God.

1708

EZEKIEL 1709

[Ezekiel 29]
Prophecies against Egypt; against Pharaoh (7 Jan 587 BCE)
1 In the tenth year, in the tenth month, on the twelfth day of the
month, the word of the LORD came to me: 2 Mortal, set your face
against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and prophesy against him and against
all Egypt; 3 speak, and say, Thus says the Lord GOD:
I am against you,
Pharaoh king of Egypt,
the great dragon sprawling
in the midst of its channels,
saying, "My Nile is my own;
I made it for myself."
4 I will put hooks in your jaws,
and make the fish of your channels stick to your scales.
I will draw you up from your channels,
with all the fish of your channels
sticking to your scales.
5 I will fling you into the wilderness,
you and all the fish of your channels;
you shall fall in the open field,
and not be gathered and buried.
To the animals of the earth and to the birds of the air
I have given you as food.
6 Then all the inhabitants of Egypt shall know
that I am the LORD
because you were a staff of reed
to the house of Israel;
7 when they grasped you with the hand, you broke,
and tore all their shoulders;
and when they leaned on you, you broke,
and made all their legs unsteady.
8 Therefore, thus says the Lord GOD: I will bring a sword upon you, and
will cut off from you human being and animal; 9 and the land of Egypt
shall be a desolation and a waste. Then they shall know that I am the
LORD.

1709

EZEKIEL 1710

Because you said, "The Nile is mine, and I made it," 10 therefore, I am
against you, and against your channels, and I will make the land of
Egypt an utter waste and desolation, from Migdol to Syene, as far as
the border of Ethiopia. 11 No human foot shall pass through it, and no
animal foot shall pass through it; it shall be uninhabited forty years. 12 I
will make the land of Egypt a desolation among desolated countries;
and her cities shall be a desolation forty years among cities that are
laid waste. I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and disperse
them among the countries.
13 Further, thus says the Lord GOD: At the end of forty years I will
gather the Egyptians from the peoples among whom they were
scattered; 14 and I will restore the fortunes of Egypt, and bring them
back to the land of Pathros, the land of their origin; and there they
shall be a lowly kingdom. 15 It shall be the most lowly of the kingdoms,
and never again exalt itself above the nations; and I will make them so
small that they will never again rule over the nations. 16 The Egyptians
shall never again be the reliance of the house of Israel; they will recall
their iniquity, when they turned to them for aid. Then they shall know
that I am the Lord GOD.
Egypt as "wages" for Nebuchadrezzar, instead of Tyre
17 In the twenty-seventh year, in the first month, on the first day of the
month, the word of the LORD came to me: 18 Mortal, King
Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon made his army labor hard against Tyre;
every head was made bald and every shoulder was rubbed bare; yet
neither he nor his army got anything from Tyre to pay for the labor
that he had expended against it. 19 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: I
will give the land of Egypt to King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon; and he
shall carry off its wealth and despoil it and plunder it; and it shall be
the wages for his army. 20 I have given him the land of Egypt as his
payment for which he labored, because they worked for me, says the
Lord GOD.
21 On that day I will cause a horn to sprout up for the house of Israel,
and I will open your lips among them. Then they shall know that I am
the LORD.

1710

EZEKIEL 1711

[Ezekiel 30]
The doom of Egypt
1 The word of the LORD came to me: 2 Mortal, prophesy, and say, Thus
says the Lord GOD:
Wail, "Alas for the day!"
3
For a day is near,
the day of the LORD is near;
it will be a day of clouds,
a time of doom for the nations.
4 A sword shall come upon Egypt,
and anguish shall be in Ethiopia,
when the slain fall in Egypt,
and its wealth is carried away,
and its foundations are torn down.
5 Ethiopia, and Put, and Lud, and all Arabia, and Libya, and the people
of the allied land shall fall with them by the sword.
6 Thus says the LORD:
Those who support Egypt shall fall,
and its proud might shall come down;
from Migdol to Syene
they shall fall within it by the sword,
says the Lord GOD.
7 They shall be desolated among other desolated countries,
and their cities shall lie among cities laid waste.
8 Then they shall know that I am the LORD,
when I have set fire to Egypt,
and all who help it are broken.
9 On that day, messengers shall go out from me in ships to terrify the
unsuspecting Ethiopians; and anguish shall come upon them on the
day of Egypt's doom; for it is coming!
10 Thus says the Lord GOD:
I will put an end to the hordes of Egypt,
by the hand of King Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon.

1711

EZEKIEL 1712

11 He and his people with him, the most terrible of the nations,
shall be brought in to destroy the land;
and they shall draw their swords against Egypt,
and fill the land with the slain.
12 I will dry up the channels,
and will sell the land into the hand of evildoers;
I will bring desolation upon the land and everything in it
by the hand of foreigners;
I the LORD have spoken.
13 Thus says the Lord GOD:
I will destroy the idols
and put an end to the images in Memphis;
there shall no longer be a prince in the land of Egypt;
so I will put fear in the land of Egypt.
14 I will make Pathros a desolation,
and will set fire to Zoan,
and will execute acts of judgment on Thebes.
15 I will pour my wrath upon Pelusium,
the stronghold of Egypt,
and cut off the hordes of Thebes.
16 I will set fire to Egypt;
Pelusium shall be in great agony;
Thebes shall be breached,
and Memphis face adversaries by day.
17 The young men of On and of Pi-beseth shall fall by the sword;
and the cities themselves shall go into captivity.
18 At Tehaphnehes the day shall be dark,
when I break there the dominion of Egypt,
and its proud might shall come to an end;
the city shall be covered by a cloud,
and its daughter-towns shall go into captivity.
19 Thus I will execute acts of judgment on Egypt.
Then they shall know that I am the LORD.

1712

EZEKIEL 1713

Pharaoh disarmed
20 In the eleventh year, in the first month, on the seventh day of the
month, the word of the LORD came to me: 21 Mortal, I have broken the
arm of Pharaoh king of Egypt; it has not been bound up for healing or
wrapped with a bandage, so that it may become strong to wield the
sword. 22 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: I am against Pharaoh king
of Egypt, and will break his arms, both the strong arm and the one that
was broken; and I will make the sword fall from his hand. 23 I will
scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and disperse them
throughout the lands. 24 I will strengthen the arms of the king of
Babylon, and put my sword in his hand; but I will break the arms of
Pharaoh, and he will groan before him with the groans of one mortally
wounded. 25 I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, but the
arms of Pharaoh shall fall. And they shall know that I am the LORD,
when I put my sword into the hand of the king of Babylon. He shall
stretch it out against the land of Egypt, 26 and I will scatter the
Egyptians among the nations and disperse them throughout the
countries. Then they shall know that I am the LORD.
[Ezekiel 31]
The comparison between Assyria and Egypt
1 In the eleventh year, in the third month, on the first day of the
month, the word of the LORD came to me: 2 Mortal, say to Pharaoh
king of Egypt and to his hordes:
Whom are you like in your greatness?
3
Consider Assyria, a cedar of Lebanon,
with fair branches and forest shade,
and of great height,
its top among the clouds.
4 The waters nourished it,
the deep made it grow tall,
making its rivers flow
around the place it was planted,
sending forth its streams
to all the trees of the field.

1713

EZEKIEL 1714

5 So it towered high
above all the trees of the field;
its boughs grew large
and its branches long,
from abundant water in its shoots.
6 All the birds of the air
made their nests in its boughs;
under its branches all the animals of the field
gave birth to their young;
and in its shade
all great nations lived.
7 It was beautiful in its greatness,
in the length of its branches;
for its roots went down
to abundant water.
8 The cedars in the garden of God could not rival it,
nor the fir trees equal its boughs;
the plane trees were as nothing
compared with its branches;
no tree in the garden of God
was like it in beauty.
9 I made it beautiful
with its mass of branches,
the envy of all the trees of Eden
that were in the garden of God.
10 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Because it towered high and set
its top among the clouds, and its heart was proud of its height, 11 I
gave it into the hand of the prince of the nations; he has dealt with it
as its wickedness deserves. I have cast it out. 12 Foreigners from the
most terrible of the nations have cut it down and left it. On the
mountains and in all the valleys its branches have fallen, and its boughs
lie broken in all the watercourses of the land; and all the peoples of
the earth went away from its shade and left it.
13 On its fallen trunk settle
all the birds of the air,
and among its boughs lodge
all the wild animals.

1714

EZEKIEL 1715

14 All this is in order that no trees by the waters may grow to lofty
height or set their tops among the clouds, and that no trees that drink
water may reach up to them in height.
For all of them are handed over to death,
to the world below;
along with all mortals,
with those who go down to the Pit.
15 Thus says the Lord GOD: On the day it went down to Sheol I closed
the deep over it and covered it; I restrained its rivers, and its mighty
waters were checked. I clothed Lebanon in gloom for it, and all the
trees of the field fainted because of it. 16 I made the nations quake at
the sound of its fall, when I cast it down to Sheol with those who go
down to the Pit; and all the trees of Eden, the choice and best of
Lebanon, all that were well watered, were consoled in the world
below. 17 They also went down to Sheol with it, to those killed by the
sword, along with its allies, those who lived in its shade among the
nations.
18 Which among the trees of Eden was like you in glory and in
greatness? Now you shall be brought down with the trees of Eden to
the world below; you shall lie among the uncircumcised, with those
who are killed by the sword. This is Pharaoh and all his horde, says the
Lord GOD.
[Ezekiel 32]
Dirge over Pharaoh
1 In the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, on the first day of the
month, the word of the LORD came to me: 2 Mortal, raise a lamentation
over Pharaoh king of Egypt, and say to him:
You consider yourself a lion among the nations,
but you are like a dragon in the seas;
you thrash about in your streams,
trouble the water with your feet,
and foul your streams.

1715

EZEKIEL 1716

3 Thus says the Lord GOD:
In an assembly of many peoples
I will throw my net over you;
and I will haul you up in my dragnet.
4 I will throw you on the ground,
on the open field I will fling you,
and will cause all the birds of the air to settle on you,
and I will let the wild animals of the whole
earth gorge themselves with you.
5 I will strew your flesh on the mountains,
and fill the valleys with your carcass.
6 I will drench the land with your flowing blood
up to the mountains,
and the watercourses will be filled with you.
7 When I blot you out, I will cover the heavens,
and make their stars dark;
I will cover the sun with a cloud,
and the moon shall not give its light.
8 All the shining lights of the heavens
I will darken above you,
and put darkness on your land,
says the Lord GOD.
9 I will trouble the hearts of many peoples,
as I carry you captive among the nations,
into countries you have not known.
10 I will make many peoples appalled at you;
their kings shall shudder because of you.
When I brandish my sword before them,
they shall tremble every moment
for their lives, each one of them,
on the day of your downfall.
11 For thus says the Lord GOD:
The sword of the king of Babylon shall come against you.
12 I will cause your hordes to fall
by the swords of mighty ones,
all of them most terrible among the nations.
They shall bring to ruin the pride of Egypt,
and all its hordes shall perish.

1716

EZEKIEL 1717

13 I will destroy all its livestock
from beside abundant waters;
and no human foot shall trouble them any more,
nor shall the hoofs of cattle trouble them.
14 Then I will make their waters clear,
and cause their streams to run like oil, says the Lord GOD.
15 When I make the land of Egypt desolate
and when the land is stripped of all that fills it,
when I strike down all who live in it,
then they shall know that I am the LORD.
16 This is a lamentation; it shall be chanted.
The women of the nations shall chant it.
Over Egypt and all its hordes they shall chant it,
says the Lord GOD.
Egypt in the underworld
17 In the twelfth year, in the first month, on the fifteenth day of the
month, the word of the LORD came to me:
18 Mortal, wail over the hordes of Egypt,
and send them down,
with Egypt and the daughters of majestic nations,
to the world below,
with those who go down to the Pit.
19 "Whom do you surpass in beauty?
Go down! Be laid to rest with the uncircumcised!"
20 They shall fall among those who are killed by the sword. Egypt has
been handed over to the sword; carry away both it and its hordes. 21
The mighty chiefs shall speak of them, with their helpers, out of the
midst of Sheol: "They have come down, they lie still, the uncircumcised,
killed by the sword."
22 Assyria is there, and all its company, their graves all around it, all of
them killed, fallen by the sword. 23 Their graves are set in the
uttermost parts of the Pit. Its company is all around its grave, all of
them killed, fallen by the sword, who spread terror in the land of the
living.

1717

EZEKIEL 1718

24 Elam is there, and all its hordes around its grave; all of them killed,
fallen by the sword, who went down uncircumcised into the world
below, who spread terror in the land of the living. They bear their
shame with those who go down to the Pit. 25 They have made Elam a
bed among the slain with all its hordes, their graves all around it, all of
them uncircumcised, killed by the sword; for terror of them was spread
in the land of the living, and they bear their shame with those who go
down to the Pit; they are placed among the slain.
26 Meshech and Tubal are there, and all their multitude, their graves
all around them, all of them uncircumcised, killed by the sword; for
they spread terror in the land of the living. 27 And they do not lie with
the fallen warriors of long ago who went down to Sheol with their
weapons of war, whose swords were laid under their heads, and whose
shields are upon their bones; for the terror of the warriors was in the
land of the living. 28 So you shall be broken and lie among the
uncircumcised, with those who are killed by the sword.
29 Edom is there, its kings and all its princes, who for all their might are
laid with those who are killed by the sword; they lie with the
uncircumcised, with those who go down to the Pit.
30 The princes of the north are there, all of them, and all the
Sidonians, who have gone down in shame with the slain, for all the
terror that they caused by their might; they lie uncircumcised with
those who are killed by the sword, and bear their shame with those
who go down to the Pit.
31 When Pharaoh sees them, he will be consoled for all his hordes —
Pharaoh and all his army, killed by the sword, says the Lord GOD. 32 For
he spread terror in the land of the living; therefore he shall be laid to
rest among the uncircumcised, with those who are slain by the sword
— Pharaoh and all his multitude, says the Lord GOD.

1718

EZEKIEL 1719

[Ezekiel 33]
Part IV: Prophecies of Israel's restoration; clarification of Ezekiel's role
1 The word of the LORD came to me: 2 O Mortal, speak to your people
and say to them, If I bring the sword upon a land, and the people of
the land take one of their number as their sentinel; 3 and if the
sentinel sees the sword coming upon the land and blows the trumpet
and warns the people; 4 then if any who hear the sound of the
trumpet do not take warning, and the sword comes and takes them
away, their blood shall be upon their own heads. 5 They heard the
sound of the trumpet and did not take warning; their blood shall be
upon themselves. But if they had taken warning, they would have
saved their lives. 6 But if the sentinel sees the sword coming and does
not blow the trumpet, so that the people are not warned, and the
sword comes and takes any of them, they are taken away in their
iniquity, but their blood I will require at the sentinel's hand.
7 So you, mortal, I have made a sentinel for the house of Israel;
whenever you hear a word from my mouth, you shall give them
warning from me. 8 If I say to the wicked, "O wicked ones, you shall
surely die," and you do not speak to warn the wicked to turn from
their ways, the wicked shall die in their iniquity, but their blood I will
require at your hand. 9 But if you warn the wicked to turn from their
ways, and they do not turn from their ways, the wicked shall die in
their iniquity, but you will have saved your life.
10 Now you, mortal, say to the house of Israel, Thus you have said:
"Our transgressions and our sins weigh upon us, and we waste away
because of them; how then can we live?" 11 Say to them, As I live, says
the Lord GOD, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that
the wicked turn from their ways and live; turn back, turn back from
your evil ways; for why will you die, O house of Israel? 12 And you,
mortal, say to your people, The righteousness of the righteous shall not
save them when they transgress; and as for the wickedness of the
wicked, it shall not make them stumble when they turn from their
wickedness; and the righteous shall not be able to live by their
righteousness when they sin. 13 Though I say to the righteous that they
shall surely live, yet if they trust in their righteousness and commit

1719

EZEKIEL 1720

iniquity, none of their righteous deeds shall be remembered; but in the
iniquity that they have committed they shall die. 14 Again, though I say
to the wicked, "You shall surely die," yet if they turn from their sin and
do what is lawful and right — 15 if the wicked restore the pledge, give
back what they have taken by robbery, and walk in the statutes of life,
committing no iniquity — they shall surely live, they shall not die. 16
None of the sins that they have committed shall be remembered
against them; they have done what is lawful and right, they shall surely
live.
17 Yet your people say, "The way of the Lord is not just," when it is
their own way that is not just. 18 When the righteous turn from their
righteousness, and commit iniquity, they shall die for it. 19 And when
the wicked turn from their wickedness, and do what is lawful and
right, they shall live by it. 20 Yet you say, "The way of the Lord is not
just." O house of Israel, I will judge all of you according to your ways!
Release from speechlessness
21 In the twelfth year of our exile, in the tenth month, on the fifth day
of the month, someone who had escaped from Jerusalem came to me
and said, "The city has fallen." 22 Now the hand of the LORD had been
upon me the evening before the fugitive came; but he had opened my
mouth by the time the fugitive came to me in the morning; so my
mouth was opened, and I was no longer unable to speak.
Resistance in the homeland and in exile
23 The word of the LORD came to me: 24 Mortal, the inhabitants of
these waste places in the land of Israel keep saying, "Abraham was
only one man, yet he got possession of the land; but we are many; the
land is surely given us to possess." 25 Therefore say to them, Thus says
the Lord GOD: You eat flesh with the blood, and lift up your eyes to
your idols, and shed blood; shall you then possess the land? 26 You
depend on your swords, you commit abominations, and each of you
defiles his neighbor's wife; shall you then possess the land? 27 Say this
to them, Thus says the Lord GOD: As I live, surely those who are in the
waste places shall fall by the sword; and those who are in the open

1720

EZEKIEL 1721

field I will give to the wild animals to be devoured; and those who are
in strongholds and in caves shall die by pestilence. 28 I will make the
land a desolation and a waste, and its proud might shall come to an
end; and the mountains of Israel shall be so desolate that no one will
pass through. 29 Then they shall know that I am the LORD, when I have
made the land a desolation and a waste because of all their
abominations that they have committed.
30 As for you, mortal, your people who talk together about you by the
walls, and at the doors of the houses, say to one another, each to a
neighbor, "Come and hear what the word is that comes from the
LORD." 31 They come to you as people come, and they sit before you as
my people, and they hear your words, but they will not obey them. For
flattery is on their lips, but their heart is set on their gain. 32 To them
you are like a singer of love songs, one who has a beautiful voice and
plays well on an instrument; they hear what you say, but they will not
do it. 33 When this comes — and come it will! — then they shall know
that a prophet has been among them.
[Ezekiel 34]
The shepherds of Israel
1 The word of the LORD came to me: 2 Mortal, prophesy against the
shepherds of Israel: prophesy, and say to them — to the shepherds:
Thus says the Lord GOD: Ah, you shepherds of Israel who have been
feeding yourselves! Should not shepherds feed the sheep? 3 You eat
the fat, you clothe yourselves with the wool, you slaughter the fatlings;
but you do not feed the sheep. 4 You have not strengthened the weak,
you have not healed the sick, you have not bound up the injured, you
have not brought back the strayed, you have not sought the lost, but
with force and harshness you have ruled them. 5 So they were
scattered, because there was no shepherd; and scattered, they became
food for all the wild animals. 6 My sheep were scattered, they
wandered over all the mountains and on every high hill; my sheep
were scattered over all the face of the earth, with no one to search or
seek for them.

1721

EZEKIEL 1722

7 Therefore, you shepherds, hear the word of the LORD: 8 As I live, says
the Lord GOD, because my sheep have become a prey, and my sheep
have become food for all the wild animals, since there was no
shepherd; and because my shepherds have not searched for my sheep,
but the shepherds have fed themselves, and have not fed my sheep; 9
therefore, you shepherds, hear the word of the LORD: 10 Thus says the
Lord GOD, I am against the shepherds; and I will demand my sheep at
their hand, and put a stop to their feeding the sheep; no longer shall
the shepherds feed themselves. I will rescue my sheep from their
mouths, so that they may not be food for them.
God is the good shepherd
11 For thus says the Lord GOD: I myself will search for my sheep, and will
seek them out. 12 As shepherds seek out their flocks when they are
among their scattered sheep, so I will seek out my sheep. I will rescue
them from all the places to which they have been scattered on a day of
clouds and thick darkness. 13 I will bring them out from the peoples
and gather them from the countries, and will bring them into their
own land; and I will feed them on the mountains of Israel, by the
watercourses, and in all the inhabited parts of the land. 14 I will feed
them with good pasture, and the mountain heights of Israel shall be
their pasture; there they shall lie down in good grazing land, and they
shall feed on rich pasture on the mountains of Israel. 15 I myself will be
the shepherd of my sheep, and I will make them lie down, says the
Lord GOD. 16 I will seek the lost, and I will bring back the strayed, and I
will bind up the injured, and I will strengthen the weak, but the fat
and the strong I will destroy. I will feed them with justice.
A new order for Israel
17 As for you, my flock, thus says the Lord GOD: I shall judge between
sheep and sheep, between rams and goats: 18 Is it not enough for you
to feed on the good pasture, but you must tread down with your feet
the rest of your pasture? When you drink of clear water, must you foul
the rest with your feet? 19 And must my sheep eat what you have
trodden with your feet, and drink what you have fouled with your
feet?

1722

EZEKIEL 1723

20 Therefore, thus says the Lord GOD to them: I myself will judge
between the fat sheep and the lean sheep. 21 Because you pushed with
flank and shoulder, and butted at all the weak animals with your horns
until you scattered them far and wide, 22 I will save my flock, and they
shall no longer be ravaged; and I will judge between sheep and sheep.
23 I will set up over them one shepherd, my servant David, and he shall
feed them: he shall feed them and be their shepherd. 24 And I, the
LORD, will be their God, and my servant David shall be prince among
them; I, the LORD, have spoken.
25 I will make with them a covenant of peace and banish wild animals
from the land, so that they may live in the wild and sleep in the woods
securely. 26 I will make them and the region around my hill a blessing;
and I will send down the showers in their season; they shall be showers
of blessing. 27 The trees of the field shall yield their fruit, and the earth
shall yield its increase. They shall be secure on their soil; and they shall
know that I am the LORD, when I break the bars of their yoke, and save
them from the hands of those who enslaved them. 28 They shall no
more be plunder for the nations, nor shall the animals of the land
devour them; they shall live in safety, and no one shall make them
afraid. 29 I will provide for them a splendid vegetation so that they
shall no more be consumed with hunger in the land, and no longer
suffer the insults of the nations. 30 They shall know that I, the LORD
their God, am with them, and that they, the house of Israel, are my
people, says the Lord GOD. 31 You are my sheep, the sheep of my
pasture and I am your God, says the Lord GOD.
[Ezekiel 35]
Oracle on behalf of the mountains of Israel; oracles against Edom
1 The word of the LORD came to me: 2 Mortal, set your face against
Mount Seir, and prophesy against it, 3 and say to it, Thus says the Lord
GOD:
I am against you, Mount Seir;
I stretch out my hand against you
to make you a desolation and a waste.

1723

EZEKIEL 1724

4 I lay your towns in ruins;
you shall become a desolation,
and you shall know that I am the LORD.
5 Because you cherished an ancient enmity, and gave over the people
of Israel to the power of the sword at the time of their calamity, at the
time of their final punishment; 6 therefore, as I live, says the Lord GOD,
I will prepare you for blood, and blood shall pursue you; since you did
not hate bloodshed, bloodshed shall pursue you. 7 I will make Mount
Seir a waste and a desolation; and I will cut off from it all who come
and go. 8 I will fill its mountains with the slain; on your hills and in
your valleys and in all your watercourses those killed with the sword
shall fall. 9 I will make you a perpetual desolation, and your cities shall
never be inhabited. Then you shall know that I am the LORD.
10 Because you said, "These two nations and these two countries shall
be mine, and we will take possession of them," — although the LORD
was there — 11 therefore, as I live, says the Lord GOD, I will deal with
you according to the anger and envy that you showed because of your
hatred against them; and I will make myself known among you, when I
judge you. 12 You shall know that I, the LORD, have heard all the
abusive speech that you uttered against the mountains of Israel,
saying, "They are laid desolate, they are given us to devour." 13 And
you magnified yourselves against me with your mouth, and multiplied
your words against me; I heard it. 14 Thus says the Lord GOD: As the
whole earth rejoices, I will make you desolate. 15 As you rejoiced over
the inheritance of the house of Israel, because it was desolate, so I will
deal with you; you shall be desolate, Mount Seir, and all Edom, all of it.
Then they shall know that I am the LORD.
[Ezekiel 36]
Deliverance as "punishment"
1 And you, mortal, prophesy to the mountains of Israel, and say: O
mountains of Israel, hear the word of the LORD. 2 Thus says the Lord
GOD: Because the enemy said of you, "Aha!" and, "The ancient heights
have become our possession," 3 therefore prophesy, and say: Thus says
the Lord GOD: Because they made you desolate indeed, and crushed
you from all sides, so that you became the possession of the rest of the

1724

EZEKIEL 1725

nations, and you became an object of gossip and slander among the
people; 4 therefore, O mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord
GOD: Thus says the Lord GOD to the mountains and the hills, the
watercourses and the valleys, the desolate wastes and the deserted
towns, which have become a source of plunder and an object of
derision to the rest of the nations all around; 5 therefore thus says the
Lord GOD: I am speaking in my hot jealousy against the rest of the
nations, and against all Edom, who, with wholehearted joy and utter
contempt, took my land as their possession, because of its pasture, to
plunder it. 6 Therefore prophesy concerning the land of Israel, and say
to the mountains and hills, to the watercourses and valleys, Thus says
the Lord GOD: I am speaking in my jealous wrath, because you have
suffered the insults of the nations; 7 therefore thus says the Lord GOD: I
swear that the nations that are all around you shall themselves suffer
insults.
8 But you, O mountains of Israel, shall shoot out your branches, and
yield your fruit to my people Israel; for they shall soon come home. 9
See now, I am for you; I will turn to you, and you shall be tilled and
sown; 10 and I will multiply your population, the whole house of Israel,
all of it; the towns shall be inhabited and the waste places rebuilt; 11
and I will multiply human beings and animals upon you. They shall
increase and be fruitful; and I will cause you to be inhabited as in your
former times, and will do more good to you than ever before. Then
you shall know that I am the LORD. 12 I will lead people upon you — my
people Israel — and they shall possess you, and you shall be their
inheritance. No longer shall you bereave them of children.
No more disgrace
13 Thus says the Lord GOD: Because they say to you, "You devour
people, and you bereave your nation of children," 14 therefore you
shall no longer devour people and no longer bereave your nation of
children, says the Lord GOD; 15 and no longer will I let you hear the
insults of the nations, no longer shall you bear the disgrace of the
peoples; and no longer shall you cause your nation to stumble, says the
Lord GOD.

1725

EZEKIEL 1726

God's honor as the cause of the restoration
16 The word of the LORD came to me: 17 Mortal, when the house of
Israel lived on their own soil, they defiled it with their ways and their
deeds; their conduct in my sight was like the uncleanness of a woman
in her menstrual period. 18 So I poured out my wrath upon them for
the blood that they had shed upon the land, and for the idols with
which they had defiled it. 19 I scattered them among the nations, and
they were dispersed through the countries; in accordance with their
conduct and their deeds I judged them. 20 But when they came to the
nations, wherever they came, they profaned my holy name, in that it
was said of them, "These are the people of the LORD, and yet they had
to go out of his land." 21 But I had concern for my holy name, which
the house of Israel had profaned among the nations to which they
came.
22 Therefore say to the house of Israel, Thus says the Lord GOD: It is not
for your sake, O house of Israel, that I am about to act, but for the sake
of my holy name, which you have profaned among the nations to
which you came. 23 I will sanctify my great name, which has been
profaned among the nations, and which you have profaned among
them; and the nations shall know that I am the LORD, says the Lord
GOD, when through you I display my holiness before their eyes. 24 I will
take you from the nations, and gather you from all the countries, and
bring you into your own land. 25 I will sprinkle clean water upon you,
and you shall be clean from all your uncleannesses, and from all your
idols I will cleanse you. 26 A new heart I will give you, and a new spirit I
will put within you; and I will remove from your body the heart of
stone and give you a heart of flesh. 27 I will put my spirit within you,
and make you follow my statutes and be careful to observe my
ordinances. 28 Then you shall live in the land that I gave to your
ancestors; and you shall be my people, and I will be your God. 29 I will
save you from all your uncleannesses, and I will summon the grain and
make it abundant and lay no famine upon you. 30 I will make the fruit
of the tree and the produce of the field abundant, so that you may
never again suffer the disgrace of famine among the nations. 31 Then
you shall remember your evil ways, and your dealings that were not
good; and you shall loathe yourselves for your iniquities and your

1726

EZEKIEL 1727

abominable deeds. 32 It is not for your sake that I will act, says the Lord
GOD; let that be known to you. Be ashamed and dismayed for your
ways, O house of Israel.
33 Thus says the Lord GOD: On the day that I cleanse you from all your
iniquities, I will cause the towns to be inhabited, and the waste places
shall be rebuilt. 34 The land that was desolate shall be tilled, instead of
being the desolation that it was in the sight of all who passed by. 35
And they will say, "This land that was desolate has become like the
garden of Eden; and the waste and desolate and ruined towns are now
inhabited and fortified." 36 Then the nations that are left all around
you shall know that I, the LORD, have rebuilt the ruined places, and
replanted that which was desolate; I, the LORD, have spoken, and I will
do it.
37 Thus says the Lord GOD: I will also let the house of Israel ask me to
do this for them: to increase their population like a flock. 38 Like the
flock for sacrifices, like the flock at Jerusalem during her appointed
festivals, so shall the ruined towns be filled with flocks of people. Then
they shall know that I am the LORD.
[Ezekiel 37]
Vision of the valley of dry bones
1 The hand of the LORD came upon me, and he brought me out by the
spirit of the LORD and set me down in the middle of a valley; it was full
of bones. 2 He led me all around them; there were very many lying in
the valley, and they were very dry. 3 He said to me, "Mortal, can these
bones live?" I answered, "O Lord GOD, you know." 4 Then he said to
me, "Prophesy to these bones, and say to them: O dry bones, hear the
word of the LORD. 5 Thus says the Lord GOD to these bones: I will cause
breath to enter you, and you shall live. 6 I will lay sinews on you, and
will cause flesh to come upon you, and cover you with skin, and put
breath in you, and you shall live; and you shall know that I am the
LORD."

1727

EZEKIEL 1728

7 So I prophesied as I had been commanded; and as I prophesied,
suddenly there was a noise, a rattling, and the bones came together,
bone to its bone. 8 I looked, and there were sinews on them, and flesh
had come upon them, and skin had covered them; but there was no
breath in them. 9 Then he said to me, "Prophesy to the breath,
prophesy, mortal, and say to the breath: Thus says the Lord GOD: Come
from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they
may live." 10 I prophesied as he commanded me, and the breath came
into them, and they lived, and stood on their feet, a vast multitude.
11 Then he said to me, "Mortal, these bones are the whole house of
Israel. They say, 'Our bones are dried up, and our hope is lost; we are
cut off completely.' 12 Therefore prophesy, and say to them, Thus says
the Lord GOD: I am going to open your graves, and bring you up from
your graves, O my people; and I will bring you back to the land of
Israel. 13 And you shall know that I am the LORD, when I open your
graves, and bring you up from your graves, O my people. 14 I will put
my spirit within you, and you shall live, and I will place you on your
own soil; then you shall know that I, the LORD, have spoken and will
act, says the LORD."
The symbolic action of the two sticks
15 The word of the LORD came to me: 16 Mortal, take a stick and write
on it, "For Judah, and the Israelites associated with it"; then take
another stick and write on it, "For Joseph (the stick of Ephraim) and all
the house of Israel associated with it"; 17 and join them together into
one stick, so that they may become one in your hand. 18 And when
your people say to you, "Will you not show us what you mean by
these?" 19 say to them, Thus says the Lord GOD: I am about to take the
stick of Joseph (which is in the hand of Ephraim) and the tribes of Israel
associated with it; and I will put the stick of Judah upon it, and make
them one stick, in order that they may be one in my hand. 20 When
the sticks on which you write are in your hand before their eyes, 21
then say to them, Thus says the Lord GOD: I will take the people of
Israel from the nations among which they have gone, and will gather
them from every quarter, and bring them to their own land. 22 I will
make them one nation in the land, on the mountains of Israel; and one

1728

EZEKIEL 1729

king shall be king over them all. Never again shall they be two nations,
and never again shall they be divided into two kingdoms. 23 They shall
never again defile themselves with their idols and their detestable
things, or with any of their transgressions. I will save them from all the
apostasies into which they have fallen, and will cleanse them. Then
they shall be my people, and I will be their God.
24 My servant David shall be king over them; and they shall all have
one shepherd. They shall follow my ordinances and be careful to
observe my statutes. 25 They shall live in the land that I gave to my
servant Jacob, in which your ancestors lived; they and their children
and their children's children shall live there forever; and my servant
David shall be their prince forever. 26 I will make a covenant of peace
with them; it shall be an everlasting covenant with them; and I will
bless them and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary among them
forevermore. 27 My dwelling place shall be with them; and I will be
their God, and they shall be my people. 28 Then the nations shall know
that I the LORD sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary is among them
forevermore.
[Ezekiel 38]
The God and Magog oracles
1 The word of the LORD came to me: 2 Mortal, set your face toward
Gog, of the land of Magog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal.
Prophesy against him 3 and say: Thus says the Lord GOD: I am against
you, O Gog, chief prince of Meshech and Tubal; 4 I will turn you
around and put hooks into your jaws, and I will lead you out with all
your army, horses and horsemen, all of them clothed in full armor, a
great company, all of them with shield and buckler, wielding swords. 5
Persia, Ethiopia, and Put are with them, all of them with buckler and
helmet; 6 Gomer and all its troops; Beth-togarmah from the remotest
parts of the north with all its troops — many peoples are with you.
7 Be ready and keep ready, you and all the companies that are
assembled around you, and hold yourselves in reserve for them. 8 After
many days you shall be mustered; in the latter years you shall go
against a land restored from war, a land where people were gathered

1729

EZEKIEL 1730

from many nations on the mountains of Israel, which had long lain
waste; its people were brought out from the nations and now are
living in safety, all of them. 9 You shall advance, coming on like a
storm; you shall be like a cloud covering the land, you and all your
troops, and many peoples with you.
10 Thus says the Lord GOD: On that day thoughts will come into your
mind, and you will devise an evil scheme. 11 You will say, "I will go up
against the land of unwalled villages; I will fall upon the quiet people
who live in safety, all of them living without walls, and having no bars
or gates"; 12 to seize spoil and carry off plunder; to assail the waste
places that are now inhabited, and the people who were gathered
from the nations, who are acquiring cattle and goods, who live at the
center of the earth. 13 Sheba and Dedan and the merchants of Tarshish
and all its young warriors will say to you, "Have you come to seize
spoil? Have you assembled your horde to carry off plunder, to carry
away silver and gold, to take away cattle and goods, to seize a great
amount of booty?"
14 Therefore, mortal, prophesy, and say to Gog: Thus says the Lord GOD:
On that day when my people Israel are living securely, you will rouse
yourself 15 and come from your place out of the remotest parts of the
north, you and many peoples with you, all of them riding on horses, a
great horde, a mighty army; 16 you will come up against my people
Israel, like a cloud covering the earth. In the latter days I will bring you
against my land, so that the nations may know me, when through you,
O Gog, I display my holiness before their eyes.
17 Thus says the Lord GOD: Are you he of whom I spoke in former days
by my servants the prophets of Israel, who in those days prophesied for
years that I would bring you against them? 18 On that day, when Gog
comes against the land of Israel, says the Lord GOD, my wrath shall be
aroused. 19 For in my jealousy and in my blazing wrath I declare: On
that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel; 20 the fish
of the sea, and the birds of the air, and the animals of the field, and all
creeping things that creep on the ground, and all human beings that
are on the face of the earth, shall quake at my presence, and the
mountains shall be thrown down, and the cliffs shall fall, and every

1730

EZEKIEL 1731

wall shall tumble to the ground. 21 I will summon the sword against
Gog in all my mountains, says the Lord GOD; the swords of all will be
against their comrades. 22 With pestilence and bloodshed I will enter
into judgment with him; and I will pour down torrential rains and
hailstones, fire and sulfur, upon him and his troops and the many
peoples that are with him. 23 So I will display my greatness and my
holiness and make myself known in the eyes of many nations. Then
they shall know that I am the LORD.
[Ezekiel 39]
1 And you, mortal, prophesy against Gog, and say: Thus says the Lord
GOD: I am against you, O Gog, chief prince of Meshech and Tubal! 2 I
will turn you around and drive you forward, and bring you up from the
remotest parts of the north, and lead you against the mountains of
Israel. 3 I will strike your bow from your left hand, and will make your
arrows drop out of your right hand. 4 You shall fall upon the
mountains of Israel, you and all your troops and the peoples that are
with you; I will give you to birds of prey of every kind and to the wild
animals to be devoured. 5 You shall fall in the open field; for I have
spoken, says the Lord GOD. 6 I will send fire on Magog and on those
who live securely in the coastlands; and they shall know that I am the
LORD.
7 My holy name I will make known among my people Israel; and I will
not let my holy name be profaned any more; and the nations shall
know that I am the LORD, the Holy One in Israel. 8 It has come! It has
happened, says the Lord GOD. This is the day of which I have spoken.
9 Then those who live in the towns of Israel will go out and make fires
of the weapons and burn them — bucklers and shields, bows and
arrows, handpikes and spears — and they will make fires of them for
seven years. 10 They will not need to take wood out of the field or cut
down any trees in the forests, for they will make their fires of the
weapons; they will despoil those who despoiled them, and plunder
those who plundered them, says the Lord GOD.

1731

EZEKIEL 1732

11 On that day I will give to Gog a place for burial in Israel, the Valley
of the Travelers east of the sea; it shall block the path of the travelers,
for there Gog and all his horde will be buried; it shall be called the
Valley of Hamon-gog. 12 Seven months the house of Israel shall spend
burying them, in order to cleanse the land. 13 All the people of the
land shall bury them; and it will bring them honor on the day that I
show my glory, says the Lord GOD. 14 They will set apart men to pass
through the land regularly and bury any invaders who remain on the
face of the land, so as to cleanse it; for seven months they shall make
their search. 15 As the searchers pass through the land, anyone who
sees a human bone shall set up a sign by it, until the buriers have
buried it in the Valley of Hamon-gog. 16 (A city Hamonah is there also.)
Thus they shall cleanse the land.
17 As for you, mortal, thus says the Lord GOD: Speak to the birds of
every kind and to all the wild animals: Assemble and come, gather
from all around to the sacrificial feast that I am preparing for you, a
great sacrificial feast on the mountains of Israel, and you shall eat flesh
and drink blood. 18 You shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the
blood of the princes of the earth — of rams, of lambs, and of goats, of
bulls, all of them fatlings of Bashan. 19 You shall eat fat until you are
filled, and drink blood until you are drunk, at the sacrificial feast that I
am preparing for you. 20 And you shall be filled at my table with
horses and charioteers, with warriors and all kinds of soldiers, says the
Lord GOD.
Secondary summary and concluding oracles
21 I will display my glory among the nations; and all the nations shall
see my judgment that I have executed, and my hand that I have laid on
them. 22 The house of Israel shall know that I am the LORD their God,
from that day forward. 23 And the nations shall know that the house
of Israel went into captivity for their iniquity, because they dealt
treacherously with me. So I hid my face from them and gave them into
the hand of their adversaries, and they all fell by the sword. 24 I dealt
with them according to their uncleanness and their transgressions, and
hid my face from them.

1732

EZEKIEL 1733

25 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Now I will restore the fortunes of
Jacob, and have mercy on the whole house of Israel; and I will be
jealous for my holy name. 26 They shall forget their shame, and all the
treachery they have practiced against me, when they live securely in
their land with no one to make them afraid, 27 when I have brought
them back from the peoples and gathered them from their enemies'
lands, and through them have displayed my holiness in the sight of
many nations. 28 Then they shall know that I am the LORD their God
because I sent them into exile among the nations, and then gathered
them into their own land. I will leave none of them behind; 29 and I
will never again hide my face from them, when I pour out my spirit
upon the house of Israel, says the Lord GOD.
[Ezekiel 40]
Part V: Blueprint for the restored Temple and land; the new Temple
1 In the twenty-fifth year of our exile, at the beginning of the year, on
the tenth day of the month, in the fourteenth year after the city was
struck down, on that very day, the hand of the LORD was upon me, and
he brought me there. 2 He brought me, in visions of God, to the land
of Israel, and set me down upon a very high mountain, on which was a
structure like a city to the south. 3 When he brought me there, a man
was there, whose appearance shone like bronze, with a linen cord and
a measuring reed in his hand; and he was standing in the gateway. 4
The man said to me, "Mortal, look closely and listen attentively, and
set your mind upon all that I shall show you, for you were brought
here in order that I might show it to you; declare all that you see to the
house of Israel."
5 Now there was a wall all around the outside of the temple area. The
length of the measuring reed in the man's hand was six long cubits,
each being a cubit and a handbreadth in length; so he measured the
thickness of the wall, one reed; and the height, one reed. 6 Then he
went into the gateway facing east, going up its steps, and measured
the threshold of the gate, one reed deep. There were 7 recesses, and
each recess was one reed wide and one reed deep; and the space
between the recesses, five cubits; and the threshold of the gate by the
vestibule of the gate at the inner end was one reed deep. 8 Then he

1733

EZEKIEL 1734

measured the inner vestibule of the gateway, one cubit. 9 Then he
measured the vestibule of the gateway, eight cubits; and its pilasters,
two cubits; and the vestibule of the gate was at the inner end. 10 There
were three recesses on either side of the east gate; the three were of
the same size; and the pilasters on either side were of the same size. 11
Then he measured the width of the opening of the gateway, ten
cubits; and the width of the gateway, thirteen cubits. 12 There was a
barrier before the recesses, one cubit on either side; and the recesses
were six cubits on either side. 13 Then he measured the gate from the
back of the one recess to the back of the other, a width of twenty-five
cubits, from wall to wall. 14 He measured also the vestibule, twenty
cubits; and the gate next to the pilaster on every side of the court. 15
From the front of the gate at the entrance to the end of the inner
vestibule of the gate was fifty cubits. 16 The recesses and their pilasters
had windows, with shutters on the inside of the gateway all around,
and the vestibules also had windows on the inside all around; and on
the pilasters were palm trees.
17 Then he brought me into the outer court; there were chambers
there, and a pavement, all around the court; thirty chambers fronted
on the pavement. 18 The pavement ran along the side of the gates,
corresponding to the length of the gates; this was the lower pavement.
19 Then he measured the distance from the inner front of the lower
gate to the outer front of the inner court, one hundred cubits.
20 Then he measured the gate of the outer court that faced north —
its depth and width. 21 Its recesses, three on either side, and its pilasters
and its vestibule were of the same size as those of the first gate; its
depth was fifty cubits, and its width twenty-five cubits. 22 Its windows,
its vestibule, and its palm trees were of the same size as those of the
gate that faced toward the east. Seven steps led up to it; and its
vestibule was on the inside. 23 Opposite the gate on the north, as on
the east, was a gate to the inner court; he measured from gate to gate,
one hundred cubits.
24 Then he led me toward the south, and there was a gate on the
south; and he measured its pilasters and its vestibule; they had the
same dimensions as the others. 25 There were windows all around in it

1734

EZEKIEL 1735

and in its vestibule, like the windows of the others; its depth was fifty
cubits, and its width twenty-five cubits. 26 There were seven steps
leading up to it; its vestibule was on the inside. It had palm trees on its
pilasters, one on either side. 27 There was a gate on the south of the
inner court; and he measured from gate to gate toward the south, one
hundred cubits.
28 Then he brought me to the inner court by the south gate, and he
measured the south gate; it was of the same dimensions as the others.
29 Its recesses, its pilasters, and its vestibule were of the same size as
the others; and there were windows all around in it and in its vestibule;
its depth was fifty cubits, and its width twenty-five cubits. 30 There
were vestibules all around, twenty-five cubits deep and five cubits
wide. 31 Its vestibule faced the outer court, and palm trees were on its
pilasters, and its stairway had eight steps.
32 Then he brought me to the inner court on the east side, and he
measured the gate; it was of the same size as the others. 33 Its recesses,
its pilasters, and its vestibule were of the same dimensions as the
others; and there were windows all around in it and in its vestibule; its
depth was fifty cubits, and its width twenty-five cubits. 34 Its vestibule
faced the outer court, and it had palm trees on its pilasters, on either
side; and its stairway had eight steps.
35 Then he brought me to the north gate, and he measured it; it had
the same dimensions as the others. 36 Its recesses, its pilasters, and its
vestibule were of the same size as the others; and it had windows all
around. Its depth was fifty cubits, and its width twenty-five cubits. 37
Its vestibule faced the outer court, and it had palm trees on its
pilasters, on either side; and its stairway had eight steps.
38 There was a chamber with its door in the vestibule of the gate,
where the burnt offering was to be washed. 39 And in the vestibule of
the gate were two tables on either side, on which the burnt offering
and the sin offering and the guilt offering were to be slaughtered. 40
On the outside of the vestibule at the entrance of the north gate were
two tables; and on the other side of the vestibule of the gate were two
tables. 41 Four tables were on the inside, and four tables on the outside

1735

EZEKIEL 1736

of the side of the gate, eight tables, on which the sacrifices were to be
slaughtered. 42 There were also four tables of hewn stone for the
burnt offering, a cubit and a half long, and one cubit and a half wide,
and one cubit high, on which the instruments were to be laid with
which the burnt offerings and the sacrifices were slaughtered. 43 There
were pegs, one handbreadth long, fastened all around the inside. And
on the tables the flesh of the offering was to be laid.
44 On the outside of the inner gateway there were chambers for the
singers in the inner court, one at the side of the north gate facing
south, the other at the side of the east gate facing north. 45 He said to
me, "This chamber that faces south is for the priests who have charge
of the temple, 46 and the chamber that faces north is for the priests
who have charge of the altar; these are the descendants of Zadok, who
alone among the descendants of Levi may come near to the LORD to
minister to him." 47 He measured the court, one hundred cubits deep,
and one hundred cubits wide, a square; and the altar was in front of
the temple.
48 Then he brought me to the vestibule of the temple and measured
the pilasters of the vestibule, five cubits on either side; and the width
of the gate was fourteen cubits; and the sidewalls of the gate were
three cubits on either side. 49 The depth of the vestibule was twenty
cubits, and the width twelve cubits; ten steps led up to it; and there
were pillars beside the pilasters on either side.
[Ezekiel 41]
1 Then he brought me to the nave, and measured the pilasters; on each
side six cubits was the width of the pilasters. 2 The width of the
entrance was ten cubits; and the sidewalls of the entrance were five
cubits on either side. He measured the length of the nave, forty cubits,
and its width, twenty cubits. 3 Then he went into the inner room and
measured the pilasters of the entrance, two cubits; and the width of
the entrance, six cubits; and the sidewalls of the entrance, seven cubits.
4 He measured the depth of the room, twenty cubits, and its width,
twenty cubits, beyond the nave. And he said to me, This is the most
holy place.

1736

EZEKIEL 1737

5 Then he measured the wall of the temple, six cubits thick; and the
width of the side chambers, four cubits, all around the temple. 6 The
side chambers were in three stories, one over another, thirty in each
story. There were offsets all around the wall of the temple to serve as
supports for the side chambers, so that they should not be supported
by the wall of the temple. 7 The passageway of the side chambers
widened from story to story; for the structure was supplied with a
stairway all around the temple. For this reason the structure became
wider from story to story. One ascended from the bottom story to the
uppermost story by way of the middle one. 8 I saw also that the temple
had a raised platform all around; the foundations of the side chambers
measured a full reed of six long cubits. 9 The thickness of the outer
wall of the side chambers was five cubits; and the free space between
the side chambers of the temple 10 and the chambers of the court was
a width of twenty cubits all around the temple on every side. 11 The
side chambers opened onto the area left free, one door toward the
north, and another door toward the south; and the width of the part
that was left free was five cubits all around.
12 The building that was facing the temple yard on the west side was
seventy cubits wide; and the wall of the building was five cubits thick
all around, and its depth ninety cubits.
13 Then he measured the temple, one hundred cubits deep; and the
yard and the building with its walls, one hundred cubits deep; 14 also
the width of the east front of the temple and the yard, one hundred
cubits.
15 Then he measured the depth of the building facing the yard at the
west, together with its galleries on either side, one hundred cubits.
The nave of the temple and the inner room and the outer vestibule 16
were paneled, and, all around, all three had windows with recessed
frames. Facing the threshold the temple was paneled with wood all
around, from the floor up to the windows (now the windows were
covered), 17 to the space above the door, even to the inner room, and
on the outside. And on all the walls all around in the inner room and
the nave there was a pattern. 18 It was formed of cherubim and palm

1737

EZEKIEL 1738

trees, a palm tree between cherub and cherub. Each cherub had two
faces: 19 a human face turned toward the palm tree on the one side,
and the face of a young lion turned toward the palm tree on the other
side. They were carved on the whole temple all around; 20 from the
floor to the area above the door, cherubim and palm trees were carved
on the wall.
21 The doorposts of the nave were square. In front of the holy place
was something resembling 22 an altar of wood, three cubits high, two
cubits long, and two cubits wide; its corners, its base, and its walls were
of wood. He said to me, "This is the table that stands before the LORD."
23 The nave and the holy place had each a double door. 24 The doors
had two leaves apiece, two swinging leaves for each door. 25 On the
doors of the nave were carved cherubim and palm trees, such as were
carved on the walls; and there was a canopy of wood in front of the
vestibule outside. 26 And there were recessed windows and palm trees
on either side, on the sidewalls of the vestibule.
[Ezekiel 42]
1 Then he led me out into the outer court, toward the north, and he
brought me to the chambers that were opposite the temple yard and
opposite the building on the north. 2 The length of the building that
was on the north side was one hundred cubits, and the width fifty
cubits. 3 Across the twenty cubits that belonged to the inner court, and
facing the pavement that belonged to the outer court, the chambers
rose gallery by gallery in three stories. 4 In front of the chambers was a
passage on the inner side, ten cubits wide and one hundred cubits
deep, and its entrances were on the north. 5 Now the upper chambers
were narrower, for the galleries took more away from them than from
the lower and middle chambers in the building. 6 For they were in
three stories, and they had no pillars like the pillars of the outer court;
for this reason the upper chambers were set back from the ground
more than the lower and the middle ones. 7 There was a wall outside
parallel to the chambers, toward the outer court, opposite the
chambers, fifty cubits long. 8 For the chambers on the outer court were
fifty cubits long, while those opposite the temple were one hundred
cubits long. 9 At the foot of these chambers ran a passage that one

1738

EZEKIEL 1739

entered from the east in order to enter them from the outer court. 10
The width of the passage was fixed by the wall of the court.
On the south also, opposite the vacant area and opposite the building,
there were chambers 11 with a passage in front of them; they were
similar to the chambers on the north, of the same length and width,
with the same exits and arrangements and doors. 12 So the entrances
of the chambers to the south were entered through the entrance at
the head of the corresponding passage, from the east, along the
matching wall.
13 Then he said to me, "The north chambers and the south chambers
opposite the vacant area are the holy chambers, where the priests who
approach the LORD shall eat the most holy offerings; there they shall
deposit the most holy offerings — the grain offering, the sin offering,
and the guilt offering — for the place is holy. 14 When the priests enter
the holy place, they shall not go out of it into the outer court without
laying there the vestments in which they minister, for these are holy;
they shall put on other garments before they go near to the area open
to the people."
15 When he had finished measuring the interior of the temple area, he
led me out by the gate that faces east, and measured the temple area
all around. 16 He measured the east side with the measuring reed, five
hundred cubits by the measuring reed. 17 Then he turned and
measured the north side, five hundred cubits by the measuring reed. 18
Then he turned and measured the south side, five hundred cubits by
the measuring reed. 19 Then he turned to the west side and measured,
five hundred cubits by the measuring reed. 20 He measured it on the
four sides. It had a wall around it, five hundred cubits long and five
hundred cubits wide, to make a separation between the holy and the
common.

1739

EZEKIEL 1740

[Ezekiel 43]
Return of the glory of the Lord
1 Then he brought me to the gate, the gate facing east. 2 And there,
the glory of the God of Israel was coming from the east; the sound was
like the sound of mighty waters; and the earth shone with his glory. 3
The vision I saw was like the vision that I had seen when he came to
destroy the city, and like the vision that I had seen by the river Chebar;
and I fell upon my face. 4 As the glory of the LORD entered the temple
by the gate facing east, 5 the spirit lifted me up, and brought me into
the inner court; and the glory of the LORD filled the temple.
6 While the man was standing beside me, I heard someone speaking to
me out of the temple. 7 He said to me: Mortal, this is the place of my
throne and the place for the soles of my feet, where I will reside
among the people of Israel forever. The house of Israel shall no more
defile my holy name, neither they nor their kings, by their whoring,
and by the corpses of their kings at their death. 8 When they placed
their threshold by my threshold and their doorposts beside my
doorposts, with only a wall between me and them, they were defiling
my holy name by their abominations that they committed; therefore I
have consumed them in my anger. 9 Now let them put away their
idolatry and the corpses of their kings far from me, and I will reside
among them forever.
10 As for you, mortal, describe the temple to the house of Israel, and
let them measure the pattern; and let them be ashamed of their
iniquities. 11 When they are ashamed of all that they have done, make
known to them the plan of the temple, its arrangement, its exits and
its entrances, and its whole form — all its ordinances and its entire plan
and all its laws; and write it down in their sight, so that they may
observe and follow the entire plan and all its ordinances. 12 This is the
law of the temple: the whole territory on the top of the mountain all
around shall be most holy. This is the law of the temple.

1740

EZEKIEL 1741

The altar of burnt offerings
13 These are the dimensions of the altar by cubits (the cubit being one
cubit and a handbreadth): its base shall be one cubit high, and one
cubit wide, with a rim of one span around its edge. This shall be the
height of the altar: 14 From the base on the ground to the lower ledge,
two cubits, with a width of one cubit; and from the smaller ledge to
the larger ledge, four cubits, with a width of one cubit; 15 and the altar
hearth, four cubits; and from the altar hearth projecting upward, four
horns. 16 The altar hearth shall be square, twelve cubits long by twelve
wide. 17 The ledge also shall be square, fourteen cubits long by
fourteen wide, with a rim around it half a cubit wide, and its
surrounding base, one cubit. Its steps shall face east.
The altar's consecration
18 Then he said to me: Mortal, thus says the Lord GOD: These are the
ordinances for the altar: On the day when it is erected for offering
burnt offerings upon it and for dashing blood against it, 19 you shall
give to the levitical priests of the family of Zadok, who draw near to
me to minister to me, says the Lord GOD, a bull for a sin offering. 20
And you shall take some of its blood, and put it on the four horns of
the altar, and on the four corners of the ledge, and upon the rim all
around; thus you shall purify it and make atonement for it. 21 You shall
also take the bull of the sin offering, and it shall be burnt in the
appointed place belonging to the temple, outside the sacred area.
22 On the second day you shall offer a male goat without blemish for a
sin offering; and the altar shall be purified, as it was purified with the
bull. 23 When you have finished purifying it, you shall offer a bull
without blemish and a ram from the flock without blemish. 24 You
shall present them before the LORD, and the priests shall throw salt on
them and offer them up as a burnt offering to the LORD. 25 For seven
days you shall provide daily a goat for a sin offering; also a bull and a
ram from the flock, without blemish, shall be provided. 26 Seven days
shall they make atonement for the altar and cleanse it, and so
consecrate it. 27 When these days are over, then from the eighth day

1741

EZEKIEL 1742

onward the priests shall offer upon the altar your burnt offerings and
your offerings of well-being; and I will accept you, says the Lord GOD.
[Ezekiel 44]
1 Then he brought me back to the outer gate of the sanctuary, which
faces east; and it was shut. 2 The LORD said to me: This gate shall
remain shut; it shall not be opened, and no one shall enter by it; for
the LORD, the God of Israel, has entered by it; therefore it shall remain
shut. 3 Only the prince, because he is a prince, may sit in it to eat food
before the LORD; he shall enter by way of the vestibule of the gate, and
shall go out by the same way.
Temple ordinances
4 Then he brought me by way of the north gate to the front of the
temple; and I looked, and lo! the glory of the LORD filled the temple of
the LORD; and I fell upon my face. 5 The LORD said to me: Mortal, mark
well, look closely, and listen attentively to all that I shall tell you
concerning all the ordinances of the temple of the LORD and all its laws;
and mark well those who may be admitted to the temple and all those
who are to be excluded from the sanctuary. 6 Say to the rebellious
house, to the house of Israel, Thus says the Lord GOD: O house of Israel,
let there be an end to all your abominations 7 in admitting foreigners,
uncircumcised in heart and flesh, to be in my sanctuary, profaning my
temple when you offer to me my food, the fat and the blood. You
have broken my covenant with all your abominations. 8 And you have
not kept charge of my sacred offerings; but you have appointed
foreigners to act for you in keeping my charge in my sanctuary.
9 Thus says the Lord GOD: No foreigner, uncircumcised in heart and
flesh, of all the foreigners who are among the people of Israel, shall
enter my sanctuary. 10 But the Levites who went far from me, going
astray from me after their idols when Israel went astray, shall bear
their punishment. 11 They shall be ministers in my sanctuary, having
oversight at the gates of the temple, and serving in the temple; they
shall slaughter the burnt offering and the sacrifice for the people, and
they shall attend on them and serve them. 12 Because they ministered

1742

EZEKIEL 1743

to them before their idols and made the house of Israel stumble into
iniquity, therefore I have sworn concerning them, says the Lord GOD,
that they shall bear their punishment. 13 They shall not come near to
me, to serve me as priest, nor come near any of my sacred offerings,
the things that are most sacred; but they shall bear their shame, and
the consequences of the abominations that they have committed. 14
Yet I will appoint them to keep charge of the temple, to do all its
chores, all that is to be done in it.
Priestly rules
15 But the levitical priests, the descendants of Zadok, who kept the
charge of my sanctuary when the people of Israel went astray from me,
shall come near to me to minister to me; and they shall attend me to
offer me the fat and the blood, says the Lord GOD. 16 It is they who
shall enter my sanctuary, it is they who shall approach my table, to
minister to me, and they shall keep my charge. 17 When they enter the
gates of the inner court, they shall wear linen vestments; they shall
have nothing of wool on them, while they minister at the gates of the
inner court, and within. 18 They shall have linen turbans on their
heads, and linen undergarments on their loins; they shall not bind
themselves with anything that causes sweat. 19 When they go out into
the outer court to the people, they shall remove the vestments in
which they have been ministering, and lay them in the holy chambers;
and they shall put on other garments, so that they may not
communicate holiness to the people with their vestments. 20 They shall
not shave their heads or let their locks grow long; they shall only trim
the hair of their heads. 21 No priest shall drink wine when he enters the
inner court. 22 They shall not marry a widow, or a divorced woman, but
only a virgin of the stock of the house of Israel, or a widow who is the
widow of a priest. 23 They shall teach my people the difference
between the holy and the common, and show them how to distinguish
between the unclean and the clean. 24 In a controversy they shall act as
judges, and they shall decide it according to my judgments. They shall
keep my laws and my statutes regarding all my appointed festivals, and
they shall keep my sabbaths holy. 25 They shall not defile themselves
by going near to a dead person; for father or mother, however, and for
son or daughter, and for brother or unmarried sister they may defile

1743

EZEKIEL 1744

themselves. 26 After he has become clean, they shall count seven days
for him. 27 On the day that he goes into the holy place, into the inner
court, to minister in the holy place, he shall offer his sin offering, says
the Lord GOD.
28 This shall be their inheritance: I am their inheritance; and you shall
give them no holding in Israel; I am their holding. 29 They shall eat the
grain offering, the sin offering, and the guilt offering; and every
devoted thing in Israel shall be theirs. 30 The first of all the first fruits
of all kinds, and every offering of all kinds from all your offerings, shall
belong to the priests; you shall also give to the priests the first of your
dough, in order that a blessing may rest on your house. 31 The priests
shall not eat of anything, whether bird or animal, that died of itself or
was torn by animals.
[Ezekiel 45]
The distribution of land
1 When you allot the land as an inheritance, you shall set aside for the
LORD a portion of the land as a holy district, twenty-five thousand
cubits long and twenty thousand cubits wide; it shall be holy
throughout its entire extent. 2 Of this, a square plot of five hundred by
five hundred cubits shall be for the sanctuary, with fifty cubits for an
open space around it. 3 In the holy district you shall measure off a
section twenty-five thousand cubits long and ten thousand wide, in
which shall be the sanctuary, the most holy place. 4 It shall be a holy
portion of the land; it shall be for the priests, who minister in the
sanctuary and approach the LORD to minister to him; and it shall be
both a place for their houses and a holy place for the sanctuary. 5
Another section, twenty-five thousand cubits long and ten thousand
cubits wide, shall be for the Levites who minister at the temple, as their
holding for cities to live in.
6 Alongside the portion set apart as the holy district you shall assign as
a holding for the city an area five thousand cubits wide, and twentyfive thousand cubits long; it shall belong to the whole house of Israel.

1744

EZEKIEL 1745

7 And to the prince shall belong the land on both sides of the holy
district and the holding of the city, alongside the holy district and the
holding of the city, on the west and on the east, corresponding in
length to one of the tribal portions, and extending from the western
to the eastern boundary 8 of the land. It is to be his property in Israel.
And my princes shall no longer oppress my people; but they shall let
the house of Israel have the land according to their tribes.
9 Thus says the Lord GOD: Enough, O princes of Israel! Put away
violence and oppression, and do what is just and right. Cease your
evictions of my people, says the Lord GOD.
Weights and measures for offerings
10 You shall have honest balances, an honest ephah, and an honest
bath. 11 The ephah and the bath shall be of the same measure, the
bath containing one-tenth of a homer, and the ephah one-tenth of a
homer; the homer shall be the standard measure. 12 The shekel shall be
twenty gerahs. Twenty shekels, twenty-five shekels, and fifteen shekels
shall make a mina for you.
13 This is the offering that you shall make: one-sixth of an ephah from
each homer of wheat, and one-sixth of an ephah from each homer of
barley, 14 and as the fixed portion of oil, one-tenth of a bath from each
cor (the cor, like the homer, contains ten baths); 15 and one sheep from
every flock of two hundred, from the pastures of Israel. This is the
offering for grain offerings, burnt offerings, and offerings of wellbeing, to make atonement for them, says the Lord GOD. 16 All the
people of the land shall join with the prince in Israel in making this
offering. 17 But this shall be the obligation of the prince regarding the
burnt offerings, grain offerings, and drink offerings, at the festivals,
the new moons, and the sabbaths, all the appointed festivals of the
house of Israel: he shall provide the sin offerings, grain offerings, the
burnt offerings, and the offerings of well-being, to make atonement
for the house of Israel.

1745

EZEKIEL 1746

Festival regulations
18 Thus says the Lord GOD: In the first month, on the first day of the
month, you shall take a young bull without blemish, and purify the
sanctuary. 19 The priest shall take some of the blood of the sin offering
and put it on the doorposts of the temple, the four corners of the
ledge of the altar, and the posts of the gate of the inner court. 20 You
shall do the same on the seventh day of the month for anyone who has
sinned through error or ignorance; so you shall make atonement for
the temple.
21 In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, you shall
celebrate the festival of the passover, and for seven days unleavened
bread shall be eaten. 22 On that day the prince shall provide for
himself and all the people of the land a young bull for a sin offering.
23 And during the seven days of the festival he shall provide as a burnt
offering to the LORD seven young bulls and seven rams without
blemish, on each of the seven days; and a male goat daily for a sin
offering. 24 He shall provide as a grain offering an ephah for each bull,
an ephah for each ram, and a hin of oil to each ephah. 25 In the
seventh month, on the fifteenth day of the month and for the seven
days of the festival, he shall make the same provision for sin offerings,
burnt offerings, and grain offerings, and for the oil.
[Ezekiel 46]
Gate regulations and the prince's minor offerings
1 Thus says the Lord GOD: The gate of the inner court that faces east
shall remain closed on the six working days; but on the sabbath day it
shall be opened and on the day of the new moon it shall be opened. 2
The prince shall enter by the vestibule of the gate from outside, and
shall take his stand by the post of the gate. The priests shall offer his
burnt offering and his offerings of well-being, and he shall bow down
at the threshold of the gate. Then he shall go out, but the gate shall
not be closed until evening. 3 The people of the land shall bow down
at the entrance of that gate before the LORD on the sabbaths and on
the new moons. 4 The burnt offering that the prince offers to the LORD
on the sabbath day shall be six lambs without blemish and a ram

1746

EZEKIEL 1747

without blemish; 5 and the grain offering with the ram shall be an
ephah, and the grain offering with the lambs shall be as much as he
wishes to give, together with a hin of oil to each ephah. 6 On the day
of the new moon he shall offer a young bull without blemish, and six
lambs and a ram, which shall be without blemish; 7 as a grain offering
he shall provide an ephah with the bull and an ephah with the ram,
and with the lambs as much as he wishes, together with a hin of oil to
each ephah. 8 When the prince enters, he shall come in by the
vestibule of the gate, and he shall go out by the same way.
9 When the people of the land come before the LORD at the appointed
festivals, whoever enters by the north gate to worship shall go out by
the south gate; and whoever enters by the south gate shall go out by
the north gate: they shall not return by way of the gate by which they
entered, but shall go out straight ahead. 10 When they come in, the
prince shall come in with them; and when they go out, he shall go out.
11 At the festivals and the appointed seasons the grain offering with a
young bull shall be an ephah, and with a ram an ephah, and with the
lambs as much as one wishes to give, together with a hin of oil to an
ephah. 12 When the prince provides a freewill offering, either a burnt
offering or offerings of well-being as a freewill offering to the LORD,
the gate facing east shall be opened for him; and he shall offer his
burnt offering or his offerings of well-being as he does on the sabbath
day. Then he shall go out, and after he has gone out the gate shall be
closed.
13 He shall provide a lamb, a yearling, without blemish, for a burnt
offering to the LORD daily; morning by morning he shall provide it. 14
And he shall provide a grain offering with it morning by morning
regularly, one-sixth of an ephah, and one-third of a hin of oil to
moisten the choice flour, as a grain offering to the LORD; this is the
ordinance for all time. 15 Thus the lamb and the grain offering and the
oil shall be provided, morning by morning, as a regular burnt offering.

1747

EZEKIEL 1748

The prince's property
16 Thus says the Lord GOD: If the prince makes a gift to any of his sons
out of his inheritance, it shall belong to his sons, it is their holding by
inheritance. 17 But if he makes a gift out of his inheritance to one of
his servants, it shall be his to the year of liberty; then it shall revert to
the prince; only his sons may keep a gift from his inheritance. 18 The
prince shall not take any of the inheritance of the people, thrusting
them out of their holding; he shall give his sons their inheritance out of
his own holding, so that none of my people shall be dispossessed of
their holding.
Sacrificial kitchens
19 Then he brought me through the entrance, which was at the side of
the gate, to the north row of the holy chambers for the priests; and
there I saw a place at the extreme western end of them. 20 He said to
me, "This is the place where the priests shall boil the guilt offering and
the sin offering, and where they shall bake the grain offering, in order
not to bring them out into the outer court and so communicate
holiness to the people."
21 Then he brought me out to the outer court, and led me past the
four corners of the court; and in each corner of the court there was a
court — 22 in the four corners of the court were small courts, forty
cubits long and thirty wide; the four were of the same size. 23 On the
inside, around each of the four courts was a row of masonry, with
hearths made at the bottom of the rows all around. 24 Then he said to
me, "These are the kitchens where those who serve at the temple shall
boil the sacrifices of the people."
[Ezekiel 47]
The sacred river
1 Then he brought me back to the entrance of the temple; there, water
was flowing from below the threshold of the temple toward the east
(for the temple faced east); and the water was flowing down from
below the south end of the threshold of the temple, south of the altar.

1748

EZEKIEL 1749

2 Then he brought me out by way of the north gate, and led me
around on the outside to the outer gate that faces toward the east;
and the water was coming out on the south side.
3 Going on eastward with a cord in his hand, the man measured one
thousand cubits, and then led me through the water; and it was ankledeep. 4 Again he measured one thousand, and led me through the
water; and it was knee-deep. Again he measured one thousand, and
led me through the water; and it was up to the waist. 5 Again he
measured one thousand, and it was a river that I could not cross, for
the water had risen; it was deep enough to swim in, a river that could
not be crossed. 6 He said to me, "Mortal, have you seen this?"
Then he led me back along the bank of the river. 7 As I came back, I
saw on the bank of the river a great many trees on the one side and on
the other. 8 He said to me, "This water flows toward the eastern
region and goes down into the Arabah; and when it enters the sea, the
sea of stagnant waters, the water will become fresh. 9 Wherever the
river goes, every living creature that swarms will live, and there will be
very many fish, once these waters reach there. It will become fresh; and
everything will live where the river goes. 10 People will stand fishing
beside the sea from En-gedi to En-eglaim; it will be a place for the
spreading of nets; its fish will be of a great many kinds, like the fish of
the Great Sea. 11 But its swamps and marshes will not become fresh;
they are to be left for salt. 12 On the banks, on both sides of the river,
there will grow all kinds of trees for food. Their leaves will not wither
nor their fruit fail, but they will bear fresh fruit every month, because
the water for them flows from the sanctuary. Their fruit will be for
food, and their leaves for healing."
A new holy land; boundary and allotment instructions
13 Thus says the Lord GOD: These are the boundaries by which you shall
divide the land for inheritance among the twelve tribes of Israel.
Joseph shall have two portions. 14 You shall divide it equally; I swore to
give it to your ancestors, and this land shall fall to you as your
inheritance.

1749

EZEKIEL 1750

15 This shall be the boundary of the land: On the north side, from the
Great Sea by way of Hethlon to Lebo-hamath, and on to Zedad, 16
Berothah, Sibraim (which lies between the border of Damascus and the
border of Hamath), as far as Hazer-hatticon, which is on the border of
Hauran. 17 So the boundary shall run from the sea to Hazar-enon,
which is north of the border of Damascus, with the border of Hamath
to the north. This shall be the north side.
18 On the east side, between Hauran and Damascus; along the Jordan
between Gilead and the land of Israel; to the eastern sea and as far as
Tamar. This shall be the east side.
19 On the south side, it shall run from Tamar as far as the waters of
Meribath-kadesh, from there along the Wadi of Egypt to the Great
Sea. This shall be the south side.
20 On the west side, the Great Sea shall be the boundary to a point
opposite Lebo-hamath. This shall be the west side.
21 So you shall divide this land among you according to the tribes of
Israel. 22 You shall allot it as an inheritance for yourselves and for the
aliens who reside among you and have begotten children among you.
They shall be to you as citizens of Israel; with you they shall be allotted
an inheritance among the tribes of Israel. 23 In whatever tribe aliens
reside, there you shall assign them their inheritance, says the Lord GOD.
[Ezekiel 48]
Tribal and holy-district allotments
1 These are the names of the tribes: Beginning at the northern border,
on the Hethlon road, from Lebo-hamath, as far as Hazar-enon (which is
on the border of Damascus, with Hamath to the north), and extending
from the east side to the west, Dan, one portion. 2 Adjoining the
territory of Dan, from the east side to the west, Asher, one portion. 3
Adjoining the territory of Asher, from the east side to the west,
Naphtali, one portion. 4 Adjoining the territory of Naphtali, from the
east side to the west, Manasseh, one portion. 5 Adjoining the territory
of Manasseh, from the east side to the west, Ephraim, one portion. 6

1750

EZEKIEL 1751

Adjoining the territory of Ephraim, from the east side to the west,
Reuben, one portion. 7 Adjoining the territory of Reuben, from the
east side to the west, Judah, one portion.
8 Adjoining the territory of Judah, from the east side to the west, shall
be the portion that you shall set apart, twenty-five thousand cubits in
width, and in length equal to one of the tribal portions, from the east
side to the west, with the sanctuary in the middle of it. 9 The portion
that you shall set apart for the LORD shall be twenty-five thousand
cubits in length, and twenty thousand in width. 10 These shall be the
allotments of the holy portion: the priests shall have an allotment
measuring twenty-five thousand cubits on the northern side, ten
thousand cubits in width on the western side, ten thousand in width
on the eastern side, and twenty-five thousand in length on the
southern side, with the sanctuary of the LORD in the middle of it. 11 This
shall be for the consecrated priests, the descendants of Zadok, who
kept my charge, who did not go astray when the people of Israel went
astray, as the Levites did. 12 It shall belong to them as a special portion
from the holy portion of the land, a most holy place, adjoining the
territory of the Levites. 13 Alongside the territory of the priests, the
Levites shall have an allotment twenty-five thousand cubits in length
and ten thousand in width. The whole length shall be twenty-five
thousand cubits and the width twenty thousand. 14 They shall not sell
or exchange any of it; they shall not transfer this choice portion of the
land, for it is holy to the LORD.
15 The remainder, five thousand cubits in width and twenty-five
thousand in length, shall be for ordinary use for the city, for dwellings
and for open country. In the middle of it shall be the city; 16 and these
shall be its dimensions: the north side four thousand five hundred
cubits, the south side four thousand five hundred, the east side four
thousand five hundred, and the west side four thousand five hundred.
17 The city shall have open land: on the north two hundred fifty cubits,
on the south two hundred fifty, on the east two hundred fifty, on the
west two hundred fifty. 18 The remainder of the length alongside the
holy portion shall be ten thousand cubits to the east, and ten thousand
to the west, and it shall be alongside the holy portion. Its produce shall
be food for the workers of the city. 19 The workers of the city, from all

1751

EZEKIEL 1752

the tribes of Israel, shall cultivate it. 20 The whole portion that you
shall set apart shall be twenty-five thousand cubits square, that is, the
holy portion together with the property of the city.
21 What remains on both sides of the holy portion and of the property
of the city shall belong to the prince. Extending from the twenty-five
thousand cubits of the holy portion to the east border, and westward
from the twenty-five thousand cubits to the west border, parallel to
the tribal portions, it shall belong to the prince. The holy portion with
the sanctuary of the temple in the middle of it, 22 and the property of
the Levites and of the city, shall be in the middle of that which belongs
to the prince. The portion of the prince shall lie between the territory
of Judah and the territory of Benjamin.
23 As for the rest of the tribes: from the east side to the west,
Benjamin, one portion. 24 Adjoining the territory of Benjamin, from
the east side to the west, Simeon, one portion. 25 Adjoining the
territory of Simeon, from the east side to the west, Issachar, one
portion. 26 Adjoining the territory of Issachar, from the east side to the
west, Zebulun, one portion. 27 Adjoining the territory of Zebulun, from
the east side to the west, Gad, one portion. 28 And adjoining the
territory of Gad to the south, the boundary shall run from Tamar to the
waters of Meribath-kadesh, from there along the Wadi of Egypt to the
Great Sea. 29 This is the land that you shall allot as an inheritance
among the tribes of Israel, and these are their portions, says the Lord
GOD.
The new Jerusalem
30 These shall be the exits of the city: On the north side, which is to be
four thousand five hundred cubits by measure, 31 three gates, the gate
of Reuben, the gate of Judah, and the gate of Levi, the gates of the
city being named after the tribes of Israel. 32 On the east side, which is
to be four thousand five hundred cubits, three gates, the gate of
Joseph, the gate of Benjamin, and the gate of Dan. 33 On the south
side, which is to be four thousand five hundred cubits by measure,
three gates, the gate of Simeon, the gate of Issachar, and the gate of
Zebulun. 34 On the west side, which is to be four thousand five

1752

EZEKIEL 1753

hundred cubits, three gates, the gate of Gad, the gate of Asher, and
the gate of Naphtali. 35 The circumference of the city shall be eighteen
thousand cubits. And the name of the city from that time on shall be,
The LORD is There.

1753

DANIEL 1754

DANIEL
Introduction
The book of Daniel combines the humor of folktale with the mystery of
apocalyptic to create a message of hope and encouragement. Daniel
himself is as much a mystery as the symbols in the book that bears his
name: The earliest reference to a figure named Daniel is that of a
Ugaritic king who lived in the fourteenth century BCE. Ezekiel 14.14
associates this king with Noah and Job: three non-Jewish individuals
known for belief in the face of danger, wisdom in the face of
foolishness. According to Ezek 28.3, Daniel is one who knows secrets.
The Daniel of this prophetic book is similar in knowledge, fidelity, and
circumstances; he is, however, emphatically Jewish.
Blending theological emphasis on personal piety and divine
intervention with staples of folktales such as wise courtiers,
endangered heroes, and foolish kings, the first six chapters entertain
and edify even as they provide encouragement to Jews living as a
minority under foreign rule. The accounts of Daniel and his friends,
Jewish youths taken into Babylonian captivity, reflect a time in which
the imperial rule is ignorant and often dangerous rather than
malevolent, and in which Jews can live at peace with their non-Jewish
neighbors, though perhaps not with a complete sense of security.
Consequently, the tales are most often regarded as products of the
Persian (539-333 BCE) or early Hellenistic (333-168) periods. Like Joseph,
Daniel succeeds in service to the ruler through his ability to interpret
dreams; like Mordecai in the book of Esther, he succeeds in foreign
political service despite challenges by rival politicians.
These stories contrast with the apocalyptic materials in 7-12, which
depict extreme hostility to foreign governments and which underscore
ongoing universal tribulation rather than temporary personal danger.
In this second section, Daniel is not the interpreter of visions but the
1754

DANIEL 1755

visionary himself, and he is now in need of an angel's interpretive skills.
In a series of dreams, he learns of the history of the Near East and
Egypt from the Babylonian Empire, through Persian rule, to the time of
Alexander the Great, and finally to the attacks against Judaism and
Jerusalem by the Syrian-Greek ruler Antiochus IV Epiphanes. The
increasingly detailed descriptions of the period following the division
of Alexander's empire up to the Hellenization crisis under Antiochus in
167 BCE suggest that the apocalyptic sections were composed on the
eve of the Maccabean revolt against the assimilationist policies of
Antiochus and his allies in Jerusalem's priestly circles (see 1 Macc 1). The
author may well have been one of the "wise men" who promulgated a
counsel of nonviolence together with the expectation that God would
punish the wicked and redeem the faithful (Dan 12.3). That the visions
are presented pseudonymously, that is, under the name of an ancient
figure who "foresees" what is to come, is typical of apocalypses (so also
for 2 Esdras, 2 Baruch, and later Christian texts such as the 'Apocalypse
of Peter').
Daniel 2.4b-7.28 is written in Aramaic, the common language of the
Near East from the time of the Babylonian exile until the conquests of
Alexander the Great; 1.1-2.4a and chs 8-12 are in Hebrew, which by then
for the Jews had become largely the language of worship, not of
ordinary discourse. Complicating the linguistic history of the volume
are the Septuagint and Old Greek translations. These texts contain
additions to the story of Daniel: The Prayer of Azariah and the Song of
the Three Jews, Susanna, and Bel and the Dragon. In this bible these
additional texts appear in the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical Books. Still
more books within the Danielic corpus appear among the documents
discovered in 1948 at Qumran, the so-called Dead Sea Scrolls. One text,
the Prayer of Nabonidus (4QprNab), may represent an earlier version of
Dan 4; that Nabonidus engaged in erratic behavior, and that he rather
than Nebuchadnezzar was the father of Belshazzar (Dan 5.1) make this
supposition particularly intriguing.
The wisdom of the Jewish courtiers in negotiating the difficulties of
living under an often arbitrary and dangerous foreign rule is
juxtaposed with a vision of wars, persecutions, and finally, salvation
under God's sovereignty; through these images the book of Daniel

1755

DANIEL 1756

offers to its readers both advice and consolation. The folktales speak to
all peoples persecuted as religious and ethnic minorities, especially
under conditions of colonial rule. The apocalyptic materials, whose
meanings would have been known to the author's own circle, have
provided for over two thousand years occasion for speculation and,
often, hope.

[Daniel 1]
The Babylonian exile
1 In the third year of the reign of King Jehoiakim of Judah, King
Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came to Jerusalem and besieged it. 2 The
Lord let King Jehoiakim of Judah fall into his power, as well as some of
the vessels of the house of God. These he brought to the land of
Shinar, and placed the vessels in the treasury of his gods.
Courtiers in exile
3 Then the king commanded his palace master Ashpenaz to bring some
of the Israelites of the royal family and of the nobility, 4 young men
without physical defect and handsome, versed in every branch of
wisdom, endowed with knowledge and insight, and competent to
serve in the king's palace; they were to be taught the literature and
language of the Chaldeans. 5 The king assigned them a daily portion of
the royal rations of food and wine. They were to be educated for three
years, so that at the end of that time they could be stationed in the
king's court. 6 Among them were Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and
Azariah, from the tribe of Judah. 7 The palace master gave them other
names: Daniel he called Belteshazzar, Hananiah he called Shadrach,
Mishael he called Meshach, and Azariah he called Abednego.
The first resistance
8 But Daniel resolved that he would not defile himself with the royal
rations of food and wine; so he asked the palace master to allow him

1756

DANIEL 1757

not to defile himself. 9 Now God allowed Daniel to receive favor and
compassion from the palace master. 10 The palace master said to
Daniel, "I am afraid of my lord the king; he has appointed your food
and your drink. If he should see you in poorer condition than the other
young men of your own age, you would endanger my head with the
king." 11 Then Daniel asked the guard whom the palace master had
appointed over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: 12 "Please test
your servants for ten days. Let us be given vegetables to eat and water
to drink. 13 You can then compare our appearance with the
appearance of the young men who eat the royal rations, and deal with
your servants according to what you observe." 14 So he agreed to this
proposal and tested them for ten days. 15 At the end of ten days it was
observed that they appeared better and fatter than all the young men
who had been eating the royal rations. 16 So the guard continued to
withdraw their royal rations and the wine they were to drink, and gave
them vegetables. 17 To these four young men God gave knowledge
and skill in every aspect of literature and wisdom; Daniel also had
insight into all visions and dreams.
18 At the end of the time that the king had set for them to be brought
in, the palace master brought them into the presence of
Nebuchadnezzar, 19 and the king spoke with them. And among them
all, no one was found to compare with Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and
Azariah; therefore they were stationed in the king's court. 20 In every
matter of wisdom and understanding concerning which the king
inquired of them, he found them ten times better than all the
magicians and enchanters in his whole kingdom. 21 And Daniel
continued there until the first year of King Cyrus.
[Daniel 2]
Nebuchadnezzar's test
1 In the second year of Nebuchadnezzar's reign, Nebuchadnezzar
dreamed such dreams that his spirit was troubled and his sleep left
him. 2 So the king commanded that the magicians, the enchanters, the
sorcerers, and the Chaldeans be summoned to tell the king his dreams.
When they came in and stood before the king, 3 he said to them, "I
have had such a dream that my spirit is troubled by the desire to

1757

DANIEL 1758

understand it." 4 The Chaldeans said to the king (in Aramaic), "O king,
live forever! Tell your servants the dream, and we will reveal the
interpretation." 5 The king answered the Chaldeans, "This is a public
decree: if you do not tell me both the dream and its interpretation, you
shall be torn limb from limb, and your houses shall be laid in ruins. 6
But if you do tell me the dream and its interpretation, you shall receive
from me gifts and rewards and great honor. Therefore tell me the
dream and its interpretation." 7 They answered a second time, "Let the
king first tell his servants the dream, then we can give its
interpretation." 8 The king answered, "I know with certainty that you
are trying to gain time, because you see I have firmly decreed: 9 if you
do not tell me the dream, there is but one verdict for you. You have
agreed to speak lying and misleading words to me until things take a
turn. Therefore, tell me the dream, and I shall know that you can give
me its interpretation." 10 The Chaldeans answered the king, "There is
no one on earth who can reveal what the king demands! In fact no
king, however great and powerful, has ever asked such a thing of any
magician or enchanter or Chaldean. 11 The thing that the king is asking
is too difficult, and no one can reveal it to the king except the gods,
whose dwelling is not with mortals."
Daniel seek divine aid
12 Because of this the king flew into a violent rage and commanded
that all the wise men of Babylon be destroyed. 13 The decree was
issued, and the wise men were about to be executed; and they looked
for Daniel and his companions, to execute them. 14 Then Daniel
responded with prudence and discretion to Arioch, the king's chief
executioner, who had gone out to execute the wise men of Babylon; 15
he asked Arioch, the royal official, "Why is the decree of the king so
urgent?" Arioch then explained the matter to Daniel. 16 So Daniel
went in and requested that the king give him time and he would tell
the king the interpretation.
17 Then Daniel went to his home and informed his companions,
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, 18 and told them to seek mercy from
the God of heaven concerning this mystery, so that Daniel and his
companions with the rest of the wise men of Babylon might not perish.

1758

DANIEL 1759

19 Then the mystery was revealed to Daniel in a vision of the night, and
Daniel blessed the God of heaven.
Daniel's doxology
20 Daniel said:
"Blessed be the name of God from age to age,
for wisdom and power are his.
21 He changes times and seasons,
deposes kings and sets up kings;
he gives wisdom to the wise
and knowledge to those who have understanding.
22 He reveals deep and hidden things;
he knows what is in the darkness,
and light dwells with him.
23 To you, O God of my ancestors,
I give thanks and praise,
for you have given me wisdom and power,
and have now revealed to me what we asked of you,
for you have revealed to us what the king ordered."
Daniel approaches the king
24 Therefore Daniel went to Arioch, whom the king had appointed to
destroy the wise men of Babylon, and said to him, "Do not destroy the
wise men of Babylon; bring me in before the king, and I will give the
king the interpretation."
25 Then Arioch quickly brought Daniel before the king and said to him:
"I have found among the exiles from Judah a man who can tell the
king the interpretation." 26 The king said to Daniel, whose name was
Belteshazzar, "Are you able to tell me the dream that I have seen and
its interpretation?" 27 Daniel answered the king, "No wise men,
enchanters, magicians, or diviners can show to the king the mystery
that the king is asking, 28 but there is a God in heaven who reveals
mysteries, and he has disclosed to King Nebuchadnezzar what will
happen at the end of days. Your dream and the visions of your head as
you lay in bed were these: 29 To you, O king, as you lay in bed, came

1759

DANIEL 1760

thoughts of what would be hereafter, and the revealer of mysteries
disclosed to you what is to be. 30 But as for me, this mystery has not
been revealed to me because of any wisdom that I have more than any
other living being, but in order that the interpretation may be known
to the king and that you may understand the thoughts of your mind.
Nebuchadnezzar's dream
31 "You were looking, O king, and lo! there was a great statue. This
statue was huge, its brilliance extraordinary; it was standing before
you, and its appearance was frightening. 32 The head of that statue
was of fine gold, its chest and arms of silver, its middle and thighs of
bronze, 33 its legs of iron, its feet partly of iron and partly of clay. 34 As
you looked on, a stone was cut out, not by human hands, and it struck
the statue on its feet of iron and clay and broke them in pieces. 35
Then the iron, the clay, the bronze, the silver, and the gold, were all
broken in pieces and became like the chaff of the summer threshing
floors; and the wind carried them away, so that not a trace of them
could be found. But the stone that struck the statue became a great
mountain and filled the whole earth.
Daniel's first interpretation
36 "This was the dream; now we will tell the king its interpretation. 37
You, O king, the king of kings — to whom the God of heaven has
given the kingdom, the power, the might, and the glory, 38 into whose
hand he has given human beings, wherever they live, the wild animals
of the field, and the birds of the air, and whom he has established as
ruler over them all — you are the head of gold. 39 After you shall arise
another kingdom inferior to yours, and yet a third kingdom of bronze,
which shall rule over the whole earth. 40 And there shall be a fourth
kingdom, strong as iron; just as iron crushes and smashes everything, it
shall crush and shatter all these. 41 As you saw the feet and toes partly
of potter's clay and partly of iron, it shall be a divided kingdom; but
some of the strength of iron shall be in it, as you saw the iron mixed
with the clay. 42 As the toes of the feet were part iron and part clay, so
the kingdom shall be partly strong and partly brittle. 43 As you saw the
iron mixed with clay, so will they mix with one another in marriage,

1760

DANIEL 1761

but they will not hold together, just as iron does not mix with clay. 44
And in the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a
kingdom that shall never be destroyed, nor shall this kingdom be left
to another people. It shall crush all these kingdoms and bring them to
an end, and it shall stand forever; 45 just as you saw that a stone was
cut from the mountain not by hands, and that it crushed the iron, the
bronze, the clay, the silver, and the gold. The great God has informed
the king what shall be hereafter. The dream is certain, and its
interpretation trustworthy."
Daniel's promotion
46 Then King Nebuchadnezzar fell on his face, worshiped Daniel, and
commanded that a grain offering and incense be offered to him. 47
The king said to Daniel, "Truly, your God is God of gods and Lord of
kings and a revealer of mysteries, for you have been able to reveal this
mystery!" 48 Then the king promoted Daniel, gave him many great
gifts, and made him ruler over the whole province of Babylon and chief
prefect over all the wise men of Babylon. 49 Daniel made a request of
the king, and he appointed Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego over
the affairs of the province of Babylon. But Daniel remained at the
king's court.
[Daniel 3]
The golden statue
1 King Nebuchadnezzar made a golden statue whose height was sixty
cubits and whose width was six cubits; he set it up on the plain of Dura
in the province of Babylon. 2 Then King Nebuchadnezzar sent for the
satraps, the prefects, and the governors, the counselors, the treasurers,
the justices, the magistrates, and all the officials of the provinces, to
assemble and come to the dedication of the statue that King
Nebuchadnezzar had set up. 3 So the satraps, the prefects, and the
governors, the counselors, the treasurers, the justices, the magistrates,
and all the officials of the provinces, assembled for the dedication of
the statue that King Nebuchadnezzar had set up. When they were
standing before the statue that Nebuchadnezzar had set up, 4 the
herald proclaimed aloud, "You are commanded, O peoples, nations,

1761

DANIEL 1762

and languages, 5 that when you hear the sound of the horn, pipe, lyre,
trigon, harp, drum, and entire musical ensemble, you are to fall down
and worship the golden statue that King Nebuchadnezzar has set up. 6
Whoever does not fall down and worship shall immediately be thrown
into a furnace of blazing fire." 7 Therefore, as soon as all the peoples
heard the sound of the horn, pipe, lyre, trigon, harp, drum, and entire
musical ensemble, all the peoples, nations, and languages fell down
and worshiped the golden statue that King Nebuchadnezzar had set
up.
The youths accused
8 Accordingly, at this time certain Chaldeans came forward and
denounced the Jews. 9 They said to King Nebuchadnezzar, "O king,
live forever! 10 You, O king, have made a decree, that everyone who
hears the sound of the horn, pipe, lyre, trigon, harp, drum, and entire
musical ensemble, shall fall down and worship the golden statue, 11
and whoever does not fall down and worship shall be thrown into a
furnace of blazing fire. 12 There are certain Jews whom you have
appointed over the affairs of the province of Babylon: Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego. These pay no heed to you, O king. They do
not serve your gods and they do not worship the golden statue that
you have set up."
13 Then Nebuchadnezzar in furious rage commanded that Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego be brought in; so they brought those men
before the king. 14 Nebuchadnezzar said to them, "Is it true, O
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, that you do not serve my gods and
you do not worship the golden statue that I have set up? 15 Now if you
are ready when you hear the sound of the horn, pipe, lyre, trigon,
harp, drum, and entire musical ensemble to fall down and worship the
statue that I have made, well and good. But if you do not worship, you
shall immediately be thrown into a furnace of blazing fire, and who is
the god that will deliver you out of my hands?"

1762

DANIEL 1763

Resistance
16 Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego answered the king, "O
Nebuchadnezzar, we have no need to present a defense to you in this
matter. 17 If our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the
furnace of blazing fire and out of your hand, O king, let him deliver us.
18 But if not, be it known to you, O king, that we will not serve your
gods and we will not worship the golden statue that you have set up."
The furnace
19 Then Nebuchadnezzar was so filled with rage against Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego that his face was distorted. He ordered the
furnace heated up seven times more than was customary, 20 and
ordered some of the strongest guards in his army to bind Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego and to throw them into the furnace of
blazing fire. 21 So the men were bound, still wearing their tunics, their
trousers, their hats, and their other garments, and they were thrown
into the furnace of blazing fire. 22 Because the king's command was
urgent and the furnace was so overheated, the raging flames killed the
men who lifted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. 23 But the three
men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, fell down, bound, into the
furnace of blazing fire.
Nebuchadnezzar's acknowledgment
24 Then King Nebuchadnezzar was astonished and rose up quickly. He
said to his counselors, "Was it not three men that we threw bound into
the fire?" They answered the king, "True, O king." 25 He replied, "But I
see four men unbound, walking in the middle of the fire, and they are
not hurt; and the fourth has the appearance of a god." 26
Nebuchadnezzar then approached the door of the furnace of blazing
fire and said, "Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, servants of the Most
High God, come out! Come here!" So Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego came out from the fire. 27 And the satraps, the prefects, the
governors, and the king's counselors gathered together and saw that
the fire had not had any power over the bodies of those men; the hair
of their heads was not singed, their tunics were not harmed, and not

1763

DANIEL 1764

even the smell of fire came from them. 28 Nebuchadnezzar said,
"Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who has
sent his angel and delivered his servants who trusted in him. They
disobeyed the king's command and yielded up their bodies rather than
serve and worship any god except their own God. 29 Therefore I make
a decree: Any people, nation, or language that utters blasphemy
against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego shall be torn
limb from limb, and their houses laid in ruins; for there is no other god
who is able to deliver in this way." 30 Then the king promoted
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego in the province of Babylon.
[Daniel 4]
Nebuchadnezzar's doxology
1 King Nebuchadnezzar to all peoples, nations, and languages that live
throughout the earth: May you have abundant prosperity! 2 The signs
and wonders that the Most High God has worked for me I am pleased
to recount.
3 How great are his signs,
how mighty his wonders!
His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom,
and his sovereignty is from generation to generation.
The king's vision
4 I, Nebuchadnezzar, was living at ease in my home and prospering in
my palace. 5 I saw a dream that frightened me; my fantasies in bed and
the visions of my head terrified me. 6 So I made a decree that all the
wise men of Babylon should be brought before me, in order that they
might tell me the interpretation of the dream. 7 Then the magicians,
the enchanters, the Chaldeans, and the diviners came in, and I told
them the dream, but they could not tell me its interpretation. 8 At last
Daniel came in before me — he who was named Belteshazzar after the
name of my god, and who is endowed with a spirit of the holy gods —
and I told him the dream: 9 "O Belteshazzar, chief of the magicians, I
know that you are endowed with a spirit of the holy gods and that no
mystery is too difficult for you. Hear the dream that I saw; tell me its
interpretation.

1764

DANIEL 1765

10 Upon my bed this is what I saw;
there was a tree at the center of the earth,
and its height was great.
11 The tree grew great and strong,
its top reached to heaven,
and it was visible to the ends of the whole earth.
12 Its foliage was beautiful,
its fruit abundant,
and it provided food for all.
The animals of the field found shade under it,
the birds of the air nested in its branches,
and from it all living beings were fed.
13 "I continued looking, in the visions of my head as I lay in bed, and
there was a holy watcher, coming down from heaven. 14 He cried
aloud and said:
'Cut down the tree and chop off its branches,
strip off its foliage and scatter its fruit.
Let the animals flee from beneath it
and the birds from its branches.
15 But leave its stump and roots in the ground,
with a band of iron and bronze,
in the tender grass of the field.
Let him be bathed with the dew of heaven,
and let his lot be with the animals of the field
in the grass of the earth.
16 Let his mind be changed from that of a human,
and let the mind of an animal be given to him.
And let seven times pass over him.
17 The sentence is rendered by decree of the watchers,
the decision is given by order of the holy ones,
in order that all who live may know
that the Most High is sovereign over the kingdom of mortals;
he gives it to whom he will
and sets over it the lowliest of human beings.'

1765

DANIEL 1766

18 "This is the dream that I, King Nebuchadnezzar, saw. Now you,
Belteshazzar, declare the interpretation, since all the wise men of my
kingdom are unable to tell me the interpretation. You are able,
however, for you are endowed with a spirit of the holy gods."
Daniel's second interpretation
19 Then Daniel, who was called Belteshazzar, was severely distressed
for a while. His thoughts terrified him. The king said, "Belteshazzar, do
not let the dream or the interpretation terrify you." Belteshazzar
answered, "My lord, may the dream be for those who hate you, and its
interpretation for your enemies! 20 The tree that you saw, which grew
great and strong, so that its top reached to heaven and was visible to
the end of the whole earth, 21 whose foliage was beautiful and its fruit
abundant, and which provided food for all, under which animals of the
field lived, and in whose branches the birds of the air had nests — 22 it
is you, O king! You have grown great and strong. Your greatness has
increased and reaches to heaven, and your sovereignty to the ends of
the earth. 23 And whereas the king saw a holy watcher coming down
from heaven and saying, 'Cut down the tree and destroy it, but leave
its stump and roots in the ground, with a band of iron and bronze, in
the grass of the field; and let him be bathed with the dew of heaven,
and let his lot be with the animals of the field, until seven times pass
over him' — 24 this is the interpretation, O king, and it is a decree of
the Most High that has come upon my lord the king: 25 You shall be
driven away from human society, and your dwelling shall be with the
wild animals. You shall be made to eat grass like oxen, you shall be
bathed with the dew of heaven, and seven times shall pass over you,
until you have learned that the Most High has sovereignty over the
kingdom of mortals, and gives it to whom he will. 26 As it was
commanded to leave the stump and roots of the tree, your kingdom
shall be re-established for you from the time that you learn that
Heaven is sovereign. 27 Therefore, O king, may my counsel be
acceptable to you: atone for your sins with righteousness, and your
iniquities with mercy to the oppressed, so that your prosperity may be
prolonged."

1766

DANIEL 1767

Nebuchadnezzar's punishment
28 All this came upon King Nebuchadnezzar. 29 At the end of twelve
months he was walking on the roof of the royal palace of Babylon, 30
and the king said, "Is this not magnificent Babylon, which I have built
as a royal capital by my mighty power and for my glorious majesty?" 31
While the words were still in the king's mouth, a voice came from
heaven: "O King Nebuchadnezzar, to you it is declared: The kingdom
has departed from you! 32 You shall be driven away from human
society, and your dwelling shall be with the animals of the field. You
shall be made to eat grass like oxen, and seven times shall pass over
you, until you have learned that the Most High has sovereignty over
the kingdom of mortals and gives it to whom he will." 33 Immediately
the sentence was fulfilled against Nebuchadnezzar. He was driven
away from human society, ate grass like oxen, and his body was bathed
with the dew of heaven, until his hair grew as long as eagles' feathers
and his nails became like birds' claws.
Restoration
34 When that period was over, I, Nebuchadnezzar, lifted my eyes to
heaven, and my reason returned to me.
I blessed the Most High,
and praised and honored the one who lives forever.
For his sovereignty is an everlasting sovereignty,
and his kingdom endures from generation to generation.
35 All the inhabitants of the earth are accounted as nothing,
and he does what he wills with the host of heaven
and the inhabitants of the earth.
There is no one who can stay his hand
or say to him, "What are you doing?"
36 At that time my reason returned to me; and my majesty and
splendor were restored to me for the glory of my kingdom. My
counselors and my lords sought me out, I was re-established over my
kingdom, and still more greatness was added to me. 37 Now I,
Nebuchadnezzar, praise and extol and honor the King of heaven,

1767

DANIEL 1768

for all his works are truth, and his ways are justice;
and he is able to bring low those who walk in pride.
[Daniel 5]
The handwriting on the wall
1 King Belshazzar made a great festival for a thousand of his lords, and
he was drinking wine in the presence of the thousand.
2 Under the influence of the wine, Belshazzar commanded that they
bring in the vessels of gold and silver that his father Nebuchadnezzar
had taken out of the temple in Jerusalem, so that the king and his
lords, his wives, and his concubines might drink from them. 3 So they
brought in the vessels of gold and silver that had been taken out of the
temple, the house of God in Jerusalem, and the king and his lords, his
wives, and his concubines drank from them. 4 They drank the wine and
praised the gods of gold and silver, bronze, iron, wood, and stone.
5 Immediately the fingers of a human hand appeared and began
writing on the plaster of the wall of the royal palace, next to the
lampstand. The king was watching the hand as it wrote. 6 Then the
king's face turned pale, and his thoughts terrified him. His limbs gave
way, and his knees knocked together. 7 The king cried aloud to bring
in the enchanters, the Chaldeans, and the diviners; and the king said to
the wise men of Babylon, "Whoever can read this writing and tell me
its interpretation shall be clothed in purple, have a chain of gold
around his neck, and rank third in the kingdom." 8 Then all the king's
wise men came in, but they could not read the writing or tell the king
the interpretation. 9 Then King Belshazzar became greatly terrified
and his face turned pale, and his lords were perplexed.
The queen's intervention
10 The queen, when she heard the discussion of the king and his lords,
came into the banqueting hall. The queen said, "O king, live forever!
Do not let your thoughts terrify you or your face grow pale. 11 There is
a man in your kingdom who is endowed with a spirit of the holy gods.
In the days of your father he was found to have enlightenment,

1768

DANIEL 1769

understanding, and wisdom like the wisdom of the gods. Your father,
King Nebuchadnezzar, made him chief of the magicians, enchanters,
Chaldeans, and diviners, 12 because an excellent spirit, knowledge, and
understanding to interpret dreams, explain riddles, and solve problems
were found in this Daniel, whom the king named Belteshazzar. Now let
Daniel be called, and he will give the interpretation."
Deciphering the handwriting
13 Then Daniel was brought in before the king. The king said to Daniel,
"So you are Daniel, one of the exiles of Judah, whom my father the
king brought from Judah? 14 I have heard of you that a spirit of the
gods is in you, and that enlightenment, understanding, and excellent
wisdom are found in you. 15 Now the wise men, the enchanters, have
been brought in before me to read this writing and tell me its
interpretation, but they were not able to give the interpretation of the
matter. 16 But I have heard that you can give interpretations and solve
problems. Now if you are able to read the writing and tell me its
interpretation, you shall be clothed in purple, have a chain of gold
around your neck, and rank third in the kingdom."
17 Then Daniel answered in the presence of the king, "Let your gifts be
for yourself, or give your rewards to someone else! Nevertheless I will
read the writing to the king and let him know the interpretation. 18 O
king, the Most High God gave your father Nebuchadnezzar kingship,
greatness, glory, and majesty. 19 And because of the greatness that he
gave him, all peoples, nations, and languages trembled and feared
before him. He killed those he wanted to kill, kept alive those he
wanted to keep alive, honored those he wanted to honor, and
degraded those he wanted to degrade. 20 But when his heart was
lifted up and his spirit was hardened so that he acted proudly, he was
deposed from his kingly throne, and his glory was stripped from him. 21
He was driven from human society, and his mind was made like that of
an animal. His dwelling was with the wild asses, he was fed grass like
oxen, and his body was bathed with the dew of heaven, until he
learned that the Most High God has sovereignty over the kingdom of
mortals, and sets over it whomever he will. 22 And you, Belshazzar his
son, have not humbled your heart, even though you knew all this! 23

1769

DANIEL 1770

You have exalted yourself against the Lord of heaven! The vessels of
his temple have been brought in before you, and you and your lords,
your wives and your concubines have been drinking wine from them.
You have praised the gods of silver and gold, of bronze, iron, wood,
and stone, which do not see or hear or know; but the God in whose
power is your very breath, and to whom belong all your ways, you
have not honored.
24 "So from his presence the hand was sent and this writing was
inscribed. 25 And this is the writing that was inscribed: MENE, MENE,
TEKEL, and PARSIN. 26 This is the interpretation of the matter: MENE, God
has numbered the days of your kingdom and brought it to an end; 27
TEKEL, you have been weighed on the scales and found wanting; 28
PERES, your kingdom is divided and given to the Medes and Persians."
29 Then Belshazzar gave the command, and Daniel was clothed in
purple, a chain of gold was put around his neck, and a proclamation
was made concerning him that he should rank third in the kingdom.
30 That very night Belshazzar, the Chaldean king, was killed. 31 And
Darius the Mede received the kingdom, being about sixty-two years
old.
[Daniel 6]
Persian plot against Daniel
1 It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom one hundred twenty
satraps, stationed throughout the whole kingdom, 2 and over them
three presidents, including Daniel; to these the satraps gave account,
so that the king might suffer no loss. 3 Soon Daniel distinguished
himself above all the other presidents and satraps because an excellent
spirit was in him, and the king planned to appoint him over the whole
kingdom. 4 So the presidents and the satraps tried to find grounds for
complaint against Daniel in connection with the kingdom. But they
could find no grounds for complaint or any corruption, because he was
faithful, and no negligence or corruption could be found in him. 5 The
men said, "We shall not find any ground for complaint against this
Daniel unless we find it in connection with the law of his God."

1770

DANIEL 1771

6 So the presidents and satraps conspired and came to the king and
said to him, "O King Darius, live forever! 7 All the presidents of the
kingdom, the prefects and the satraps, the counselors and the
governors are agreed that the king should establish an ordinance and
enforce an interdict, that whoever prays to anyone, divine or human,
for thirty days, except to you, O king, shall be thrown into a den of
lions. 8 Now, O king, establish the interdict and sign the document, so
that it cannot be changed, according to the law of the Medes and the
Persians, which cannot be revoked." 9 Therefore King Darius signed
the document and interdict.
Daniel's defiance
10 Although Daniel knew that the document had been signed, he
continued to go to his house, which had windows in its upper room
open toward Jerusalem, and to get down on his knees three times a
day to pray to his God and praise him, just as he had done previously.
11 The conspirators came and found Daniel praying and seeking mercy
before his God. 12 Then they approached the king and said concerning
the interdict, "O king! Did you not sign an interdict, that anyone who
prays to anyone, divine or human, within thirty days except to you, O
king, shall be thrown into a den of lions?" The king answered, "The
thing stands fast, according to the law of the Medes and Persians,
which cannot be revoked." 13 Then they responded to the king,
"Daniel, one of the exiles from Judah, pays no attention to you, O
king, or to the interdict you have signed, but he is saying his prayers
three times a day."
14 When the king heard the charge, he was very much distressed. He
was determined to save Daniel, and until the sun went down he made
every effort to rescue him. 15 Then the conspirators came to the king
and said to him, "Know, O king, that it is a law of the Medes and
Persians that no interdict or ordinance that the king establishes can be
changed."
16 Then the king gave the command, and Daniel was brought and
thrown into the den of lions. The king said to Daniel, "May your God,
whom you faithfully serve, deliver you!" 17 A stone was brought and

1771

DANIEL 1772

laid on the mouth of the den, and the king sealed it with his own
signet and with the signet of his lords, so that nothing might be
changed concerning Daniel. 18 Then the king went to his palace and
spent the night fasting; no food was brought to him, and sleep fled
from him.
In the lion's den; restitution
19 Then, at break of day, the king got up and hurried to the den of
lions. 20 When he came near the den where Daniel was, he cried out
anxiously to Daniel, "O Daniel, servant of the living God, has your God
whom you faithfully serve been able to deliver you from the lions?" 21
Daniel then said to the king, "O king, live forever! 22 My God sent his
angel and shut the lions' mouths so that they would not hurt me,
because I was found blameless before him; and also before you, O
king, I have done no wrong." 23 Then the king was exceedingly glad
and commanded that Daniel be taken up out of the den. So Daniel was
taken up out of the den, and no kind of harm was found on him,
because he had trusted in his God. 24 The king gave a command, and
those who had accused Daniel were brought and thrown into the den
of lions — they, their children, and their wives. Before they reached the
bottom of the den the lions overpowered them and broke all their
bones in pieces.
25 Then King Darius wrote to all peoples and nations of every
language throughout the whole world: "May you have abundant
prosperity! 26 I make a decree, that in all my royal dominion people
should tremble and fear before the God of Daniel:
For he is the living God,
enduring forever.
His kingdom shall never be destroyed,
and his dominion has no end.

1772

DANIEL 1773

27 He delivers and rescues,
he works signs and wonders in heaven and on earth;
for he has saved Daniel
from the power of the lions."
28 So this Daniel prospered during the reign of Darius and the reign of
Cyrus the Persian.
[Daniel 7]
The first vision
1 In the first year of King Belshazzar of Babylon, Daniel had a dream
and visions of his head as he lay in bed. Then he wrote down the
dream: 2 I, Daniel, saw in my vision by night the four winds of heaven
stirring up the great sea, 3 and four great beasts came up out of the
sea, different from one another. 4 The first was like a lion and had
eagles' wings. Then, as I watched, its wings were plucked off, and it
was lifted up from the ground and made to stand on two feet like a
human being; and a human mind was given to it. 5 Another beast
appeared, a second one, that looked like a bear. It was raised up on
one side, had three tusks in its mouth among its teeth and was told,
"Arise, devour many bodies!" 6 After this, as I watched, another
appeared, like a leopard. The beast had four wings of a bird on its back
and four heads; and dominion was given to it. 7 After this I saw in the
visions by night a fourth beast, terrifying and dreadful and exceedingly
strong. It had great iron teeth and was devouring, breaking in pieces,
and stamping what was left with its feet. It was different from all the
beasts that preceded it, and it had ten horns. 8 I was considering the
horns, when another horn appeared, a little one coming up among
them; to make room for it, three of the earlier horns were plucked up
by the roots. There were eyes like human eyes in this horn, and a
mouth speaking arrogantly.

1773

DANIEL 1774

The heavenly throne room
9 As I watched,
thrones were set in place,
and an Ancient One took his throne,
his clothing was white as snow,
and the hair of his head like pure wool;
his throne was fiery flames,
and its wheels were burning fire.
10 A stream of fire issued
and flowed out from his presence.
A thousand thousands served him,
and ten thousand times ten thousand stood attending him.
The court sat in judgment,
and the books were opened.
11 I watched then because of the noise of the arrogant words that the
horn was speaking. And as I watched, the beast was put to death, and
its body destroyed and given over to be burned with fire. 12 As for the
rest of the beasts, their dominion was taken away, but their lives were
prolonged for a season and a time. 13 As I watched in the night visions,
I saw one like a human being
coming with the clouds of heaven.
And he came to the Ancient One
and was presented before him.
14 To him was given dominion
and glory and kingship,
that all peoples, nations, and languages
should serve him.
His dominion is an everlasting dominion
that shall not pass away,
and his kingship is one
that shall never be destroyed.
The interpretation
15 As for me, Daniel, my spirit was troubled within me, and the visions
of my head terrified me. 16 I approached one of the attendants to ask
him the truth concerning all this. So he said that he would disclose to

1774

DANIEL 1775

me the interpretation of the matter: 17 "As for these four great beasts,
four kings shall arise out of the earth. 18 But the holy ones of the Most
High shall receive the kingdom and possess the kingdom forever —
forever and ever."
19 Then I desired to know the truth concerning the fourth beast, which
was different from all the rest, exceedingly terrifying, with its teeth of
iron and claws of bronze, and which devoured and broke in pieces, and
stamped what was left with its feet; 20 and concerning the ten horns
that were on its head, and concerning the other horn, which came up
and to make room for which three of them fell out — the horn that
had eyes and a mouth that spoke arrogantly, and that seemed greater
than the others. 21 As I looked, this horn made war with the holy ones
and was prevailing over them, 22 until the Ancient One came; then
judgment was given for the holy ones of the Most High, and the time
arrived when the holy ones gained possession of the kingdom.
23 This is what he said: "As for the fourth beast,
there shall be a fourth kingdom on earth
that shall be different from all the other kingdoms;
it shall devour the whole earth,
and trample it down, and break it to pieces.
24 As for the ten horns,
out of this kingdom ten kings shall arise,
and another shall arise after them.
This one shall be different from the former ones,
and shall put down three kings.
25 He shall speak words against the Most High,
shall wear out the holy ones of the Most High,
and shall attempt to change the sacred seasons and the law;
and they shall be given into his power
for a time, two times, and half a time.
26 Then the court shall sit in judgment,
and his dominion shall be taken away,
to be consumed and totally destroyed.

1775

DANIEL 1776

27 The kingship and dominion
and the greatness of the kingdoms under the whole heaven
shall be given to the people of the holy ones of the Most High;
their kingdom shall be an everlasting kingdom,
and all dominions shall serve and obey them."
28 Here the account ends. As for me, Daniel, my thoughts greatly
terrified me, and my face turned pale; but I kept the matter in my
mind.
[Daniel 8]
The second vision
1 In the third year of the reign of King Belshazzar a vision appeared to
me, Daniel, after the one that had appeared to me at first. 2 In the
vision I was looking and saw myself in Susa the capital, in the province
of Elam, and I was by the river Ulai. 3 I looked up and saw a ram
standing beside the river. It had two horns. Both horns were long, but
one was longer than the other, and the longer one came up second. 4 I
saw the ram charging westward and northward and southward. All
beasts were powerless to withstand it, and no one could rescue from its
power; it did as it pleased and became strong.
5 As I was watching, a male goat appeared from the west, coming
across the face of the whole earth without touching the ground. The
goat had a horn between its eyes. 6 It came toward the ram with the
two horns that I had seen standing beside the river, and it ran at it
with savage force. 7 I saw it approaching the ram. It was enraged
against it and struck the ram, breaking its two horns. The ram did not
have power to withstand it; it threw the ram down to the ground and
trampled upon it, and there was no one who could rescue the ram
from its power. 8 Then the male goat grew exceedingly great; but at
the height of its power, the great horn was broken, and in its place
there came up four prominent horns toward the four winds of heaven.

1776

DANIEL 1777

9 Out of one of them came another horn, a little one, which grew
exceedingly great toward the south, toward the east, and toward the
beautiful land. 10 It grew as high as the host of heaven. It threw down
to the earth some of the host and some of the stars, and trampled on
them. 11 Even against the prince of the host it acted arrogantly; it took
the regular burnt offering away from him and overthrew the place of
his sanctuary. 12 Because of wickedness, the host was given over to it
together with the regular burnt offering; it cast truth to the ground,
and kept prospering in what it did. 13 Then I heard a holy one
speaking, and another holy one said to the one that spoke, "For how
long is this vision concerning the regular burnt offering, the
transgression that makes desolate, and the giving over of the sanctuary
and host to be trampled?" 14 And he answered him, "For two
thousand three hundred evenings and mornings; then the sanctuary
shall be restored to its rightful state."
Gabriel's interpretation
15 When I, Daniel, had seen the vision, I tried to understand it. Then
someone appeared standing before me, having the appearance of a
man, 16 and I heard a human voice by the Ulai, calling, "Gabriel, help
this man understand the vision." 17 So he came near where I stood; and
when he came, I became frightened and fell prostrate. But he said to
me, "Understand, O mortal, that the vision is for the time of the end."
18 As he was speaking to me, I fell into a trance, face to the ground;
then he touched me and set me on my feet. 19 He said, "Listen, and I
will tell you what will take place later in the period of wrath; for it
refers to the appointed time of the end. 20 As for the ram that you saw
with the two horns, these are the kings of Media and Persia. 21 The
male goat is the king of Greece, and the great horn between its eyes is
the first king. 22 As for the horn that was broken, in place of which
four others arose, four kingdoms shall arise from his nation, but not
with his power.
23 At the end of their rule,
when the transgressions have reached their full measure,
a king of bold countenance shall arise,
skilled in intrigue.

1777

DANIEL 1778

24 He shall grow strong in power,
shall cause fearful destruction,
and shall succeed in what he does.
He shall destroy the powerful
and the people of the holy ones.
25 By his cunning
he shall make deceit prosper under his hand,
and in his own mind he shall be great.
Without warning he shall destroy many
and shall even rise up against the Prince of princes.
But he shall be broken, and not by human hands.
26 The vision of the evenings and the mornings that has been told is
true. As for you, seal up the vision, for it refers to many days from
now."
27 So I, Daniel, was overcome and lay sick for some days; then I arose
and went about the king's business. But I was dismayed by the vision
and did not understand it.
[Daniel 9]
Daniel's prayer
1 In the first year of Darius son of Ahasuerus, by birth a Mede, who
became king over the realm of the Chaldeans — 2 in the first year of
his reign, I, Daniel, perceived in the books the number of years that,
according to the word of the LORD to the prophet Jeremiah, must be
fulfilled for the devastation of Jerusalem, namely, seventy years.
3 Then I turned to the Lord God, to seek an answer by prayer and
supplication with fasting and sackcloth and ashes. 4 I prayed to the
LORD my God and made confession, saying,
"Ah, Lord, great and awesome God, keeping covenant and steadfast
love with those who love you and keep your commandments, 5 we
have sinned and done wrong, acted wickedly and rebelled, turning
aside from your commandments and ordinances. 6 We have not
listened to your servants the prophets, who spoke in your name to our
kings, our princes, and our ancestors, and to all the people of the land.

1778

DANIEL 1779

7 "Righteousness is on your side, O Lord, but open shame, as at this
day, falls on us, the people of Judah, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
all Israel, those who are near and those who are far away, in all the
lands to which you have driven them, because of the treachery that
they have committed against you. 8 Open shame, O LORD, falls on us,
our kings, our officials, and our ancestors, because we have sinned
against you. 9 To the Lord our God belong mercy and forgiveness, for
we have rebelled against him, 10 and have not obeyed the voice of the
LORD our God by following his laws, which he set before us by his
servants the prophets.
11 "All Israel has transgressed your law and turned aside, refusing to
obey your voice. So the curse and the oath written in the law of Moses,
the servant of God, have been poured out upon us, because we have
sinned against you. 12 He has confirmed his words, which he spoke
against us and against our rulers, by bringing upon us a calamity so
great that what has been done against Jerusalem has never before
been done under the whole heaven. 13 Just as it is written in the law of
Moses, all this calamity has come upon us. We did not entreat the favor
of the LORD our God, turning from our iniquities and reflecting on his
fidelity. 14 So the LORD kept watch over this calamity until he brought it
upon us. Indeed, the LORD our God is right in all that he has done; for
we have disobeyed his voice.
15 "And now, O Lord our God, who brought your people out of the
land of Egypt with a mighty hand and made your name renowned
even to this day — we have sinned, we have done wickedly. 16 O Lord,
in view of all your righteous acts, let your anger and wrath, we pray,
turn away from your city Jerusalem, your holy mountain; because of
our sins and the iniquities of our ancestors, Jerusalem and your people
have become a disgrace among all our neighbors. 17 Now therefore, O
our God, listen to the prayer of your servant and to his supplication,
and for your own sake, Lord, let your face shine upon your desolated
sanctuary. 18 Incline your ear, O my God, and hear. Open your eyes and
look at our desolation and the city that bears your name. We do not
present our supplication before you on the ground of our
righteousness, but on the ground of your great mercies. 19 O Lord,
hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, listen and act and do not delay! For your

1779

DANIEL 1780

own sake, O my God, because your city and your people bear your
name!"
Gabriel's response
20 While I was speaking, and was praying and confessing my sin and
the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before the
LORD my God on behalf of the holy mountain of my God — 21 while I
was speaking in prayer, the man Gabriel, whom I had seen before in a
vision, came to me in swift flight at the time of the evening sacrifice. 22
He came and said to me, "Daniel, I have now come out to give you
wisdom and understanding. 23 At the beginning of your supplications
a word went out, and I have come to declare it, for you are greatly
beloved. So consider the word and understand the vision:
24 "Seventy weeks are decreed for your people and your holy city: to
finish the transgression, to put an end to sin, and to atone for iniquity,
to bring in everlasting righteousness, to seal both vision and prophet,
and to anoint a most holy place. 25 Know therefore and understand:
from the time that the word went out to restore and rebuild Jerusalem
until the time of an anointed prince, there shall be seven weeks; and
for sixty-two weeks it shall be built again with streets and moat, but in
a troubled time. 26 After the sixty-two weeks, an anointed one shall be
cut off and shall have nothing, and the troops of the prince who is to
come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary. Its end shall come with a
flood, and to the end there shall be war. Desolations are decreed. 27
He shall make a strong covenant with many for one week, and for half
of the week he shall make sacrifice and offering cease; and in their
place shall be an abomination that desolates, until the decreed end is
poured out upon the desolator."
[Daniel 10]
Daniel's visionary experience
1 In the third year of King Cyrus of Persia a word was revealed to
Daniel, who was named Belteshazzar. The word was true, and it
concerned a great conflict. He understood the word, having received
understanding in the vision.

1780

DANIEL 1781

2 At that time I, Daniel, had been mourning for three weeks. 3 I had
eaten no rich food, no meat or wine had entered my mouth, and I had
not anointed myself at all, for the full three weeks. 4 On the twentyfourth day of the first month, as I was standing on the bank of the
great river (that is, the Tigris), 5 I looked up and saw a man clothed in
linen, with a belt of gold from Uphaz around his waist. 6 His body was
like beryl, his face like lightning, his eyes like flaming torches, his arms
and legs like the gleam of burnished bronze, and the sound of his
words like the roar of a multitude. 7 I, Daniel, alone saw the vision; the
people who were with me did not see the vision, though a great
trembling fell upon them, and they fled and hid themselves. 8 So I was
left alone to see this great vision. My strength left me, and my
complexion grew deathly pale, and I retained no strength. 9 Then I
heard the sound of his words; and when I heard the sound of his
words, I fell into a trance, face to the ground.
Gabriel's encouragement
10 But then a hand touched me and roused me to my hands and knees.
11 He said to me, "Daniel, greatly beloved, pay attention to the words
that I am going to speak to you. Stand on your feet, for I have now
been sent to you." So while he was speaking this word to me, I stood
up trembling. 12 He said to me, "Do not fear, Daniel, for from the first
day that you set your mind to gain understanding and to humble
yourself before your God, your words have been heard, and I have
come because of your words. 13 But the prince of the kingdom of
Persia opposed me twenty-one days. So Michael, one of the chief
princes, came to help me, and I left him there with the prince of the
kingdom of Persia, 14 and have come to help you understand what is to
happen to your people at the end of days. For there is a further vision
for those days."
15 While he was speaking these words to me, I turned my face toward
the ground and was speechless. 16 Then one in human form touched
my lips, and I opened my mouth to speak, and said to the one who
stood before me, "My lord, because of the vision such pains have come
upon me that I retain no strength. 17 How can my lord's servant talk

1781

DANIEL 1782

with my lord? For I am shaking, no strength remains in me, and no
breath is left in me."
18 Again one in human form touched me and strengthened me. 19 He
said, "Do not fear, greatly beloved, you are safe. Be strong and
courageous!" When he spoke to me, I was strengthened and said, "Let
my lord speak, for you have strengthened me." 20 Then he said, "Do
you know why I have come to you? Now I must return to fight against
the prince of Persia, and when I am through with him, the prince of
Greece will come. 21 But I am to tell you what is inscribed in the book
of truth. There is no one with me who contends against these princes
except Michael, your prince. [Daniel 11] 1 As for me, in the first year of
Darius the Mede, I stood up to support and strengthen him.
[Daniel 11]
Succession of kings
2 "Now I will announce the truth to you. Three more kings shall arise in
Persia. The fourth shall be far richer than all of them, and when he has
become strong through his riches, he shall stir up all against the
kingdom of Greece. 3 Then a warrior king shall arise, who shall rule
with great dominion and take action as he pleases. 4 And while still
rising in power, his kingdom shall be broken and divided toward the
four winds of heaven, but not to his posterity, nor according to the
dominion with which he ruled; for his kingdom shall be uprooted and
go to others besides these.
5 "Then the king of the south shall grow strong, but one of his officers
shall grow stronger than he and shall rule a realm greater than his own
realm. 6 After some years they shall make an alliance, and the
daughter of the king of the south shall come to the king of the north
to ratify the agreement. But she shall not retain her power, and his
offspring shall not endure. She shall be given up, she and her
attendants and her child and the one who supported her.
"In those times 7 a branch from her roots shall rise up in his place. He
shall come against the army and enter the fortress of the king of the
north, and he shall take action against them and prevail. 8 Even their

1782

DANIEL 1783

gods, with their idols and with their precious vessels of silver and gold,
he shall carry off to Egypt as spoils of war. For some years he shall
refrain from attacking the king of the north; 9 then the latter shall
invade the realm of the king of the south, but will return to his own
land.
10 "His sons shall wage war and assemble a multitude of great forces,
which shall advance like a flood and pass through, and again shall carry
the war as far as his fortress. 11 Moved with rage, the king of the south
shall go out and do battle against the king of the north, who shall
muster a great multitude, which shall, however, be defeated by his
enemy. 12 When the multitude has been carried off, his heart shall be
exalted, and he shall overthrow tens of thousands, but he shall not
prevail. 13 For the king of the north shall again raise a multitude, larger
than the former, and after some years he shall advance with a great
army and abundant supplies.
Campaigns of Antiochus III
14 "In those times many shall rise against the king of the south. The
lawless among your own people shall lift themselves up in order to
fulfill the vision, but they shall fail. 15 Then the king of the north shall
come and throw up siegeworks, and take a well-fortified city. And the
forces of the south shall not stand, not even his picked troops, for
there shall be no strength to resist. 16 But he who comes against him
shall take the actions he pleases, and no one shall withstand him. He
shall take a position in the beautiful land, and all of it shall be in his
power. 17 He shall set his mind to come with the strength of his whole
kingdom, and he shall bring terms of peace and perform them. In
order to destroy the kingdom, he shall give him a woman in marriage;
but it shall not succeed or be to his advantage. 18 Afterward he shall
turn to the coastlands, and shall capture many. But a commander shall
put an end to his insolence; indeed, he shall turn his insolence back
upon him. 19 Then he shall turn back toward the fortresses of his own
land, but he shall stumble and fall, and shall not be found.

1783

DANIEL 1784

Antiochus IV
20 "Then shall arise in his place one who shall send an official for the
glory of the kingdom; but within a few days he shall be broken,
though not in anger or in battle. 21 In his place shall arise a
contemptible person on whom royal majesty had not been conferred;
he shall come in without warning and obtain the kingdom through
intrigue. 22 Armies shall be utterly swept away and broken before him,
and the prince of the covenant as well. 23 And after an alliance is made
with him, he shall act deceitfully and become strong with a small party.
24 Without warning he shall come into the richest parts of the province
and do what none of his predecessors had ever done, lavishing
plunder, spoil, and wealth on them. He shall devise plans against
strongholds, but only for a time. 25 He shall stir up his power and
determination against the king of the south with a great army, and the
king of the south shall wage war with a much greater and stronger
army. But he shall not succeed, for plots shall be devised against him 26
by those who eat of the royal rations. They shall break him, his army
shall be swept away, and many shall fall slain. 27 The two kings, their
minds bent on evil, shall sit at one table and exchange lies. But it shall
not succeed, for there remains an end at the time appointed. 28 He
shall return to his land with great wealth, but his heart shall be set
against the holy covenant. He shall work his will, and return to his own
land.
Attack against the Jews
29 "At the time appointed he shall return and come into the south, but
this time it shall not be as it was before. 30 For ships of Kittim shall
come against him, and he shall lose heart and withdraw. He shall be
enraged and take action against the holy covenant. He shall turn back
and pay heed to those who forsake the holy covenant. 31 Forces sent by
him shall occupy and profane the temple and fortress. They shall
abolish the regular burnt offering and set up the abomination that
makes desolate. 32 He shall seduce with intrigue those who violate the
covenant; but the people who are loyal to their God shall stand firm
and take action. 33 The wise among the people shall give
understanding to many; for some days, however, they shall fall by

1784

DANIEL 1785

sword and flame, and suffer captivity and plunder. 34 When they fall
victim, they shall receive a little help, and many shall join them
insincerely. 35 Some of the wise shall fall, so that they may be refined,
purified, and cleansed, until the time of the end, for there is still an
interval until the time appointed.
36 "The king shall act as he pleases. He shall exalt himself and consider
himself greater than any god, and shall speak horrendous things
against the God of gods. He shall prosper until the period of wrath is
completed, for what is determined shall be done. 37 He shall pay no
respect to the gods of his ancestors, or to the one beloved by women;
he shall pay no respect to any other god, for he shall consider himself
greater than all. 38 He shall honor the god of fortresses instead of
these; a god whom his ancestors did not know he shall honor with gold
and silver, with precious stones and costly gifts. 39 He shall deal with
the strongest fortresses by the help of a foreign god. Those who
acknowledge him he shall make more wealthy, and shall appoint them
as rulers over many, and shall distribute the land for a price.
The end-time
40 "At the time of the end the king of the south shall attack him. But
the king of the north shall rush upon him like a whirlwind, with
chariots and horsemen, and with many ships. He shall advance against
countries and pass through like a flood. 41 He shall come into the
beautiful land, and tens of thousands shall fall victim, but Edom and
Moab and the main part of the Ammonites shall escape from his
power. 42 He shall stretch out his hand against the countries, and the
land of Egypt shall not escape. 43 He shall become ruler of the
treasures of gold and of silver, and all the riches of Egypt; and the
Libyans and the Ethiopians shall follow in his train. 44 But reports from
the east and the north shall alarm him, and he shall go out with great
fury to bring ruin and complete destruction to many. 45 He shall pitch
his palatial tents between the sea and the beautiful holy mountain. Yet
he shall come to his end, with no one to help him.

1785

DANIEL 1786

[Daniel 12]
Michael's victory
1 "At that time Michael, the great prince, the protector of your people,
shall arise. There shall be a time of anguish, such as has never occurred
since nations first came into existence. But at that time your people
shall be delivered, everyone who is found written in the book. 2 Many
of those who sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. 3 Those
who are wise shall shine like the brightness of the sky, and those who
lead many to righteousness, like the stars forever and ever. 4 But you,
Daniel, keep the words secret and the book sealed until the time of the
end. Many shall be running back and forth, and evil shall increase."
5 Then I, Daniel, looked, and two others appeared, one standing on
this bank of the stream and one on the other. 6 One of them said to
the man clothed in linen, who was upstream, "How long shall it be
until the end of these wonders?" 7 The man clothed in linen, who was
upstream, raised his right hand and his left hand toward heaven. And I
heard him swear by the one who lives forever that it would be for a
time, two times, and half a time, and that when the shattering of the
power of the holy people comes to an end, all these things would be
accomplished. 8 I heard but could not understand; so I said, "My lord,
what shall be the outcome of these things?" 9 He said, "Go your way,
Daniel, for the words are to remain secret and sealed until the time of
the end. 10 Many shall be purified, cleansed, and refined, but the
wicked shall continue to act wickedly. None of the wicked shall
understand, but those who are wise shall understand. 11 From the time
that the regular burnt offering is taken away and the abomination
that desolates is set up, there shall be one thousand two hundred
ninety days. 12 Happy are those who persevere and attain the thousand
three hundred thirty-five days. 13 But you, go your way, and rest; you
shall rise for your reward at the end of the days."

1786

The Minor Prophets
1. Hosea
2. Joel
3. Amos
4. Obadiah
5. Jonah
6. Micah
7. Nahum
8. Habakkuk
9. Zephaniah
10. Haggai
11. Zechariah
12. Malachi

HOSEA 1787

HOSEA
Introduction
The book of Hosea stands first in that part of the latter prophets called
the Book of the Twelve, also known as the minor prophets because of
their relative brevity in comparison with Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel.
Along with his contemporary Amos, Hosea was the first of the "writing
prophets," those prophets whose speeches were collected and edited
as literary documents.
The book consists primarily of speeches critiquing the political, social,
and, above all, religious life of the Northern Kingdom, Israel, in the
final days before its conquest and destruction by the Assyrians in 722
BCE. Hosea refers to Israel under the titles of "Ephraim," its largest
tribe, and "Samaria," its capital. 'Ephraim' was the name for the region
surrounding Samaria. Though often used as a general term for the
Northern Kingdom, its use here and Hosea's preference for it (4.16ff.)
over Israel in the rest of the book could reflect a changed political
situation. Israel gradually lost its territory in Transjordan, Galilee, and
Jezreel in this period; in the end Ephraim was all that remained. Over
the course of three decades (ca. 750-720 BCE), Hosea interpreted the
unfolding disaster as a divine punishment — the Assyrians were merely
God's tool — for violation of the exclusive demands of the Lord. With
frequent allusions to Israelite historical traditions, Hosea portrayed
Israel's entire history as a spiritual decline from an ideal time, its
"youth" in the period of Moses (2.25; 11.1).
Hosea is best known for his metaphors, drawn from the natural world,
agriculture, and, especially, kinship structures: Israel as the LORD's wife,
Israel as the LORD's son. These familial metaphors are introduced in two
narrative sections about the prophet's own life at the beginning of the
book (1.2-2.1; 3.1-5). The prophet's personal life is presented as a
paradigm of the relationship between the Lord and Israel (2.25; 11.1).
1787

HOSEA 1788

Not all aspects of Hosea's life are clear, and it remains debatable
whether one can deduces actual biographical facts from the
descriptions in chs 1-3. But insofar as these chapters construct a
biographical story for prophetic purposes, it can best be reconstructed
that Hosea deals with Gomer as the Lord deals with Israel. Gomer is "a
wife of whoredom," best understood as "a promiscuous woman." She
bore three children, of whom Hosea was presumably not the father
(2.4-5). After a period of marital separation, Hosea took her back (3.15). In a similar way, Israel, the LORD's unfaithful wife, will be separated
from her husband and home but, just as Hosea bough back Gomer
(3.2), the Lord will restore Israel. Hosea's images of Israel's sexual
misconduct may be more than symbolic (e.g., 4.13-19; 9.1). Canaanite
religious practice may have included sexual rites in the imitation of the
gods, who, presumably, generated terrestrial fertility through sexual
intercourse.
Hosea began his career in the final days of Jeroboam II (1.1), whose
reign capped a century of political stability and economic prosperity in
the Northern Kingdom under the Jehu dynasty. Jeroboam died in 747
BCE about the time that, in Assyria, Tiglath-pileser III came to power
(745 BCE) and initiated a program of imperial expansion. A prolonged
national crisis ensued, which ended with the demise of the Northern
Kingdom. Israel floundered under the Assyrian onslaught: Of the six
kings who reigned in the next two decades, four were assassinated as
the nation veered between appeasement, at the cost of heavy tribute,
and rebellion, seeking futile alliances with Syria and Egypt. We cannot
be sure when Hosea's prophetic career ended, though his oracles
appear to allude to events right up to the Assyrian siege of Samaria in
722 BCE (13.10-11,16).
During this national crisis, Hosea issued an unrelenting critique of
existing political and religious institutions. Through dynastic kingship,
political alliances with other nations, and above all, illicit religious
practices, Israel had violated the divine claim upon it, forged in the
time of Moses, for exclusive dependence upon and worship of the
Lord. As divine punishment, Israel would be stripped of political and
religious institutions too corrupts to be reformed and its land left

1788

HOSEA 1789

desolate and barren. Israel would, in essence, find itself again in the
wilderness.
The severity of the prophetic critique, however, is juxtaposed with the
language of divine longing and compassion (11.1-11; 13.4-7). In the short
term, Hosea presented the disintegration of the northern state as
inevitable. Drawing on a pattern discerned in Israel's sacred traditions,
Hosea ultimately offered hope. In this new wilderness, as in the Sinai
desert, Israel would recognize its dependence on the Lord and be
restored to a harmonious state with God, and with the natural world
(2.14-23).
After the destruction of Samaria, Hosea's words were preserved and
transmitted in Judah. Some or all of the references to Judah may have
been added in this era as Hosea's words were reinterpreted to address
an analogous situation there (e.g., 1.7; 3.5; 11.12). At the same time, it is
possible that Hosea himself, through a northern prophet, addressed
Judah as well.
The book has two major sections, which appear to be roughly
chronological. Chapters 1-3 contain the material about Hosea's
marriage and can be understood against the background of the last
days of Jeroboam III, since 1.4 announces the demise of the Jehu
dynasty of which Jeroboam was the final ruler. The second major
section, chs 4-14, consists entirely of prophetic speeches that seem to
allude to the chaotic days following the demise of the house of Jehu
and the prolonged Assyria crisis. Boundaries between individual speech
units in this second section are difficult to discern. It seems to fall into
two part (chs 4-11; 12-14), rhetorically couched as legal indictments of
Israel for breach of covenant (4.1; 12.2), and ending with images of
restoration (11.1-11; 14.1-7).

1789

HOSEA 1790

[Hosea 1]
Superscription
1 The word of the LORD that came to Hosea son of Beeri, in the days of
Kings Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah of Judah, and in the days of
King Jeroboam son of Joash of Israel.
Hosea's family life as a symbolic vehicle for divine communication;
Hosea's marriage to Gomer, and the birth, naming, and renaming of
their children as prophetic signs
2 When the LORD first spoke through Hosea, the LORD said to Hosea,
"Go, take for yourself a wife of whoredom and have children of
whoredom, for the land commits great whoredom by forsaking the
LORD." 3 So he went and took Gomer daughter of Diblaim, and she
conceived and bore him a son.
4 And the LORD said to him, "Name him Jezreel; for in a little while I
will punish the house of Jehu for the blood of Jezreel, and I will put an
end to the kingdom of the house of Israel. 5 On that day I will break
the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel."
6 She conceived again and bore a daughter. Then the LORD said to him,
"Name her Lo-ruhamah, for I will no longer have pity on the house of
Israel or forgive them. 7 But I will have pity on the house of Judah, and
I will save them by the LORD their God; I will not save them by bow, or
by sword, or by war, or by horses, or by horsemen."
8 When she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, she conceived and bore a son. 9
Then the LORD said, "Name him Lo-ammi, for you are not my people
and I am not your God."
10 Yet the number of the people of Israel shall be like the sand of the
sea, which can be neither measured nor numbered; and in the place
where it was said to them, "You are not my people," it shall be said to
them, "Children of the living God." 11 The people of Judah and the
people of Israel shall be gathered together, and they shall appoint for

1790

HOSEA 1791

themselves one head; and they shall take possession of the land, for
great shall be the day of Jezreel.
[Hosea 2]
A prophetic speech based on the preceding sign-acts
1 Say to your brother, Ammi, and to your sister, Ruhamah.
Israel's Infidelity, Punishment, and Redemption
2 Plead with your mother, plead —
for she is not my wife,
and I am not her husband —
that she put away her whoring from her face,
and her adultery from between her breasts,
3 or I will strip her naked
and expose her as in the day she was born,
and make her like a wilderness,
and turn her into a parched land,
and kill her with thirst.
4 Upon her children also I will have no pity,
because they are children of whoredom.
5 For their mother has played the whore;
she who conceived them has acted shamefully.
For she said, "I will go after my lovers;
they give me my bread and my water,
my wool and my flax, my oil and my drink."
6 Therefore I will hedge up her way with thorns;
and I will build a wall against her,
so that she cannot find her paths.
7 She shall pursue her lovers,
but not overtake them;
and she shall seek them,
but shall not find them.
Then she shall say, "I will go
and return to my first husband,
for it was better with me then than now."

1791

HOSEA 1792

8 She did not know
that it was I who gave her
the grain, the wine, and the oil,
and who lavished upon her silver
and gold that they used for Baal.
9 Therefore I will take back
my grain in its time,
and my wine in its season;
and I will take away my wool and my flax,
which were to cover her nakedness.
10 Now I will uncover her shame
in the sight of her lovers,
and no one shall rescue her out of my hand.
11 I will put an end to all her mirth,
her festivals, her new moons, her sabbaths,
and all her appointed festivals.
12 I will lay waste her vines and her fig trees,
of which she said,
"These are my pay,
which my lovers have given me."
I will make them a forest,
and the wild animals shall devour them.
13 I will punish her for the festival days of the Baals,
when she offered incense to them
and decked herself with her ring and jewelry,
and went after her lovers,
and forgot me, says the LORD.
14 Therefore, I will now allure her,
and bring her into the wilderness,
and speak tenderly to her.
15 From there I will give her her vineyards,
and make the Valley of Achor a door of hope.
There she shall respond as in the days of her youth,
as at the time when she came out of the land of Egypt.
16 On that day, says the LORD, you will call me, "My husband," and no
longer will you call me, "My Baal." 17 For I will remove the names of
the Baals from her mouth, and they shall be mentioned by name no

1792

HOSEA 1793

more. 18 I will make for you a covenant on that day with the wild
animals, the birds of the air, and the creeping things of the ground;
and I will abolish the bow, the sword, and war from the land; and I will
make you lie down in safety. 19 And I will take you for my wife forever;
I will take you for my wife in righteousness and in justice, in steadfast
love, and in mercy. 20 I will take you for my wife in faithfulness; and
you shall know the LORD.
21 On that day I will answer, says the LORD,
I will answer the heavens
and they shall answer the earth;
22 and the earth shall answer the grain, the wine, and the oil,
and they shall answer Jezreel;
23
and I will sow him for myself in the land.
And I will have pity on Lo-ruhamah,
and I will say to Lo-ammi, "You are my people";
and he shall say, "You are my God."
[Hosea 3]
The restoration of Hosea's marriage
1 The LORD said to me again, "Go, love a woman who has a lover and is
an adulteress, just as the LORD loves the people of Israel, though they
turn to other gods and love raisin cakes." 2 So I bought her for fifteen
shekels of silver and a homer of barley and a measure of wine. 3 And I
said to her, "You must remain as mine for many days; you shall not
play the whore, you shall not have intercourse with a man, nor I with
you." 4 For the Israelites shall remain many days without king or
prince, without sacrifice or pillar, without ephod or teraphim. 5
Afterward the Israelites shall return and seek the LORD their God, and
David their king; they shall come in awe to the LORD and to his
goodness in the latter days.

1793

HOSEA 1794

[Hosea 4]
The prophetic speeches of Hosea indict Israel for unfaithfulness and
announce the divine judgment, while offering hope of eventual
restoration
1 Hear the word of the LORD, O people of Israel;
for the LORD has an indictment against the inhabitants
of the land.
There is no faithfulness or loyalty,
and no knowledge of God in the land.
2 Swearing, lying, and murder,
and stealing and adultery break out;
bloodshed follows bloodshed.
3 Therefore the land mourns,
and all who live in it languish;
together with the wild animals
and the birds of the air,
even the fish of the sea are perishing.
An indictment of corrupt religious practices
4 Yet let no one contend,
and let none accuse,
for with you is my contention, O priest.
5 You shall stumble by day;
the prophet also shall stumble with you by night,
and I will destroy your mother.
6 My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge;
because you have rejected knowledge,
I reject you from being a priest to me.
And since you have forgotten the law of your God,
I also will forget your children.
7 The more they increased,
the more they sinned against me;
they changed their glory into shame.
8 They feed on the sin of my people;
they are greedy for their iniquity.

1794

HOSEA 1795

9 And it shall be like people, like priest;
I will punish them for their ways,
and repay them for their deeds.
10 They shall eat, but not be satisfied;
they shall play the whore, but not multiply;
because they have forsaken the LORD
to devote themselves to 11 whoredom.
Wine and new wine
take away the understanding.
12 My people consult a piece of wood,
and their divining rod gives them oracles.
For a spirit of whoredom has led them astray,
and they have played the whore, forsaking their God.
13 They sacrifice on the tops of the mountains,
and make offerings upon the hills,
under oak, poplar, and terebinth,
because their shade is good.
Therefore your daughters play the whore,
and your daughters-in-law commit adultery.
14 I will not punish your daughters when they play the whore,
nor your daughters-in-law when they commit adultery;
for the men themselves go aside with whores,
and sacrifice with temple prostitutes;
thus a people without understanding comes to ruin.
15 Though you play the whore, O Israel,
do not let Judah become guilty.
Do not enter into Gilgal,
or go up to Beth-aven,
and do not swear, "As the LORD lives."
16 Like a stubborn heifer,
Israel is stubborn;
can the LORD now feed them
like a lamb in a broad pasture?

1795

HOSEA 1796

17 Ephraim is joined to idols —
let him alone.
18 When their drinking is ended, they indulge in sexual orgies;
they love lewdness more than their glory.
19 A wind has wrapped them in its wings,
and they shall be ashamed because of their altars.
[Hosea 5]
The people do not know the Lord
1 Hear this, O priests!
Give heed, O house of Israel!
Listen, O house of the king!
For the judgment pertains to you;
for you have been a snare at Mizpah,
and a net spread upon Tabor,
2 and a pit dug deep in Shittim;
but I will punish all of them.
3 I know Ephraim,
and Israel is not hidden from me;
for now, O Ephraim, you have played the whore;
Israel is defiled.
4 Their deeds do not permit them
to return to their God.
For the spirit of whoredom is within them,
and they do not know the LORD.
5 Israel's pride testifies against him;
Ephraim stumbles in his guilt;
Judah also stumbles with them.
6 With their flocks and herds they shall go
to seek the LORD,
but they will not find him;
he has withdrawn from them.
7 They have dealt faithlessly with the LORD;
for they have borne illegitimate children.
Now the new moon shall devour them along with their fields.

1796

HOSEA 1797

8 Blow the horn in Gibeah,
the trumpet in Ramah.
Sound the alarm at Beth-aven;
look behind you, Benjamin!
9 Ephraim shall become a desolation
in the day of punishment;
among the tribes of Israel
I declare what is sure.
10 The princes of Judah have become
like those who remove the landmark;
on them I will pour out
my wrath like water.
11 Ephraim is oppressed, crushed in judgment,
because he was determined to go after vanity.
12 Therefore I am like maggots to Ephraim,
and like rottenness to the house of Judah.
13 When Ephraim saw his sickness,
and Judah his wound,
then Ephraim went to Assyria,
and sent to the great king.
But he is not able to cure you
or heal your wound.
14 For I will be like a lion to Ephraim,
and like a young lion to the house of Judah.
I myself will tear and go away;
I will carry off, and no one shall rescue.
15 I will return again to my place
until they acknowledge their guilt and seek my face.
In their distress they will beg my favor:
[Hosea 6]
1 "Come, let us return to the LORD;
for it is he who has torn, and he will heal us;
he has struck down, and he will bind us up.
2 After two days he will revive us;
on the third day he will raise us up,
that we may live before him.

1797

HOSEA 1798

3 Let us know, let us press on to know the LORD;
his appearing is as sure as the dawn;
he will come to us like the showers,
like the spring rains that water the earth."
4 What shall I do with you, O Ephraim?
What shall I do with you, O Judah?
Your love is like a morning cloud,
like the dew that goes away early.
5 Therefore I have hewn them by the prophets,
I have killed them by the words of my mouth,
and my judgment goes forth as the light.
6 For I desire steadfast love and not sacrifice,
the knowledge of God rather than burnt offerings.
An unholy gazetteer
7 But at Adam they transgressed the covenant;
there they dealt faithlessly with me.
8 Gilead is a city of evildoers,
tracked with blood.
9 As robbers lie in wait for someone,
so the priests are banded together;
they murder on the road to Shechem,
they commit a monstrous crime.
10 In the house of Israel I have seen a horrible thing;
Ephraim's whoredom is there, Israel is defiled.
11 For you also, O Judah, a harvest is appointed.

1798

HOSEA 1799

A corrupt people and government
When I would restore the fortunes of my people,
[Hosea 7]
1 when I would heal Israel,
the corruption of Ephraim is revealed,
and the wicked deeds of Samaria;
for they deal falsely,
the thief breaks in,
and the bandits raid outside.
2 But they do not consider
that I remember all their wickedness.
Now their deeds surround them,
they are before my face.
3 By their wickedness they make the king glad,
and the officials by their treachery.
4 They are all adulterers;
they are like a heated oven,
whose baker does not need to stir the fire,
from the kneading of the dough until it is leavened.
5 On the day of our king the officials
became sick with the heat of wine;
he stretched out his hand with mockers.
6 For they are kindled like an oven, their heart burns within them;
all night their anger smolders;
in the morning it blazes like a flaming fire.
7 All of them are hot as an oven,
and they devour their rulers.
All their kings have fallen;
none of them calls upon me.
Mixing, religious and political, is bad
8 Ephraim mixes himself with the peoples;
Ephraim is a cake not turned.

1799

HOSEA 1800

9 Foreigners devour his strength,
but he does not know it;
gray hairs are sprinkled upon him,
but he does not know it.
10 Israel's pride testifies against him;
yet they do not return to the LORD their God,
or seek him, for all this.
11 Ephraim has become like a dove,
silly and without sense;
they call upon Egypt, they go to Assyria.
12 As they go, I will cast my net over them;
I will bring them down like birds of the air;
I will discipline them according to the report made to their
assembly.
13 Woe to them, for they have strayed from me!
Destruction to them, for they have rebelled against me!
I would redeem them,
but they speak lies against me.
14 They do not cry to me from the heart,
but they wail upon their beds;
they gash themselves for grain and wine;
they rebel against me.
15 It was I who trained and strengthened their arms,
yet they plot evil against me.
16 They turn to that which does not profit;
they have become like a defective bow;
their officials shall fall by the sword
because of the rage of their tongue.
So much for their babbling in the land of Egypt.

1800

HOSEA 1801

[Hosea 8]
For the crime of assimilating foreign political models and religious
practices, the punishment is foreign domination
1 Set the trumpet to your lips!
One like a vulture is over the house of the LORD,
because they have broken my covenant,
and transgressed my law.
2 Israel cries to me,
"My God, we — Israel — know you!"
3 Israel has spurned the good;
the enemy shall pursue him.
4 They made kings, but not through me;
they set up princes, but without my knowledge.
With their silver and gold they made idols
for their own destruction.
5 Your calf is rejected, O Samaria.
My anger burns against them.
How long will they be incapable of innocence?
6
For it is from Israel,
an artisan made it;
it is not God.
The calf of Samaria
shall be broken to pieces.
7 For they sow the wind,
and they shall reap the whirlwind.
The standing grain has no heads,
it shall yield no meal;
if it were to yield,
foreigners would devour it.
8 Israel is swallowed up;
now they are among the nations
as a useless vessel.
9 For they have gone up to Assyria,
a wild ass wandering alone;
Ephraim has bargained for lovers.

1801

HOSEA 1802

10 Though they bargain with the nations,
I will now gather them up.
They shall soon writhe
under the burden of kings and princes.
11 When Ephraim multiplied altars to expiate sin,
they became to him altars for sinning.
12 Though I write for him the multitude of my instructions,
they are regarded as a strange thing.
13 Though they offer choice sacrifices,
though they eat flesh,
the LORD does not accept them.
Now he will remember their iniquity,
and punish their sins;
they shall return to Egypt.
14 Israel has forgotten his Maker,
and built palaces;
and Judah has multiplied fortified cities;
but I will send a fire upon his cities,
and it shall devour his strongholds.
[Hosea 9]
Israel's festivals are condemned
1 Do not rejoice, O Israel!
Do not exult as other nations do;
for you have played the whore, departing from your God.
You have loved a prostitute's pay
on all threshing floors.
2 Threshing floor and wine vat shall not feed them,
and the new wine shall fail them.
3 They shall not remain in the land of the LORD;
but Ephraim shall return to Egypt,
and in Assyria they shall eat unclean food.

1802

HOSEA 1803

4 They shall not pour drink offerings of wine to the LORD,
and their sacrifices shall not please him.
Such sacrifices shall be like mourners' bread;
all who eat of it shall be defiled;
for their bread shall be for their hunger only;
it shall not come to the house of the LORD.
5 What will you do on the day of appointed festival,
and on the day of the festival of the LORD?
6 For even if they escape destruction,
Egypt shall gather them,
Memphis shall bury them.
Nettles shall possess their precious things of silver;
thorns shall be in their tents.
A response to the prophet's critics
7 The days of punishment have come,
the days of recompense have come;
Israel cries,
"The prophet is a fool,
the man of the spirit is mad!"
Because of your great iniquity,
your hostility is great.
8 The prophet is a sentinel for my God over Ephraim,
yet a fowler's snare is on all his ways,
and hostility in the house of his God.
9 They have deeply corrupted themselves
as in the days of Gibeah;
he will remember their iniquity,
he will punish their sins.

1803

HOSEA 1804

Before and after; Israel is dessicated
10 Like grapes in the wilderness,
I found Israel.
Like the first fruit on the fig tree,
in its first season,
I saw your ancestors.
But they came to Baal-peor,
and consecrated themselves to a thing of shame,
and became detestable like the thing they loved.
11 Ephraim's glory shall fly away like a bird —
no birth, no pregnancy, no conception!
12 Even if they bring up children,
I will bereave them until no one is left.
Woe to them indeed
when I depart from them!
13 Once I saw Ephraim as a young palm planted in a lovely meadow,
but now Ephraim must lead out his children for slaughter.
14 Give them, O LORD —
what will you give?
Give them a miscarrying womb
and dry breasts.
15 Every evil of theirs began at Gilgal;
there I came to hate them.
Because of the wickedness of their deeds
I will drive them out of my house.
I will love them no more;
all their officials are rebels.
16 Ephraim is stricken,
their root is dried up,
they shall bear no fruit.
Even though they give birth,
I will kill the cherished offspring of their womb.
17 Because they have not listened to him,
my God will reject them;
they shall become wanderers among the nations.

1804

HOSEA 1805

[Hosea 10]
Israel, a luxuriant vine, is now overrun with thorns
1 Israel is a luxuriant vine
that yields its fruit.
The more his fruit increased
the more altars he built;
as his country improved,
he improved his pillars.
2 Their heart is false;
now they must bear their guilt.
The LORD will break down their altars,
and destroy their pillars.
3 For now they will say:
"We have no king,
for we do not fear the LORD,
and a king — what could he do for us?"
4 They utter mere words;
with empty oaths they make covenants;
so litigation springs up like poisonous weeds
in the furrows of the field.
5 The inhabitants of Samaria tremble
for the calf of Beth-aven.
Its people shall mourn for it,
and its idolatrous priests shall wail over it,
over its glory that has departed from it.
6 The thing itself shall be carried to Assyria
as tribute to the great king.
Ephraim shall be put to shame,
and Israel shall be ashamed of his idol.

1805

HOSEA 1806

7 Samaria's king shall perish
like a chip on the face of the waters.
8 The high places of Aven, the sin of Israel,
shall be destroyed.
Thorn and thistle shall grow up
on their altars.
They shall say to the mountains, Cover us,
and to the hills, Fall on us.
9 Since the days of Gibeah you have sinned, O Israel;
there they have continued.
Shall not war overtake them in Gibeah?
10 I will come against the wayward people to punish them;
and nations shall be gathered against them
when they are punished for their double iniquity.
Heifer Israel now plows wickedness
11 Ephraim was a trained heifer
that loved to thresh,
and I spared her fair neck;
but I will make Ephraim break the ground;
Judah must plow;
Jacob must harrow for himself.
12 Sow for yourselves righteousness;
reap steadfast love;
break up your fallow ground;
for it is time to seek the LORD,
that he may come and rain righteousness upon you.
13 You have plowed wickedness,
you have reaped injustice,
you have eaten the fruit of lies.
Because you have trusted in your power
and in the multitude of your warriors,

1806

HOSEA 1807

14 therefore the tumult of war shall rise against your people,
and all your fortresses shall be destroyed,
as Shalman destroyed Beth-arbel on the day of battle
when mothers were dashed in pieces with their children.
15 Thus it shall be done to you, O Bethel,
because of your great wickedness.
At dawn the king of Israel
shall be utterly cut off.
[Hosea 11]
Israel as God's wayward child
1 When Israel was a child, I loved him,
and out of Egypt I called my son.
2 The more I called them,
the more they went from me;
they kept sacrificing to the Baals,
and offering incense to idols.
3 Yet it was I who taught Ephraim to walk,
I took them up in my arms;
but they did not know that I healed them.
4 I led them with cords of human kindness,
with bands of love.
I was to them like those
who lift infants to their cheeks.
I bent down to them and fed them.
5 They shall return to the land of Egypt,
and Assyria shall be their king,
because they have refused to return to me.
6 The sword rages in their cities,
it consumes their oracle-priests,
and devours because of their schemes.
7 My people are bent on turning away from me.
To the Most High they call,
but he does not raise them up at all.

1807

HOSEA 1808

8 How can I give you up, Ephraim?
How can I hand you over, O Israel?
How can I make you like Admah?
How can I treat you like Zeboiim?
My heart recoils within me;
my compassion grows warm and tender.
9 I will not execute my fierce anger;
I will not again destroy Ephraim;
for I am God and no mortal,
the Holy One in your midst,
and I will not come in wrath.
10 They shall go after the LORD,
who roars like a lion;
when he roars,
his children shall come trembling from the west.
11 They shall come trembling like birds from Egypt,
and like doves from the land of Assyria;
and I will return them to their homes, says the LORD.
The futility of foreign alliances
12 Ephraim has surrounded me with lies,
and the house of Israel with deceit;
but Judah still walks with God,
and is faithful to the Holy One.
[Hosea 12]
1 Ephraim herds the wind,
and pursues the east wind all day long;
they multiply falsehood and violence;
they make a treaty with Assyria,
and oil is carried to Egypt.

1808

HOSEA 1809

Rebellion and restoration; a divine lawsuit against Israel, which mixes
historical perspectives with contemporary critique
2 The LORD has an indictment against Judah,
and will punish Jacob according to his ways,
and repay him according to his deeds.
3 In the womb he tried to supplant his brother,
and in his manhood he strove with God.
4 He strove with the angel and prevailed,
he wept and sought his favor;
he met him at Bethel,
and there he spoke with him.
5 The LORD the God of hosts,
the LORD is his name!
6 But as for you, return to your God,
hold fast to love and justice,
and wait continually for your God.
7 A trader, in whose hands are false balances,
he loves to oppress.
8 Ephraim has said, "Ah, I am rich,
I have gained wealth for myself;
in all of my gain
no offense has been found in me
that would be sin."
9 I am the LORD your God
from the land of Egypt;
I will make you live in tents again,
as in the days of the appointed festival.
10 I spoke to the prophets;
it was I who multiplied visions,
and through the prophets I will bring destruction.
11 In Gilead there is iniquity,
they shall surely come to nothing.
In Gilgal they sacrifice bulls,
so their altars shall be like stone heaps
on the furrows of the field.

1809

HOSEA 1810

12 Jacob fled to the land of Aram,
there Israel served for a wife,
and for a wife he guarded sheep.
13 By a prophet the LORD brought Israel up from Egypt,
and by a prophet he was guarded.
14 Ephraim has given bitter offense,
so his Lord will bring his crimes down on him
and pay him back for his insults.
[Hosea 13]
1 When Ephraim spoke, there was trembling;
he was exalted in Israel;
but he incurred guilt through Baal and died.
2 And now they keep on sinning
and make a cast image for themselves,
idols of silver made according to their understanding,
all of them the work of artisans.
"Sacrifice to these," they say.
People are kissing calves!
3 Therefore they shall be like the morning mist
or like the dew that goes away early,
like chaff that swirls from the threshing floor
or like smoke from a window.
4 Yet I have been the LORD your God
ever since the land of Egypt;
you know no God but me,
and besides me there is no savior.
5 It was I who fed you in the wilderness,
in the land of drought.
6 When I fed them, they were satisfied;
they were satisfied, and their heart was proud;
therefore they forgot me.
7 So I will become like a lion to them,
like a leopard I will lurk beside the way.

1810

HOSEA 1811

8 I will fall upon them like a bear robbed of her cubs,
and will tear open the covering of their heart;
there I will devour them like a lion,
as a wild animal would mangle them.
9 I will destroy you, O Israel;
who can help you?
10 Where now is your king, that he may save you?
Where in all your cities are your rulers,
of whom you said,
"Give me a king and rulers"?
11 I gave you a king in my anger,
and I took him away in my wrath.
12 Ephraim's iniquity is bound up;
his sin is kept in store.
13 The pangs of childbirth come for him,
but he is an unwise son;
for at the proper time he does not present himself
at the mouth of the womb.
14 Shall I ransom them from the power of Sheol?
Shall I redeem them from Death?
O Death, where are your plagues?
O Sheol, where is your destruction?
Compassion is hidden from my eyes.
15 Although he may flourish among rushes,
the east wind shall come, a blast from the LORD,
rising from the wilderness;
and his fountain shall dry up,
his spring shall be parched.
It shall strip his treasury
of every precious thing.

1811

HOSEA 1812

16 Samaria shall bear her guilt,
because she has rebelled against her God;
they shall fall by the sword,
their little ones shall be dashed in pieces,
and their pregnant women ripped open.
[Hosea 14]
A final plea for repentance and a vision of restoration
1 Return, O Israel, to the LORD your God,
for you have stumbled because of your iniquity.
2 Take words with you
and return to the LORD;
say to him,
"Take away all guilt;
accept that which is good,
and we will offer
the fruit of our lips.
3 Assyria shall not save us;
we will not ride upon horses;
we will say no more, 'Our God,'
to the work of our hands.
In you the orphan finds mercy."
4 I will heal their disloyalty;
I will love them freely,
for my anger has turned from them.
5 I will be like the dew to Israel;
he shall blossom like the lily,
he shall strike root like the forests of Lebanon.
6 His shoots shall spread out;
his beauty shall be like the olive tree,
and his fragrance like that of Lebanon.
7 They shall again live beneath my shadow,
they shall flourish as a garden;
they shall blossom like the vine,
their fragrance shall be like the wine of Lebanon.

1812

HOSEA 1813

8 O Ephraim, what have I to do with idols?
It is I who answer and look after you.
I am like an evergreen cypress;
your faithfulness comes from me.
9 Those who are wise understand these things;
those who are discerning know them.
For the ways of the LORD are right,
and the upright walk in them,
but transgressors stumble in them.

1813

JOEL 1814

JOEL
Introduction
Of the prophet Joel himself nothing is known except that he was the
son of Pethuel (1.1). From his book it appears that he lived in Judah
during the Persian period (539-331 BCE). Thus the book's placement
between Hosea and Amos among the Minor Prophets is not
chronological and is apparently based on thematic and verbal
correspondences between the end of Joel and the beginning of Amos.
Joel 3.16a and Amos 1.2a are identical, and the final chapter of Joel and
the initial chapter of Amos contain oracles against Tyre and Philistia.
Joel is not only acquainted with the Temple at Jerusalem, but is so
much interested in its priesthood and services that, like Haggai and
Zechariah, he can be considered a "cultic prophet," that is, a prophet
who could exercise his ministry within the life of the Temple, even
using liturgical forms, and whose message may have been transmitted
through priestly circles. As such, Joel helps to mark a notable change in
prophecy in the Hebrew Bible. Taking the characteristic forms of
classical prophecy, he expands their apocalyptic and liturgical
dimensions.
The dates of Joel's career cannot be determined with precision. The
majority of historical references in the book, the absence of any
mention of the Assyrians or Babylonians, and the heavy borrowing
from other prophets point to the period from about 400-350 BCE.
The book has two major section, and the second builds on the first.
Joel viewed a locust plague that ravaged the country — a plague that
devastated both the human community and the natural world — as
God's judgment on the people, and he called them to repentance (1.22.27). Using this catastrophe as a dire warning, Joel went on to depict

1814

JOEL 1815

the coming of the "Day of the Lord" and its final judgments and
blessings (2.28-3.21).

[Joel 1]
Superscription
1 The word of the LORD that came to Joel son of Pethuel:
The day of the locusts; a call to lament
2 Hear this, O elders,
give ear, all inhabitants of the land!
Has such a thing happened in your days,
or in the days of your ancestors?
3 Tell your children of it,
and let your children tell their children,
and their children another generation.
4 What the cutting locust left,
the swarming locust has eaten.
What the swarming locust left,
the hopping locust has eaten,
and what the hopping locust left,
the destroying locust has eaten.
5 Wake up, you drunkards, and weep;
and wail, all you wine-drinkers,
over the sweet wine,
for it is cut off from your mouth.
6 For a nation has invaded my land,
powerful and innumerable;
its teeth are lions' teeth,
and it has the fangs of a lioness.

1815

JOEL 1816

7 It has laid waste my vines,
and splintered my fig trees;
it has stripped off their bark and thrown it down;
their branches have turned white.
8 Lament like a virgin dressed in sackcloth
for the husband of her youth.
9 The grain offering and the drink offering are cut off
from the house of the LORD.
The priests mourn,
the ministers of the LORD.
10 The fields are devastated,
the ground mourns;
for the grain is destroyed,
the wine dries up,
the oil fails.
11 Be dismayed, you farmers,
wail, you vinedressers,
over the wheat and the barley;
for the crops of the field are ruined.
12 The vine withers,
the fig tree droops.
Pomegranate, palm, and apple —
all the trees of the field are dried up;
surely, joy withers away
among the people.
13 Put on sackcloth and lament, you priests;
wail, you ministers of the altar.
Come, pass the night in sackcloth,
you ministers of my God!
Grain offering and drink offering
are withheld from the house of your God.

1816

JOEL 1817

14 Sanctify a fast,
call a solemn assembly.
Gather the elders
and all the inhabitants of the land
to the house of the LORD your God,
and cry out to the LORD.
A lament
15 Alas for the day!
For the day of the LORD is near,
and as destruction from the Almighty it comes.
16 Is not the food cut off
before our eyes,
joy and gladness
from the house of our God?
17 The seed shrivels under the clods,
the storehouses are desolate;
the granaries are ruined
because the grain has failed.
18 How the animals groan!
The herds of cattle wander about
because there is no pasture for them;
even the flocks of sheep are dazed.
19 To you, O LORD, I cry.
For fire has devoured
the pastures of the wilderness,
and flames have burned
all the trees of the field.
20 Even the wild animals cry to you
because the watercourses are dried up,
and fire has devoured
the pastures of the wilderness.

1817

JOEL 1818

[Joel 2]
The locust plague, an act of God
1 Blow the trumpet in Zion;
sound the alarm on my holy mountain!
Let all the inhabitants of the land tremble,
for the day of the LORD is coming, it is near —
2 a day of darkness and gloom,
a day of clouds and thick darkness!
Like blackness spread upon the mountains
a great and powerful army comes;
their like has never been from of old,
nor will be again after them
in ages to come.
3 Fire devours in front of them,
and behind them a flame burns.
Before them the land is like the garden of Eden,
but after them a desolate wilderness,
and nothing escapes them.
4 They have the appearance of horses,
and like war-horses they charge.
5 As with the rumbling of chariots,
they leap on the tops of the mountains,
like the crackling of a flame of fire
devouring the stubble,
like a powerful army
drawn up for battle.
6 Before them peoples are in anguish,
all faces grow pale.
7 Like warriors they charge,
like soldiers they scale the wall.
Each keeps to its own course,
they do not swerve from their paths.

1818

JOEL 1819

8 They do not jostle one another,
each keeps to its own track;
they burst through the weapons
and are not halted.
9 They leap upon the city,
they run upon the walls;
they climb up into the houses,
they enter through the windows like a thief.
10 The earth quakes before them,
the heavens tremble.
The sun and the moon are darkened,
and the stars withdraw their shining.
11 The LORD utters his voice
at the head of his army;
how vast is his host!
Numberless are those who obey his command.
Truly the day of the LORD is great;
terrible indeed — who can endure it?
A call to repent
12 Yet even now, says the LORD,
return to me with all your heart,
with fasting, with weeping, and with mourning;
13
rend your hearts and not your clothing.
Return to the LORD, your God,
for he is gracious and merciful,
slow to anger, and abounding in steadfast love,
and relents from punishing.
14 Who knows whether he will not turn and relent,
and leave a blessing behind him,
a grain offering and a drink offering
for the LORD, your God?
15 Blow the trumpet in Zion;
sanctify a fast;
call a solemn assembly;

1819

JOEL 1820

16

gather the people.
Sanctify the congregation;
assemble the aged;
gather the children,
even infants at the breast.
Let the bridegroom leave his room,
and the bride her canopy.

17 Between the vestibule and the altar
let the priests, the ministers of the LORD, weep.
Let them say, "Spare your people, O LORD,
and do not make your heritage a mockery,
a byword among the nations.
Why should it be said among the peoples,
'Where is their God?'"
An oracle of salvation
18 Then the LORD became jealous for his land,
and had pity on his people.
19 In response to his people the LORD said:
I am sending you
grain, wine, and oil,
and you will be satisfied;
and I will no more make you
a mockery among the nations.
20 I will remove the northern army far from you,
and drive it into a parched and desolate land,
its front into the eastern sea,
and its rear into the western sea;
its stench and foul smell will rise up.
Surely he has done great things!
21 Do not fear, O soil;
be glad and rejoice,
for the LORD has done great things!

1820

JOEL 1821

22 Do not fear, you animals of the field,
for the pastures of the wilderness are green;
the tree bears its fruit,
the fig tree and vine give their full yield.
23 O children of Zion, be glad
and rejoice in the LORD your God;
for he has given the early rain for your vindication,
he has poured down for you abundant rain,
the early and the later rain, as before.
24 The threshing floors shall be full of grain,
the vats shall overflow with wine and oil.
25 I will repay you for the years
that the swarming locust has eaten,
the hopper, the destroyer, and the cutter,
my great army, which I sent against you.
26 You shall eat in plenty and be satisfied,
and praise the name of the LORD your God,
who has dealt wondrously with you.
And my people shall never again be put to shame.
27 You shall know that I am in the midst of Israel,
and that I, the LORD, am your God and there is no other.
And my people shall never again be put to shame.
The Day of the Lord; the faithful are delivered
28 Then afterward
I will pour out my spirit on all flesh;
your sons and your daughters shall prophesy,
your old men shall dream dreams,
and your young men shall see visions.
29 Even on the male and female slaves,
in those days, I will pour out my spirit.

1821

JOEL 1822

30 I will show portents in the heavens and on the earth, blood and fire
and columns of smoke. 31 The sun shall be turned to darkness, and the
moon to blood, before the great and terrible day of the LORD comes. 32
Then everyone who calls on the name of the LORD shall be saved; for in
Mount Zion and in Jerusalem there shall be those who escape, as the
LORD has said, and among the survivors shall be those whom the LORD
calls.
[Joel 3]
The nations are judged
1 For then, in those days and at that time, when I restore the fortunes
of Judah and Jerusalem, 2 I will gather all the nations and bring them
down to the valley of Jehoshaphat, and I will enter into judgment with
them there, on account of my people and my heritage Israel, because
they have scattered them among the nations. They have divided my
land, 3 and cast lots for my people, and traded boys for prostitutes, and
sold girls for wine, and drunk it down.
An oracle against Phoenicia and Philistia
4 What are you to me, O Tyre and Sidon, and all the regions of
Philistia? Are you paying me back for something? If you are paying me
back, I will turn your deeds back upon your own heads swiftly and
speedily. 5 For you have taken my silver and my gold, and have carried
my rich treasures into your temples. 6 You have sold the people of
Judah and Jerusalem to the Greeks, removing them far from their own
border. 7 But now I will rouse them to leave the places to which you
have sold them, and I will turn your deeds back upon your own heads.
8 I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hand of the people
of Judah, and they will sell them to the Sabeans, to a nation far away;
for the LORD has spoken.

1822

JOEL 1823

The Lord throws down the gauntlet to the nations
9 Proclaim this among the nations:
Prepare war,
stir up the warriors.
Let all the soldiers draw near,
let them come up.
10 Beat your plowshares into swords,
and your pruning hooks into spears;
let the weakling say, "I am a warrior."
11 Come quickly,
all you nations all around,
gather yourselves there.
Bring down your warriors, O LORD.
12 Let the nations rouse themselves,
and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat;
for there I will sit to judge
all the neighboring nations.
13 Put in the sickle,
for the harvest is ripe.
Go in, tread,
for the wine press is full.
The vats overflow,
for their wickedness is great.
14 Multitudes, multitudes,
in the valley of decision!
For the day of the LORD is near
in the valley of decision.
15 The sun and the moon are darkened,
and the stars withdraw their shining.

1823

JOEL 1824

16 The LORD roars from Zion,
and utters his voice from Jerusalem,
and the heavens and the earth shake.
But the LORD is a refuge for his people,
a stronghold for the people of Israel.
17 So you shall know that I, the LORD your God,
dwell in Zion, my holy mountain.
And Jerusalem shall be holy,
and strangers shall never again pass through it.
The divine blessings
18 In that day
the mountains shall drip sweet wine,
the hills shall flow with milk,
and all the stream beds of Judah
shall flow with water;
a fountain shall come forth from the house of the LORD
and water the Wadi Shittim.
19 Egypt shall become a desolation
and Edom a desolate wilderness,
because of the violence done to the people of Judah,
in whose land they have shed innocent blood.
20 But Judah shall be inhabited forever,
and Jerusalem to all generations.
21 I will avenge their blood, and I will not clear the guilty,
for the LORD dwells in Zion.

1824

AMOS 1825

AMOS
Introduction
The book of Amos is compilation of sayings attributed to the prophet
Amos, who was active in the first half of the eighth century BCE,
during the long and peaceful reign of Jeroboam II (788-747; Am 1.1). In
this period, Israel attained a height of territorial expansion and
national prosperity never again reached. At the same time, this
prosperity led to gross inequities between urban elites and the poor.
Through manipulation of debt and credit, wealthy landowners
amassed capital and estates at the expense of small farmers. The
smallest debt served as the thin end of a wedge that lenders could use
to separate farmers from their patrimonial farms and personal liberty.
In this scene stepped Amos, a native of a small village in the Southern
Kingdom Judah, and himself a farmer and herder, probably during the
760-750 BCE. Amos denounced the society of the Northern Kingdom,
Israel, in vivid language, bitterly describing the decadent opulence,
immorality, and smug piety of usually conservative elites who
"trampled the head of the poor into the dust of the earth." Amos's
program, in contrast, called for "justice" and "righteousness" (5.7, 24;
6.12), terms that connote social inequality and concern for the
disadvantaged (Isa 5.7; Mic 6.8).
Against the background of Israelite tradition about "the Day of the
Lord," occasions celebrated from the past and eagerly anticipated in
the future when the Lord dramatically intervenes in human affairs,
Amos announced that such a day was imminent. This time, however,
the fortified palaces and temples of Israel would be leveled along with
those of Israel's rival nations (1.3-2.3) when God executed the divine
version of "justice and righteousness." Israel's covenant with God (3.2)
did not absolve it from this ethical standard, which Amos, in so many
words, universalized (9.7-8). Though Amos affirmed the special quality
1825

AMOS 1826

of God's relationship with Israel (9.8), he stressed that it entails a
special ethical responsibility (3.1). The agent of this divine punishment
would be the Assyrian army (Isa 10.5-11). The frequent references to
exile in Amos (e.g., 3.11; 6.7; 7.17) reflect a grim threat, the Assyrian
imperial practice of deporting and transplanting conquered peoples.
The book contains a variety of material. Some of Amos's sayings are
presented as messenger speech ("thus says the Lord"), others as visions
("This is what the Lord showed me"), especially in chs 7-9. Amos, in a
legal style of indictment followed by punishment ("therefore..."),
announced judgments (e.g., 1.3-2.16), delivered funeral orations (5.1-2),
and exhorted (5.6). He only rarely encouraged (see 9.11-15) in the book.
In addition to the above types of prophetic sayings, the book contains
three fragments from a hymn (4.13; 5.8-9; 9.5-6) and one narrative,
about Amos's encounter with Amaziah, priest of the Northern
Kingdom's royal sanctuary at Bethel (7.10-17).
That narrative and the superscription (1.1) yield only the portrait of the
prophet. A native of the southern state of Judah who raised livestock
and tended fruit trees, Amos prophesied to and in the northern state,
Israel. At Bethel (7.13) his bitter invective, voiced as divine word ("I
hate, I despise your festivals," 5.21) no doubt scandalized pilgrims from
Samaria, capital of the Northern Kingdom. His confrontation with
Amaziah (7.10-17) remains one of the unforgettable scenes in biblical
prophecy. Expelled from the royal sanctuary and commanded not to
prophesy there again, Amos perhaps returned to Judah where he, or
like-minded scribes, wrote down the essence of his public preaching in
substantially its present form.
Amos's prophetic career was roughly contemporaneous with that of
Hosea, though Amos probably preceded him. Chronologically, then,
Amos inaugurated the era of classical prophecy. In some ancient
manuscript traditions (the Septuagint [LXX], the ancient Greek
translation of the Hebrew Bible), the book of Amos directly follows
Hosea. The traditional arrangement of the Book of the Twelve,
however, is based not solely on chronology but often on specific verbal
similarities that link the end of one book to the beginning of the next.
Amos is linked to its predecessor Joel by identical phrases (see Joel

1826

AMOS 1827

3.16a and Am 1.2a) and to its successor Obadiah by a similar subject
(Edom in Am 9.12 and Ob 1).
The book of Amos falls into three major parts: Chs 1-2 represent a
single speech, an ethical tour of the region from the divine perspective,
which climaxes in the indictment of Israel itself; chs 3-6 are the most
variegated section and form a collection of short prophetic sayings
indicting Israel for sin and injustice; chs 7-9 contain the visions of Amos,
as well as the Amaziah narrative (7.10-17) and a final speech of comfort
(9.11-15) addressed not to Israel but to Judah. The best approach for
readers is to follow the sequence of the book itself.
The book of Amos begins and ends with references to an earthquake.
(1.1 and the images of shaking in 9.1-9). We do not know the exact year
(760 BCE has been proposed), but there is archaeological evidence of a
catastrophe. Did this earthquake, so severe that it was recalled
centuries later (Zech 14.5), offer cosmic validation of Amos's preaching?
We cannot know. Still, even today we feel the aftershocks of Amos, the
first in a brilliant succession of biblical prophets whose words, now
preserved in written form, have left their indelible stamp on later
thought about God and human history.

[Amos 1]
Superscription
1 The words of Amos, who was among the shepherds of Tekoa, which
he saw concerning Israel in the days of King Uzziah of Judah and in the
days of King Jeroboam son of Joash of Israel, two years before the
earthquake.

1827

AMOS 1828

A speech against the nations
2 And he said:
The LORD roars from Zion,
and utters his voice from Jerusalem;
the pastures of the shepherds wither,
and the top of Carmel dries up.
Against Damascus
3 Thus says the LORD:
For three transgressions of Damascus,
and for four, I will not revoke the punishment;
because they have threshed Gilead
with threshing sledges of iron.
4 So I will send a fire on the house of Hazael,
and it shall devour the strongholds of Ben-hadad.
5 I will break the gate bars of Damascus,
and cut off the inhabitants from the Valley of Aven,
and the one who holds the scepter from Beth-eden;
and the people of Aram shall go into exile to Kir,
says the LORD.
Against Philistia
6 Thus says the LORD:
For three transgressions of Gaza,
and for four, I will not revoke the punishment;
because they carried into exile entire communities,
to hand them over to Edom.
7 So I will send a fire on the wall of Gaza,
fire that shall devour its strongholds.
8 I will cut off the inhabitants from Ashdod,
and the one who holds the scepter from Ashkelon;
I will turn my hand against Ekron,
and the remnant of the Philistines shall perish,
says the Lord GOD.

1828

AMOS 1829

Against Tyre
9 Thus says the LORD:
For three transgressions of Tyre,
and for four, I will not revoke the punishment;
because they delivered entire communities over to Edom,
and did not remember the covenant of kinship.
10 So I will send a fire on the wall of Tyre,
fire that shall devour its strongholds.
Against Edom
11 Thus says the LORD:
For three transgressions of Edom,
and for four, I will not revoke the punishment;
because he pursued his brother with the sword
and cast off all pity;
he maintained his anger perpetually,
and kept his wrath forever.
12 So I will send a fire on Teman,
and it shall devour the strongholds of Bozrah.
Against Ammon
13 Thus says the LORD:
For three transgressions of the Ammonites,
and for four, I will not revoke the punishment;
because they have ripped open pregnant women in Gilead
in order to enlarge their territory.
14 So I will kindle a fire against the wall of Rabbah,
fire that shall devour its strongholds,
with shouting on the day of battle,
with a storm on the day of the whirlwind;
15 then their king shall go into exile,
he and his officials together,
says the LORD.

1829

AMOS 1830

[Amos 2]
Against Moab
1 Thus says the LORD:
For three transgressions of Moab,
and for four, I will not revoke the punishment;
because he burned to lime
the bones of the king of Edom.
2 So I will send a fire on Moab,
and it shall devour the strongholds of Kerioth,
and Moab shall die amid uproar,
amid shouting and the sound of the trumpet;
3 I will cut off the ruler from its midst,
and will kill all its officials with him,
says the LORD.
Against Judah
4 Thus says the LORD:
For three transgressions of Judah,
and for four, I will not revoke the punishment;
because they have rejected the law of the LORD,
and have not kept his statutes,
but they have been led astray by the same lies
after which their ancestors walked.
5 So I will send a fire on Judah,
and it shall devour the strongholds of Jerusalem.
Against Israel
6 Thus says the LORD:
For three transgressions of Israel,
and for four, I will not revoke the punishment;
because they sell the righteous for silver,
and the needy for a pair of sandals —

1830

AMOS 1831

7 they who trample the head of the poor into the dust of the earth,
and push the afflicted out of the way;
father and son go in to the same girl,
so that my holy name is profaned;
8 they lay themselves down beside every altar
on garments taken in pledge;
and in the house of their God they drink
wine bought with fines they imposed.
9 Yet I destroyed the Amorite before them,
whose height was like the height of cedars,
and who was as strong as oaks;
I destroyed his fruit above,
and his roots beneath.
10 Also I brought you up out of the land of Egypt,
and led you forty years in the wilderness,
to possess the land of the Amorite.
11 And I raised up some of your children to be prophets
and some of your youths to be nazirites.
Is it not indeed so, O people of Israel?
says the LORD.
12 But you made the nazirites drink wine,
and commanded the prophets,
saying, "You shall not prophesy."
13 So, I will press you down in your place,
just as a cart presses down
when it is full of sheaves.
14 Flight shall perish from the swift,
and the strong shall not retain their strength,
nor shall the mighty save their lives;
15 those who handle the bow shall not stand,
and those who are swift of foot shall not save themselves,
nor shall those who ride horses save their lives;
16 and those who are stout of heart among the mighty
shall flee away naked in that day,
says the LORD.

1831

AMOS 1832

[Amos 3]
Judgment speeches against Israel; a chosen people are held to a higher
standard
1 Hear this word that the LORD has spoken against you, O people of
Israel, against the whole family that I brought up out of the land of
Egypt:
2 You only have I known
of all the families of the earth;
therefore I will punish you
for all your iniquities.
A series of rhetorical questions
3 Do two walk together
unless they have made an appointment?
4 Does a lion roar in the forest,
when it has no prey?
Does a young lion cry out from its den,
if it has caught nothing?
5 Does a bird fall into a snare on the earth,
when there is no trap for it?
Does a snare spring up from the ground,
when it has taken nothing?
6 Is a trumpet blown in a city,
and the people are not afraid?
Does disaster befall a city,
unless the LORD has done it?
7 Surely the Lord GOD does nothing,
without revealing his secret
to his servants the prophets.
8 The lion has roared;
who will not fear?
The Lord GOD has spoken;
who can but prophesy?

1832

AMOS 1833

Neighboring nations are invited to witness the LORD's complaint
9 Proclaim to the strongholds in Ashdod,
and to the strongholds in the land of Egypt,
and say, "Assemble yourselves on Mount Samaria,
and see what great tumults are within it,
and what oppressions are in its midst."
10 They do not know how to do right, says the LORD,
those who store up violence and robbery in their strongholds.
11 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD:
An adversary shall surround the land,
and strip you of your defense;
and your strongholds shall be plundered.
12 Thus says the LORD: As the shepherd rescues from the mouth of the
lion two legs, or a piece of an ear, so shall the people of Israel who live
in Samaria be rescued, with the corner of a couch and part of a bed.
13 Hear, and testify against the house of Jacob,
says the Lord GOD, the God of hosts:
14 On the day I punish Israel for its transgressions,
I will punish the altars of Bethel,
and the horns of the altar shall be cut off
and fall to the ground.
15 I will tear down the winter house as well as the summer house;
and the houses of ivory shall perish,
and the great houses shall come to an end,
says the LORD.
[Amos 4]
Israel's luxurious excesses
1 Hear this word, you cows of Bashan
who are on Mount Samaria,
who oppress the poor, who crush the needy,
who say to their husbands, "Bring something to drink!"

1833

AMOS 1834

2 The Lord GOD has sworn by his holiness:
The time is surely coming upon you,
when they shall take you away with hooks,
even the last of you with fishhooks.
3 Through breaches in the wall you shall leave,
each one straight ahead;
and you shall be flung out into Harmon,
says the LORD.
Israel's piety is satirized
4 Come to Bethel — and transgress;
to Gilgal — and multiply transgression;
bring your sacrifices every morning,
your tithes every three days;
5 bring a thank offering of leavened bread,
and proclaim freewill offerings, publish them;
for so you love to do, O people of Israel!
says the Lord GOD.
Israel has ignored the divine warnings issued through plagues
6 I gave you cleanness of teeth in all your cities,
and lack of bread in all your places,
yet you did not return to me,
says the LORD.
7 And I also withheld the rain from you
when there were still three months to the harvest;
I would send rain on one city,
and send no rain on another city;
one field would be rained upon,
and the field on which it did not rain withered;
8 so two or three towns wandered to one town
to drink water, and were not satisfied;
yet you did not return to me,
says the LORD.

1834

AMOS 1835

9 I struck you with blight and mildew;
I laid waste your gardens and your vineyards;
the locust devoured your fig trees and your olive trees;
yet you did not return to me,
says the LORD.
10 I sent among you a pestilence after the manner of Egypt;
I killed your young men with the sword;
I carried away your horses;
and I made the stench of your camp go up into your nostrils;
yet you did not return to me,
says the LORD.
11 I overthrew some of you,
as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah,
and you were like a brand snatched from the fire;
yet you did not return to me,
says the LORD.
12 Therefore thus I will do to you, O Israel;
because I will do this to you,
prepare to meet your God, O Israel!
13 For lo, the one who forms the mountains, creates the wind,
reveals his thoughts to mortals,
makes the morning darkness,
and treads on the heights of the earth —
the LORD, the God of hosts, is his name!
[Amos 5]
Lament for Israel
1 Hear this word that I take up over you in lamentation, O house of
Israel:
2 Fallen, no more to rise,
is maiden Israel;
forsaken on her land,
with no one to raise her up.

1835

AMOS 1836

3 For thus says the Lord GOD:
The city that marched out a thousand
shall have a hundred left,
and that which marched out a hundred
shall have ten left.
A plea for repentance
4 For thus says the LORD to the house of Israel:
Seek me and live;
5
but do not seek Bethel,
and do not enter into Gilgal
or cross over to Beer-sheba;
for Gilgal shall surely go into exile,
and Bethel shall come to nothing.
6 Seek the LORD and live,
or he will break out against the house of Joseph like fire,
and it will devour Bethel, with no one to quench it.
7 Ah, you that turn justice to wormwood,
and bring righteousness to the ground!
The second doxology
8 The one who made the Pleiades and Orion,
and turns deep darkness into the morning,
and darkens the day into night,
who calls for the waters of the sea,
and pours them out on the surface of the earth,
the LORD is his name,
9 who makes destruction flash out against the strong,
so that destruction comes upon the fortress.
Amos condemns a corrupt legal system
10 They hate the one who reproves in the gate,
and they abhor the one who speaks the truth.

1836

AMOS 1837

11 Therefore because you trample on the poor
and take from them levies of grain,
you have built houses of hewn stone,
but you shall not live in them;
you have planted pleasant vineyards,
but you shall not drink their wine.
12 For I know how many are your transgressions,
and how great are your sins —
you who afflict the righteous, who take a bribe,
and push aside the needy in the gate.
13 Therefore the prudent will keep silent in such a time;
for it is an evil time.
14 Seek good and not evil,
that you may live;
and so the LORD, the God of hosts, will be with you,
just as you have said.
15 Hate evil and love good,
and establish justice in the gate;
it may be that the LORD, the God of hosts,
will be gracious to the remnant of Joseph.
16 Therefore thus says the LORD, the God of hosts, the Lord:
In all the squares there shall be wailing;
and in all the streets they shall say, "Alas! alas!"
They shall call the farmers to mourning,
and those skilled in lamentation, to wailing;
17 in all the vineyards there shall be wailing,
for I will pass through the midst of you,
says the LORD.
A series of "woe" sayings; the Day of the Lord
18 Alas for you who desire the day of the LORD!
Why do you want the day of the LORD?
It is darkness, not light;

1837

AMOS 1838

19

as if someone fled from a lion,
and was met by a bear;
or went into the house and rested a hand against the wall,
and was bitten by a snake.
20 Is not the day of the LORD darkness, not light,
and gloom with no brightness in it?
The Lord delights not in abundance of festivals and sacrifices but in
justice and righteousness
21 I hate, I despise your festivals,
and I take no delight in your solemn assemblies.
22 Even though you offer me your burnt offerings and grain offerings,
I will not accept them;
and the offerings of well-being of your fatted animals
I will not look upon.
23 Take away from me the noise of your songs;
I will not listen to the melody of your harps.
24 But let justice roll down like waters,
and righteousness like an ever-flowing stream.
25 Did you bring to me sacrifices and offerings the forty years in the
wilderness, O house of Israel? 26 You shall take up Sakkuth your king,
and Kaiwan your star-god, your images, which you made for
yourselves; 27 therefore I will take you into exile beyond Damascus,
says the LORD, whose name is the God of hosts.
[Amos 6]
An indictment of conspicuous consumption
1 Alas for those who are at ease in Zion,
and for those who feel secure on Mount Samaria,
the notables of the first of the nations,
to whom the house of Israel resorts!

1838

AMOS 1839

2 Cross over to Calneh, and see;
from there go to Hamath the great;
then go down to Gath of the Philistines.
Are you better than these kingdoms?
Or is your territory greater than their territory,
3 O you that put far away the evil day,
and bring near a reign of violence?
4 Alas for those who lie on beds of ivory,
and lounge on their couches,
and eat lambs from the flock,
and calves from the stall;
5 who sing idle songs to the sound of the harp,
and like David improvise on instruments of music;
6 who drink wine from bowls,
and anoint themselves with the finest oils,
but are not grieved over the ruin of Joseph!
7 Therefore they shall now be the first to go into exile,
and the revelry of the loungers shall pass away.
Judgment on Israel
8 The Lord GOD has sworn by himself
(says the LORD, the God of hosts):
I abhor the pride of Jacob
and hate his strongholds;
and I will deliver up the city and all that is in it.
9 If ten people remain in one house, they shall die. 10 And if a relative,
one who burns the dead, shall take up the body to bring it out of the
house, and shall say to someone in the innermost parts of the house,
"Is anyone else with you?" the answer will come, "No." Then the
relative shall say, "Hush! We must not mention the name of the LORD."
11 See, the LORD commands,
and the great house shall be shattered to bits,
and the little house to pieces.

1839

AMOS 1840

12 Do horses run on rocks?
Does one plow the sea with oxen?
But you have turned justice into poison
and the fruit of righteousness into wormwood —
13 you who rejoice in Lo-debar,
who say, "Have we not by our own strength
taken Karnaim for ourselves?"
14 Indeed, I am raising up against you a nation,
O house of Israel, says the LORD, the God of hosts,
and they shall oppress you from Lebo-hamath
to the Wadi Arabah.
[Amos 7]
The visions of Amos; a series of three visions; judgment by locusts
1 This is what the Lord GOD showed me: he was forming locusts at the
time the latter growth began to sprout (it was the latter growth after
the king's mowings). 2 When they had finished eating the grass of the
land, I said,
"O Lord GOD, forgive, I beg you!
How can Jacob stand?
He is so small!"
3 The LORD relented concerning this;
"It shall not be," said the LORD.
Judgment by fire
4 This is what the Lord GOD showed me: the Lord GOD was calling for a
shower of fire, and it devoured the great deep and was eating up the
land. 5 Then I said,
"O Lord GOD, cease, I beg you!
How can Jacob stand?
He is so small!"
6 The LORD relented concerning this;
"This also shall not be," said the Lord GOD.

1840

AMOS 1841

Israel falls short
7 This is what he showed me: the Lord was standing beside a wall built
with a plumb line, with a plumb line in his hand. 8 And the LORD said to
me, "Amos, what do you see?" And I said, "A plumb line." Then the
Lord said,
"See, I am setting a plumb line
in the midst of my people Israel;
I will never again pass them by;
9 the high places of Isaac shall be made desolate,
and the sanctuaries of Israel shall be laid waste,
and I will rise against the house of Jeroboam with the sword."
Amos and Amaziah
10 Then Amaziah, the priest of Bethel, sent to King Jeroboam of Israel,
saying, "Amos has conspired against you in the very center of the
house of Israel; the land is not able to bear all his words. 11 For thus
Amos has said,
'Jeroboam shall die by the sword,
and Israel must go into exile
away from his land.'"
12 And Amaziah said to Amos, "O seer, go, flee away to the land of
Judah, earn your bread there, and prophesy there; 13 but never again
prophesy at Bethel, for it is the king's sanctuary, and it is a temple of
the kingdom."
14 Then Amos answered Amaziah, "I am no prophet, nor a prophet's
son; but I am a herdsman, and a dresser of sycamore trees, 15 and the
LORD took me from following the flock, and the LORD said to me, 'Go,
prophesy to my people Israel.'
16 "Now therefore hear the word of the LORD.
You say, 'Do not prophesy against Israel,
and do not preach against the house of Isaac.'

1841

AMOS 1842

17 Therefore thus says the LORD:
'Your wife shall become a prostitute in the city,
and your sons and your daughters shall fall by the sword,
and your land shall be parceled out by line;
you yourself shall die in an unclean land,
and Israel shall surely go into exile away from its land.'"
[Amos 8]
Further visions and oracles; fourth vision
1 This is what the Lord GOD showed me — a basket of summer fruit. 2
He said, "Amos, what do you see?" And I said, "A basket of summer
fruit." Then the LORD said to me,
"The end has come upon my people Israel;
I will never again pass them by.
3 The songs of the temple shall become wailings in that day,"
says the Lord GOD;
"the dead bodies shall be many,
cast out in every place. Be silent!"
Judgment speeches against Israel
4 Hear this, you that trample on the needy,
and bring to ruin the poor of the land,
5 saying, "When will the new moon be over
so that we may sell grain;
and the sabbath,
so that we may offer wheat for sale?
We will make the ephah small and the shekel great,
and practice deceit with false balances,
6 buying the poor for silver
and the needy for a pair of sandals,
and selling the sweepings of the wheat."
7 The LORD has sworn by the pride of Jacob:
Surely I will never forget any of their deeds.

1842

AMOS 1843

8 Shall not the land tremble on this account,
and everyone mourn who lives in it,
and all of it rise like the Nile,
and be tossed about and sink again, like the Nile of Egypt?
9 On that day, says the Lord GOD,
I will make the sun go down at noon,
and darken the earth in broad daylight.
10 I will turn your feasts into mourning,
and all your songs into lamentation;
I will bring sackcloth on all loins,
and baldness on every head;
I will make it like the mourning for an only son,
and the end of it like a bitter day.
11 The time is surely coming, says the Lord GOD,
when I will send a famine on the land;
not a famine of bread, or a thirst for water,
but of hearing the words of the LORD.
12 They shall wander from sea to sea,
and from north to east;
they shall run to and fro, seeking the word of the LORD,
but they shall not find it.
13 In that day the beautiful young women and the young men
shall faint for thirst.
14 Those who swear by Ashimah of Samaria,
and say, "As your god lives, O Dan,"
and, "As the way of Beer-sheba lives" —
they shall fall, and never rise again.

1843

AMOS 1844

[Amos 9]
Fifth vision
1 I saw the LORD standing beside the altar, and he said:
Strike the capitals until the thresholds shake,
and shatter them on the heads of all the people;
and those who are left I will kill with the sword;
not one of them shall flee away,
not one of them shall escape.
2 Though they dig into Sheol,
from there shall my hand take them;
though they climb up to heaven,
from there I will bring them down.
3 Though they hide themselves on the top of Carmel,
from there I will search out and take them;
and though they hide from my sight at the bottom of the sea,
there I will command the sea-serpent, and it shall bite them.
4 And though they go into captivity in front of their enemies,
there I will command the sword, and it shall kill them;
and I will fix my eyes on them
for harm and not for good.
5 The Lord, GOD of hosts,
he who touches the earth and it melts,
and all who live in it mourn,
and all of it rises like the Nile,
and sinks again, like the Nile of Egypt;
6 who builds his upper chambers in the heavens,
and founds his vault upon the earth;
who calls for the waters of the sea,
and pours them out upon the surface of the earth —
the LORD is his name.

1844

AMOS 1845

Israel has no claim to special privilege
7 Are you not like the Ethiopians to me,
O people of Israel? says the LORD.
Did I not bring Israel up from the land of Egypt,
and the Philistines from Caphtor and the Arameans from Kir?
8 The eyes of the Lord GOD are upon the sinful kingdom,
and I will destroy it from the face of the earth
— except that I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob,
says the LORD.
9 For lo, I will command,
and shake the house of Israel among all the nations
as one shakes with a sieve,
but no pebble shall fall to the ground.
10 All the sinners of my people shall die by the sword,
who say, "Evil shall not overtake or meet us."
An oracle of restoration
11 On that day I will raise up
the booth of David that is fallen,
and repair its breaches,
and raise up its ruins,
and rebuild it as in the days of old;
12 in order that they may possess the remnant of Edom
and all the nations who are called by my name,
says the LORD who does this.
13 The time is surely coming, says the LORD,
when the one who plows shall overtake the one who reaps,
and the treader of grapes the one who sows the seed;
the mountains shall drip sweet wine,
and all the hills shall flow with it.
14 I will restore the fortunes of my people Israel,
and they shall rebuild the ruined cities and inhabit them;
they shall plant vineyards and drink their wine,
and they shall make gardens and eat their fruit.

1845

AMOS 1846

15 I will plant them upon their land,
and they shall never again be plucked up
out of the land that I have given them,
says the LORD your God.

1846

OBADIAH 1847

OBADIAH
Introduction
Obadiah, the briefest book in the Hebrew Bible, is located between
two eight-century prophets, Amos and Micah. Though Obadiah
contains no date formula, on the basis of its allusion to the fall of
Jerusalem (586 BCE), it probably stems from the first half of the sixth
century. Thus, its place in the sequence of Minor Prophets is not based
on chronology. It seems that thematic considerations govern its
placement following Amos: The subject of Obadiah, divine judgment
against the Edomites, can be associated with Am 9.12; the "Day of the
Lord" is a central idea for both books. Nothing is known about the
prophet Obadiah. Since the name itself means "servant of the Lord," it
could simply be an appellation (see Introduction to Malachi).
HT

TH

The book consists of poetic declamations against the Edomites, Israel's
southeastern neighbor. Many biblical passages testify to the fraternity
(Gen 25; 27; 36; Num 20.14; Deut 2.4, 8; 23.7; Am 1.11; Mal 1.2) between
these neighboring peoples, as well as their enmity (Num 20.18-21; 1 Sam
14.47; 2 Sam 8.12-14; 1 Kings 11.14.22; Am 1.11; Mal 1.3). There are oracles
against Edom throughout the prophetic corpus (Isa 21.11-12; 34; Jer 49.722; Ezek 35; Joel 3.19; Am 1.11-12; Mal 1.2-5). The strongest anti-Edomite
invective stems from the time of the exile, when the Edomites,
according to Ps 137.7; Lam 4.21; Ezek 35.5-6, abetted the Babylonian
destruction of Jerusalem (see 1 Esd 4.45 for a later exaggeration of this
theme).
Against the larger background of Edomite-Israelite hostility, Obadiah,
similar to the above exilic writings, also focuses on Edom's complicity in
the Babylonian conquest. Indeed, as indicated in the notes to the book
in the Oxford Annotated editions, Obadiah's words of judgment bear
striking similarities to this larger corpus of prophetic oracles against
Edom.
1847

OBADIAH 1848

In a book of only twenty-one verses, it is difficult and, perhaps,
unnecessary to isolate subsections. There is a slight shift in subject
matter from vv. 1-18, judgment directed against Edom, to 19-21, the
vindication of Israel, which includes repatriation of its exiles and
expansion into territories it had gradually lost to neighbors since the
eighth century.

[Obadiah 1]
Introduction; the divine judgment against Edom
1 The vision of Obadiah.
Thus says the Lord GOD concerning Edom:
We have heard a report from the LORD,
and a messenger has been sent among the nations:
"Rise up! Let us rise against it for battle!"
2 I will surely make you least among the nations;
you shall be utterly despised.
3 Your proud heart has deceived you,
you that live in the clefts of the rock,
whose dwelling is in the heights.
You say in your heart,
"Who will bring me down to the ground?"
4 Though you soar aloft like the eagle,
though your nest is set among the stars,
from there I will bring you down,
says the LORD.
A taunt against Edom
5 If thieves came to you,
if plunderers by night
— how you have been destroyed! —
would they not steal only what they wanted?
If grape-gatherers came to you,
would they not leave gleanings?

1848

OBADIAH 1849

6 How Esau has been pillaged,
his treasures searched out!
7 All your allies have deceived you,
they have driven you to the border;
your confederates have prevailed against you;
those who ate your bread have set a trap for you —
there is no understanding of it.
Doomsday for Edom
8 On that day, says the LORD,
I will destroy the wise out of Edom,
and understanding out of Mount Esau.
9 Your warriors shall be shattered, O Teman,
so that everyone from Mount Esau will be cut off.
10 For the slaughter and violence done to your brother Jacob,
shame shall cover you,
and you shall be cut off forever.
11 On the day that you stood aside,
on the day that strangers carried off his wealth,
and foreigners entered his gates
and cast lots for Jerusalem,
you too were like one of them.
An eightfold indictment of Edom
12 But you should not have gloated over your brother
on the day of his misfortune;
you should not have rejoiced over the people of Judah
on the day of their ruin;
you should not have boasted
on the day of distress.
13 You should not have entered the gate of my people
on the day of their calamity;
you should not have joined in the gloating over Judah's disaster
on the day of his calamity;
you should not have looted his goods
on the day of his calamity.

1849

OBADIAH 1850

14 You should not have stood at the crossings
to cut off his fugitives;
you should not have handed over his survivors
on the day of distress.
The Day of the Lord
15 For the day of the LORD is near against all the nations.
As you have done, it shall be done to you;
your deeds shall return on your own head.
16 For as you have drunk on my holy mountain,
all the nations around you shall drink;
they shall drink and gulp down,
and shall be as though they had never been.
17 But on Mount Zion there shall be those that escape,
and it shall be holy;
and the house of Jacob shall take possession of those who
dispossessed them.
18 The house of Jacob shall be a fire,
the house of Joseph a flame,
and the house of Esau stubble;
they shall burn them and consume them,
and there shall be no survivor of the house of Esau;
for the LORD has spoken.
Israel's vindication
19 Those of the Negeb shall possess Mount Esau,
and those of the Shephelah the land of the Philistines;
they shall possess the land of Ephraim and the land of Samaria,
and Benjamin shall possess Gilead.
20 The exiles of the Israelites who are in Halah
shall possess Phoenicia as far as Zarephath;
and the exiles of Jerusalem who are in Sepharad
shall possess the towns of the Negeb.

1850

OBADIAH 1851

21 Those who have been saved shall go up to Mount Zion
to rule Mount Esau;
and the kingdom shall be the LORD's.

1851

JONAH 1852

JONAH
Introduction
Jonah is unique among the prophetic books. Jonah himself is never
called a prophet in the text. The book contains no collections of oracles
in verse against Israel and foreign nations but presents a prose
narrative about the prophet himself. Instead of portraying a prophet
who is an obedient servant of the Lord, calling people to repentance, it
features a recalcitrant prophet who tries to flee from God and his
mission and sulks when his hearers repent.
The principal figure of this deceptively simple story is presumably based
on an obscure Galilean prophet from Gath-hepher who counseled
Jeroboam II (788-747 BCE) in a successful conflict with the Syrians (2
Kings 14.25). The author of the book of Jonah apparently drew upon
legends that had collected about this prophet and put them to new
use in a brief story that contains elements of folktale, fable, satire, and
allegory. The two parts of the story, chs 1-2 and 3-4, are united by their
central character (Jonah), a similar plot (the ironical conversion of
foreigners to faith in the Lord), and an identical theme (the breadth of
God's saving love). The influence of Jeremiah and Second Isaiah in the
text suggest that the author probably lived in the postexilic period.
Although the linguistic evidence is indecisive, a date in the fifth or
fourth century BCE is plausible.
The book of Jonah is also uncharacteristic, when compared to other
writings in the prophetic tradition, in its use of humor to make its
point. Humorous qualities, such as exaggerated behavior (running
away from God, 1.3); inappropriate actions (sleeping through a violent
storm, 1.5); outlandish situations (offering a prayer of thanksgiving
from inside a fish's belly, 2.1); ludicrous commands (animals must fast
and wear sackcloth, 3.7-8); and emotions either contrary to expectation
(anger at mercy, 4.1-2) or out of proportion (being angry enough to die
1852

JONAH 1853

because a plant has withered, 4.9) appear throughout the story. But all
of these qualities serve to underline the book's themes.
Repentance and deliverance are the dominant themes in the story of
Jonah, reflected in its use in the New Testament (Mt 12.38-41; Lk 11.2932) and as the afternoon Prophetic Bible reading on the Jewish holy
day of Yom Kippur (Day of Atonement). With skill and finesse this little
book calls Israel to repentance and reminds it of God's extravagant
mercy and forgiveness (Ex 34.6; Joel 2.13). In spirit, therefore, the book
justifies its place in the Book of the Twelve Prophets.

[Jonah 1]
Jonah's first call to preach at Nineveh
1 Now the word of the LORD came to Jonah son of Amittai, saying, 2
"Go at once to Nineveh, that great city, and cry out against it; for their
wickedness has come up before me." 3 But Jonah set out to flee to
Tarshish from the presence of the LORD. He went down to Joppa and
found a ship going to Tarshish; so he paid his fare and went on board,
to go with them to Tarshish, away from the presence of the LORD.
4 But the LORD hurled a great wind upon the sea, and such a mighty
storm came upon the sea that the ship threatened to break up. 5 Then
the mariners were afraid, and each cried to his god. They threw the
cargo that was in the ship into the sea, to lighten it for them. Jonah,
meanwhile, had gone down into the hold of the ship and had lain
down, and was fast asleep. 6 The captain came and said to him, "What
are you doing sound asleep? Get up, call on your god! Perhaps the god
will spare us a thought so that we do not perish."
7 The sailors said to one another, "Come, let us cast lots, so that we
may know on whose account this calamity has come upon us." So they
cast lots, and the lot fell on Jonah. 8 Then they said to him, "Tell us
why this calamity has come upon us. What is your occupation? Where
do you come from? What is your country? And of what people are

1853

JONAH 1854

you?" 9 "I am a Hebrew," he replied. "I worship the LORD, the God of
heaven, who made the sea and the dry land." 10 Then the men were
even more afraid, and said to him, "What is this that you have done!"
For the men knew that he was fleeing from the presence of the LORD,
because he had told them so.
11 Then they said to him, "What shall we do to you, that the sea may
quiet down for us?" For the sea was growing more and more
tempestuous. 12 He said to them, "Pick me up and throw me into the
sea; then the sea will quiet down for you; for I know it is because of me
that this great storm has come upon you." 13 Nevertheless the men
rowed hard to bring the ship back to land, but they could not, for the
sea grew more and more stormy against them. 14 Then they cried out
to the LORD, "Please, O LORD, we pray, do not let us perish on account
of this man's life. Do not make us guilty of innocent blood; for you, O
LORD, have done as it pleased you." 15 So they picked Jonah up and
threw him into the sea; and the sea ceased from its raging. 16 Then the
men feared the LORD even more, and they offered a sacrifice to the
LORD and made vows.
17 But the LORD provided a large fish to swallow up Jonah; and Jonah
was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights.
[Jonah 2]
Jonah is miraculously saved; Jonah's prayer and its answer
1 Then Jonah prayed to the LORD his God from the belly of the fish, 2
saying,
"I called to the LORD out of my distress,
and he answered me;
out of the belly of Sheol I cried,
and you heard my voice.
3 You cast me into the deep,
into the heart of the seas,
and the flood surrounded me;
all your waves and your billows
passed over me.

1854

JONAH 1855

4 Then I said, 'I am driven away
from your sight;
how shall I look again
upon your holy temple?'
5 The waters closed in over me;
the deep surrounded me;
weeds were wrapped around my head
6
at the roots of the mountains.
I went down to the land
whose bars closed upon me forever;
yet you brought up my life from the Pit,
O LORD my God.
7 As my life was ebbing away,
I remembered the LORD;
and my prayer came to you,
into your holy temple.
8 Those who worship vain idols
forsake their true loyalty.
9 But I with the voice of thanksgiving
will sacrifice to you;
what I have vowed I will pay.
Deliverance belongs to the LORD!"
10 Then the LORD spoke to the fish, and it spewed Jonah out upon the
dry land.
[Jonah 3]
Jonah's preaching to Nineveh
1 The word of the LORD came to Jonah a second time, saying, 2 "Get up,
go to Nineveh, that great city, and proclaim to it the message that I tell
you." 3 So Jonah set out and went to Nineveh, according to the word
of the LORD. Now Nineveh was an exceedingly large city, a three days'
walk across. 4 Jonah began to go into the city, going a day's walk. And
he cried out, "Forty days more, and Nineveh shall be overthrown!" 5
And the people of Nineveh believed God; they proclaimed a fast, and
everyone, great and small, put on sackcloth.

1855

JONAH 1856

6 When the news reached the king of Nineveh, he rose from his
throne, removed his robe, covered himself with sackcloth, and sat in
ashes. 7 Then he had a proclamation made in Nineveh: "By the decree
of the king and his nobles: No human being or animal, no herd or
flock, shall taste anything. They shall not feed, nor shall they drink
water. 8 Human beings and animals shall be covered with sackcloth,
and they shall cry mightily to God. All shall turn from their evil ways
and from the violence that is in their hands. 9 Who knows? God may
relent and change his mind; he may turn from his fierce anger, so that
we do not perish."
10 When God saw what they did, how they turned from their evil ways,
God changed his mind about the calamity that he had said he would
bring upon them; and he did not do it.
[Jonah 4]
God exposes Jonah's egotism and selfishness by word and deed
1 But this was very displeasing to Jonah, and he became angry. 2 He
prayed to the LORD and said, "O LORD! Is not this what I said while I was
still in my own country? That is why I fled to Tarshish at the beginning;
for I knew that you are a gracious God and merciful, slow to anger,
and abounding in steadfast love, and ready to relent from punishing. 3
And now, O LORD, please take my life from me, for it is better for me to
die than to live." 4 And the LORD said, "Is it right for you to be angry?"
5 Then Jonah went out of the city and sat down east of the city, and
made a booth for himself there. He sat under it in the shade, waiting
to see what would become of the city.
6 The LORD God appointed a bush, and made it come up over Jonah, to
give shade over his head, to save him from his discomfort; so Jonah was
very happy about the bush. 7 But when dawn came up the next day,
God appointed a worm that attacked the bush, so that it withered. 8
When the sun rose, God prepared a sultry east wind, and the sun beat
down on the head of Jonah so that he was faint and asked that he
might die. He said, "It is better for me to die than to live."

1856

JONAH 1857

9 But God said to Jonah, "Is it right for you to be angry about the
bush?" And he said, "Yes, angry enough to die." 10 Then the LORD said,
"You are concerned about the bush, for which you did not labor and
which you did not grow; it came into being in a night and perished in a
night. 11 And should I not be concerned about Nineveh, that great city,
in which there are more than a hundred and twenty thousand persons
who do not know their right hand from their left, and also many
animals?"

1857

MICAH 1858

MICAH
Introduction
The prophet Micah, active during the late eighth century BCE, was
among the earliest of the Minor Prophets. According to 1.1, Micah
prophesied in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, whose reigns
spanned 759-687 BCE. Possible allusions to the fall of Samaria (1.6) and
the campaign of Sennacherib (1.10-16) place the prophet in the final
quarter of the eighth century BCE. As such he was a younger
contemporary of Isaiah of Jerusalem. The characteristics of the era in
which Micah spoke were similar to those seen in Hosea, Amos, and
Isaiah 1-39. Biblical accounts of this era are 1 Kings 16-19 and Isaiah 3637. The prophetic scroll known as Micah may have material from later
periods (e.g., 4.10 speaks of the Babylonian Exile; 7.11 seems to reflect
the postexilic period). Some suggest that chs 1-3 form the oldest core of
the book; it is characterized by the judgmental tone for which Micah
was most famous (Jer 26.18).
Micah offered a theological interpretation of the dizzying events near
the end of the eighth century; the fall of Samaria, the expansion of
Jerusalem fueled by emigrants from the north, and the international
situation made unstable by an aggressive superpower, Assyria. Micah,
from a small town southwest of Jerusalem, Moresheth-gath, had a
populist message. He expressed disdain for the corruptions and
pretensions of the Jerusalem establishment and its leaders. In an era of
urbanization, he championed the traditions of early Israel (3.9-10; 6.35). Micah condemned religious practice untethered from ethical
performance (6.6-8).
While Amos and Hosea condemned the high places, provincial shrines
where the proper worship of the Lord was diluted by illicit elements,
Micah called Jerusalem itself a high place (1.5) and announced its
destruction (3.12), for which he was long remembered (Jer 26.18). At
1858

MICAH 1859

the same time, Micah never lost faith in the future. The middle section
of the book, chs 4-5, contains images of a restored and glorious Zion to
which the nations make pilgrimage, and of an ideal king (5.2-5).
In the organization of the Book of Twelve, Micah follows Jonah, an
arrangement apparently based on chronology since, according to 2
Kings 14.25, Jonah also lived in the eighth century. Micah is connected
to the book of Nahum, which follows, by catchword; compare the final
section of Micah (7.18-19) with the initial unit of Nahum (1.1-3).
The book may be divided in three sections: chs 1-3; 4-5; 6-7. Chs 1-3
mainly consist of oracles of judgment; chs 4-5 of oracles of hope. The
final section, chs 6-7, begins with judgment and moves to hope. We do
not know whether this alternation between judgment and hope
conforms to some pattern in Micah's preaching or is an organizing
device of later editors.

[Micah 1]
Superscription
1 The word of the LORD that came to Micah of Moresheth in the days of
Kings Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah of Judah, which he saw concerning
Samaria and Jerusalem.
Speeches condemning Judean society and its leaders; the coming of
the Lord
2 Hear, you peoples, all of you;
listen, O earth, and all that is in it;
and let the Lord GOD be a witness against you,
the Lord from his holy temple.
3 For lo, the LORD is coming out of his place,
and will come down and tread upon the high places of the earth.

1859

MICAH 1860

4 Then the mountains will melt under him
and the valleys will burst open,
like wax near the fire,
like waters poured down a steep place.
5 All this is for the transgression of Jacob
and for the sins of the house of Israel.
What is the transgression of Jacob?
Is it not Samaria?
And what is the high place of Judah?
Is it not Jerusalem?
6 Therefore I will make Samaria a heap in the open country,
a place for planting vineyards.
I will pour down her stones into the valley,
and uncover her foundations.
7 All her images shall be beaten to pieces,
all her wages shall be burned with fire,
and all her idols I will lay waste;
for as the wages of a prostitute she gathered them,
and as the wages of a prostitute they shall again be used.
A lament for Samaria, and Jerusalem too
8 For this I will lament and wail;
I will go barefoot and naked;
I will make lamentation like the jackals,
and mourning like the ostriches.
9 For her wound is incurable.
It has come to Judah;
it has reached to the gate of my people,
to Jerusalem.
10 Tell it not in Gath,
weep not at all;
in Beth-leaphrah
roll yourselves in the dust.

1860

MICAH 1861

11 Pass on your way,
inhabitants of Shaphir,
in nakedness and shame;
the inhabitants of Zaanan
do not come forth;
Beth-ezel is wailing
and shall remove its support from you.
12 For the inhabitants of Maroth
wait anxiously for good,
yet disaster has come down from the LORD
to the gate of Jerusalem.
13 Harness the steeds to the chariots,
inhabitants of Lachish;
it was the beginning of sin
to daughter Zion,
for in you were found
the transgressions of Israel.
14 Therefore you shall give parting gifts
to Moresheth-gath;
the houses of Achzib shall be a deception
to the kings of Israel.
15 I will again bring a conqueror upon you,
inhabitants of Mareshah;
the glory of Israel
shall come to Adullam.
16 Make yourselves bald and cut off your hair
for your pampered children;
make yourselves as bald as the eagle,
for they have gone from you into exile.
[Micah 2]
The Lord will punish the land barons
1 Alas for those who devise wickedness
and evil deeds on their beds!
When the morning dawns, they perform it,
because it is in their power.

1861

MICAH 1862

2 They covet fields, and seize them;
houses, and take them away;
they oppress householder and house,
people and their inheritance.
3 Therefore thus says the LORD:
Now, I am devising against this family an evil
from which you cannot remove your necks;
and you shall not walk haughtily,
for it will be an evil time.
4 On that day they shall take up a taunt song against you,
and wail with bitter lamentation,
and say, "We are utterly ruined;
the LORD alters the inheritance of my people;
how he removes it from me!
Among our captors he parcels out our fields."
5 Therefore you will have no one to cast the line by lot
in the assembly of the LORD.
The prophet responds to criticism
6 "Do not preach" — thus they preach —
"one should not preach of such things;
disgrace will not overtake us."
7 Should this be said, O house of Jacob?
Is the LORD's patience exhausted?
Are these his doings?
Do not my words do good
to one who walks uprightly?
8 But you rise up against my people as an enemy;
you strip the robe from the peaceful,
from those who pass by trustingly
with no thought of war.
9 The women of my people you drive out
from their pleasant houses;
from their young children you take away
my glory forever.

1862

MICAH 1863

10 Arise and go;
for this is no place to rest,
because of uncleanness that destroys
with a grievous destruction.
11 If someone were to go about uttering empty falsehoods,
saying, "I will preach to you of wine and strong drink,"
such a one would be the preacher for this people!
A shift to an oracle of encouragement
12 I will surely gather all of you, O Jacob,
I will gather the survivors of Israel;
I will set them together
like sheep in a fold,
like a flock in its pasture;
it will resound with people.
13 The one who breaks out will go up before them;
they will break through and pass the gate,
going out by it.
Their king will pass on before them,
the LORD at their head.
[Micah 3]
The Lord will punish the judicial leaders
1 And I said:
Listen, you heads of Jacob
and rulers of the house of Israel!
Should you not know justice? —
2
you who hate the good and love the evil,
who tear the skin off my people,
and the flesh off their bones;
3 who eat the flesh of my people,
flay their skin off them,
break their bones in pieces,
and chop them up like meat in a kettle,
like flesh in a caldron.

1863

MICAH 1864

The Lord will punish the religious leaders
4 Then they will cry to the LORD,
but he will not answer them;
he will hide his face from them at that time,
because they have acted wickedly.
5 Thus says the LORD concerning the prophets
who lead my people astray,
who cry "Peace"
when they have something to eat,
but declare war against those
who put nothing into their mouths.
6 Therefore it shall be night to you, without vision,
and darkness to you, without revelation.
The sun shall go down upon the prophets,
and the day shall be black over them;
7 the seers shall be disgraced,
and the diviners put to shame;
they shall all cover their lips,
for there is no answer from God.
8 But as for me, I am filled with power,
with the spirit of the LORD,
and with justice and might,
to declare to Jacob his transgression
and to Israel his sin.
Summary: Its leadership corrupt, Jerusalem is doomed
9 Hear this, you rulers of the house of Jacob
and chiefs of the house of Israel,
who abhor justice
and pervert all equity,
10 who build Zion with blood
and Jerusalem with wrong!

1864

MICAH 1865

11 Its rulers give judgment for a bribe,
its priests teach for a price,
its prophets give oracles for money;
yet they lean upon the LORD and say,
"Surely the LORD is with us!
No harm shall come upon us."
12 Therefore because of you
Zion shall be plowed as a field;
Jerusalem shall become a heap of ruins,
and the mountain of the house a wooded height.
[Micah 4]
The ideal age
1 In days to come
the mountain of the LORD's house
shall be established as the highest of the mountains,
and shall be raised up above the hills.
Peoples shall stream to it,
2
and many nations shall come and say:
"Come, let us go up to the mountain of the LORD,
to the house of the God of Jacob;
that he may teach us his ways
and that we may walk in his paths."
For out of Zion shall go forth instruction,
and the word of the LORD from Jerusalem.
3 He shall judge between many peoples,
and shall arbitrate between strong nations far away;
they shall beat their swords into plowshares,
and their spears into pruning hooks;
nation shall not lift up sword against nation,
neither shall they learn war any more;
4 but they shall all sit under their own vines and under their own
fig trees, and no one shall make them afraid;
for the mouth of the LORD of hosts has spoken.

1865

MICAH 1866

5 For all the peoples walk,
each in the name of its god,
but we will walk in the name of the LORD our God
forever and ever.
6 In that day, says the LORD,
I will assemble the lame
and gather those who have been driven away,
and those whom I have afflicted.
7 The lame I will make the remnant,
and those who were cast off, a strong nation;
and the LORD will reign over them in Mount Zion
now and forevermore.
8 And you, O tower of the flock,
hill of daughter Zion,
to you it shall come,
the former dominion shall come,
the sovereignty of daughter Jerusalem.
The Lord will rescue the exiles
9 Now why do you cry aloud?
Is there no king in you?
Has your counselor perished,
that pangs have seized you like a woman in labor?
10 Writhe and groan, O daughter Zion,
like a woman in labor;
for now you shall go forth from the city
and camp in the open country;
you shall go to Babylon.
There you shall be rescued,
there the LORD will redeem you
from the hands of your enemies.

1866

MICAH 1867

Israel will crush its enemies
11 Now many nations
are assembled against you,
saying, "Let her be profaned,
and let our eyes gaze upon Zion."
12 But they do not know
the thoughts of the LORD;
they do not understand his plan,
that he has gathered them as sheaves to the threshing floor.
13 Arise and thresh,
O daughter Zion,
for I will make your horn iron
and your hoofs bronze;
you shall beat in pieces many peoples,
and shall devote their gain to the LORD,
their wealth to the Lord of the whole earth.
[Micah 5]
1 Now you are walled around with a wall;
siege is laid against us;
with a rod they strike the ruler of Israel
upon the cheek.
A messianic poem
2 But you, O Bethlehem of Ephrathah,
who are one of the little clans of Judah,
from you shall come forth for me
one who is to rule in Israel,
whose origin is from of old,
from ancient days.
3 Therefore he shall give them up until the time
when she who is in labor has brought forth;
then the rest of his kindred shall return
to the people of Israel.

1867

MICAH 1868

4 And he shall stand and feed his flock in the strength of the LORD,
in the majesty of the name of the LORD his God.
And they shall live secure, for now he shall be great
to the ends of the earth;
5 and he shall be the one of peace.
Assyria will be defeated
If the Assyrians come into our land
and tread upon our soil,
we will raise against them seven shepherds
and eight installed as rulers.
6 They shall rule the land of Assyria with the sword,
and the land of Nimrod with the drawn sword;
they shall rescue us from the Assyrians
if they come into our land
or tread within our border.
Israel gains the upper hand
7 Then the remnant of Jacob,
surrounded by many peoples,
shall be like dew from the LORD,
like showers on the grass,
which do not depend upon people
or wait for any mortal.
8 And among the nations the remnant of Jacob,
surrounded by many peoples,
shall be like a lion among the animals of the forest,
like a young lion among the flocks of sheep,
which, when it goes through, treads down
and tears in pieces, with no one to deliver.
9 Your hand shall be lifted up over your adversaries,
and all your enemies shall be cut off.

1868

MICAH 1869

But before reconstruction, demolition
10 In that day, says the LORD,
I will cut off your horses from among you
and will destroy your chariots;
11 and I will cut off the cities of your land
and throw down all your strongholds;
12 and I will cut off sorceries from your hand,
and you shall have no more soothsayers;
13 and I will cut off your images
and your pillars from among you,
and you shall bow down no more
to the work of your hands;
14 and I will uproot your sacred poles from among you
and destroy your towns.
15 And in anger and wrath I will execute vengeance
on the nations that did not obey.
[Micah 6]
A prophetic sampler moves from legal indictment of Israel's guilt to
liturgical affirmation of God's mercy; a divine lawsuit
1 Hear what the LORD says:
Rise, plead your case before the mountains,
and let the hills hear your voice.
2 Hear, you mountains, the controversy of the LORD,
and you enduring foundations of the earth;
for the LORD has a controversy with his people,
and he will contend with Israel.
3 "O my people, what have I done to you?
In what have I wearied you? Answer me!
4 For I brought you up from the land of Egypt,
and redeemed you from the house of slavery;
and I sent before you Moses,
Aaron, and Miriam.

1869

MICAH 1870

5 O my people, remember now what King Balak of Moab devised,
what Balaam son of Beor answered him,
and what happened from Shittim to Gilgal,
that you may know the saving acts of the LORD."
6 "With what shall I come before the LORD,
and bow myself before God on high?
Shall I come before him with burnt offerings,
with calves a year old?
7 Will the LORD be pleased with thousands of rams,
with ten thousands of rivers of oil?
Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression,
the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?"
8 He has told you, O mortal, what is good;
and what does the LORD require of you
but to do justice, and to love kindness,
and to walk humbly with your God?
Jerusalem, the corrupt city, is cursed
9 The voice of the LORD cries to the city
(it is sound wisdom to fear your name):
Hear, O tribe and assembly of the city!
10 Can I forget the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked,
and the scant measure that is accursed?
11 Can I tolerate wicked scales
and a bag of dishonest weights?
12 Your wealthy are full of violence;
your inhabitants speak lies,
with tongues of deceit in their mouths.
13 Therefore I have begun to strike you down,
making you desolate because of your sins.
14 You shall eat, but not be satisfied,
and there shall be a gnawing hunger within you;
you shall put away, but not save,
and what you save, I will hand over to the sword.

1870

MICAH 1871

15 You shall sow, but not reap;
you shall tread olives, but not anoint yourselves with oil;
you shall tread grapes, but not drink wine.
16 For you have kept the statutes of Omri
and all the works of the house of Ahab,
and you have followed their counsels.
Therefore I will make you a desolation, and your
inhabitants an object of hissing;
so you shall bear the scorn of my people.
[Micah 7]
A lament for a desperate society
1 Woe is me! For I have become like one who,
after the summer fruit has been gathered,
after the vintage has been gleaned,
finds no cluster to eat;
there is no first-ripe fig for which I hunger.
2 The faithful have disappeared from the land,
and there is no one left who is upright;
they all lie in wait for blood,
and they hunt each other with nets.
3 Their hands are skilled to do evil;
the official and the judge ask for a bribe,
and the powerful dictate what they desire;
thus they pervert justice.
4 The best of them is like a brier,
the most upright of them a thorn hedge.
The day of their sentinels, of their punishment, has come;
now their confusion is at hand.
5 Put no trust in a friend,
have no confidence in a loved one;
guard the doors of your mouth
from her who lies in your embrace;
6 for the son treats the father with contempt,
the daughter rises up against her mother,
the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law;
your enemies are members of your own household.

1871

MICAH 1872

7 But as for me, I will look to the LORD,
I will wait for the God of my salvation;
my God will hear me.
A final liturgy
8 Do not rejoice over me, O my enemy;
when I fall, I shall rise;
when I sit in darkness,
the LORD will be a light to me.
9 I must bear the indignation of the LORD,
because I have sinned against him,
until he takes my side
and executes judgment for me.
He will bring me out to the light;
I shall see his vindication.
10 Then my enemy will see,
and shame will cover her who said to me,
"Where is the LORD your God?"
My eyes will see her downfall;
now she will be trodden down
like the mire of the streets.
11 A day for the building of your walls!
In that day the boundary shall be far extended.
12 In that day they will come to you
from Assyria to Egypt,
and from Egypt to the River,
from sea to sea and from mountain to mountain.
13 But the earth will be desolate
because of its inhabitants,
for the fruit of their doings.

1872

MICAH 1873

14 Shepherd your people with your staff,
the flock that belongs to you,
which lives alone in a forest
in the midst of a garden land;
let them feed in Bashan and Gilead
as in the days of old.
15 As in the days when you came out of the land of Egypt,
show us marvelous things.
16 The nations shall see and be ashamed
of all their might;
they shall lay their hands on their mouths;
their ears shall be deaf;
17 they shall lick dust like a snake,
like the crawling things of the earth;
they shall come trembling out of their fortresses;
they shall turn in dread to the LORD our God,
and they shall stand in fear of you.
18 Who is a God like you, pardoning iniquity
and passing over the transgression
of the remnant of your possession?
He does not retain his anger forever,
because he delights in showing clemency.
19 He will again have compassion upon us;
he will tread our iniquities under foot.
You will cast all our sins
into the depths of the sea.
20 You will show faithfulness to Jacob
and unswerving loyalty to Abraham,
as you have sworn to our ancestors
from the days of old.

1873

NAHUM 1874

NAHUM
Introduction
Although Nahum does not begin with a date formula, its allusions to
historical events allow us to date it in the middle or late seventh
century BCE. Nahum refers to the fall of Thebes (3.8) which occurred in
663 BCE. The focus of the book, the fall of Nineveh (612 BCE), is either
an imminent or recent event. Nahum's placement among the Minor
Prophets thus seems to be chronological, directly following Micah, who
was active in the late eighth century BCE.
As is typical of Israelite prophecy, Nahum's words were prompted by
the dramatic events of international history. The Assyrian Empire,
whose power had for centuries been felt and feared from
Mesopotamia to the Mediterranean, crumbled quickly after the death
of Ashurbanipal (627 BCE). Under the combined assaults of the Medes
from north of Persia and the Chaldeans from southern Babylonia, the
ancient Assyrian capital city, Asshur, fell in 614. When the renowned
Nineveh was destroyed in 612 BCE, Assyrian domination of the Near
East was ended, though its imperial structures served as a template for
subsequent empires.
The fervent reaction to the overthrow of Assyria, expressed by the
peoples long subjected to its yoke, is nowhere seen more clearly than
in Nahum. The core of the book is a superb, vivid poem (2.3-9; 3.1-3)
extolling Nineveh's destruction. The prophet spells out the reason for
the Assyrian downfall: It is the LORD's judgment against an oppressor.
This basic theme makes clear that Nahum's though is passionately
partisan. He asserts boldly that the Lord is the avenger of cruelty and
immorality. Prophetic collections often include oracles against nations
(e.g., Isa 13-23; Jer 46-51). In essence, the brief book of Nahum, like that
of Obadiah, consists entirely of this single genre. To that extent, it fails
1874

NAHUM 1875

to indicate the consequences of this divine justice for Israel itself. The
book and its sentiments toward Nineveh are often contrasted with
those in the book of Jonah (contrast Nah 3.11 with Jon 4.11; Nah 1.2-3
with Jon 4.1-2).
The date of Nahum's triumphal ode lies close to the events it foretells
(or describes), probably between 626 and 612 BCE. Its author is
identified only by his name (which means "comforted"); even the
location of his home, Elkosh (1.1), is unknown.

[Nahum 1]
Title
1 An oracle concerning Nineveh. The book of the vision of Nahum of
Elkosh.
A hymn to the divine warrior
2 A jealous and avenging God is the LORD,
the LORD is avenging and wrathful;
the LORD takes vengeance on his adversaries
and rages against his enemies.
3 The LORD is slow to anger but great in power,
and the LORD will by no means clear the guilty.
His way is in whirlwind and storm,
and the clouds are the dust of his feet.
4 He rebukes the sea and makes it dry,
and he dries up all the rivers;
Bashan and Carmel wither,
and the bloom of Lebanon fades.
5 The mountains quake before him,
and the hills melt;
the earth heaves before him,
the world and all who live in it.

1875

NAHUM 1876

6 Who can stand before his indignation?
Who can endure the heat of his anger?
His wrath is poured out like fire,
and by him the rocks are broken in pieces.
7 The LORD is good,
a stronghold in a day of trouble;
he protects those who take refuge in him,
8
even in a rushing flood.
He will make a full end of his adversaries,
and will pursue his enemies into darkness.
9 Why do you plot against the LORD?
He will make an end;
no adversary will rise up twice.
Alternating oracles concerning Nineveh and Judah
10 Like thorns they are entangled,
like drunkards they are drunk;
they are consumed like dry straw.
11 From you one has gone out
who plots evil against the LORD,
one who counsels wickedness.
12 Thus says the LORD,
"Though they are at full strength and many,
they will be cut off and pass away.
Though I have afflicted you,
I will afflict you no more.
13 And now I will break off his yoke from you
and snap the bonds that bind you."
14 The LORD has commanded concerning you:
"Your name shall be perpetuated no longer;
from the house of your gods I will cut off
the carved image and the cast image.
I will make your grave, for you are worthless."

1876

NAHUM 1877

15 Look! On the mountains the feet of one
who brings good tidings,
who proclaims peace!
Celebrate your festivals, O Judah,
fulfill your vows,
for never again shall the wicked invade you;
they are utterly cut off.
[Nahum 2]
1 A shatterer has come up against you.
Guard the ramparts;
watch the road;
gird your loins;
collect all your strength.
2 (For the LORD is restoring the majesty of Jacob,
as well as the majesty of Israel,
though ravagers have ravaged them
and ruined their branches.)
The sack of Nineveh; the assault
3 The shields of his warriors are red;
his soldiers are clothed in crimson.
The metal on the chariots flashes
on the day when he musters them;
the chargers prance.
4 The chariots race madly through the streets,
they rush to and fro through the squares;
their appearance is like torches,
they dart like lightning.
5 He calls his officers;
they stumble as they come forward;
they hasten to the wall,
and the mantelet is set up.
6 The river gates are opened,
the palace trembles.

1877

NAHUM 1878

7 It is decreed that the city be exiled,
its slave women led away,
moaning like doves
and beating their breasts.
8 Nineveh is like a pool
whose waters run away.
"Halt! Halt!" —
but no one turns back.
9 "Plunder the silver,
plunder the gold!
There is no end of treasure!
An abundance of every precious thing!"
The taunt: Where is the lion now?
10 Devastation, desolation, and destruction!
Hearts faint and knees tremble,
all loins quake,
all faces grow pale!
11 What became of the lions' den,
the cave of the young lions,
where the lion goes,
and the lion's cubs, with no one to disturb them?
12 The lion has torn enough for his whelps
and strangled prey for his lionesses;
he has filled his caves with prey
and his dens with torn flesh.
13 See, I am against you, says the LORD of hosts, and I will burn your
chariots in smoke, and the sword shall devour your young lions; I will
cut off your prey from the earth, and the voice of your messengers
shall be heard no more.

1878

NAHUM 1879

[Nahum 3]
A woe oracle
1 Ah! City of bloodshed,
utterly deceitful, full of booty —
no end to the plunder!
2 The crack of whip and rumble of wheel,
galloping horse and bounding chariot!
3 Horsemen charging,
flashing sword and glittering spear,
piles of dead,
heaps of corpses,
dead bodies without end —
they stumble over the bodies!
A series of taunts
4 Because of the countless debaucheries of the prostitute,
gracefully alluring, mistress of sorcery,
who enslaves nations through her debaucheries,
and peoples through her sorcery,
5 I am against you,
says the LORD of hosts,
and will lift up your skirts over your face;
and I will let nations look on your nakedness
and kingdoms on your shame.
6 I will throw filth at you
and treat you with contempt,
and make you a spectacle.
7 Then all who see you will shrink from you and say,
"Nineveh is devastated; who will bemoan her?"
Where shall I seek comforters for you?
8 Are you better than Thebes
that sat by the Nile,
with water around her,
her rampart a sea,
water her wall?

1879

NAHUM 1880

9 Ethiopia was her strength,
Egypt too, and that without limit;
Put and the Libyans were her helpers.
10 Yet she became an exile,
she went into captivity;
even her infants were dashed in pieces
at the head of every street;
lots were cast for her nobles,
all her dignitaries were bound in fetters.
11 You also will be drunken,
you will go into hiding;
you will seek
a refuge from the enemy.
12 All your fortresses are like fig trees
with first-ripe figs —
if shaken they fall
into the mouth of the eater.
13 Look at your troops:
they are women in your midst.
The gates of your land
are wide open to your foes;
fire has devoured the bars of your gates.
14 Draw water for the siege,
strengthen your forts;
trample the clay,
tread the mortar,
take hold of the brick mold!
15 There the fire will devour you,
the sword will cut you off.
It will devour you like the locust.
Multiply yourselves like the locust,
multiply like the grasshopper!

1880

NAHUM 1881

16 You increased your merchants
more than the stars of the heavens.
The locust sheds its skin and flies away.
17 Your guards are like grasshoppers,
your scribes like swarms of locusts
settling on the fences
on a cold day —
when the sun rises, they fly away;
no one knows where they have gone.
18 Your shepherds are asleep,
O king of Assyria;
your nobles slumber.
Your people are scattered on the mountains
with no one to gather them.
19 There is no assuaging your hurt,
your wound is mortal.
All who hear the news about you
clap their hands over you.
For who has ever escaped
your endless cruelty?

1881

HABAKKUK 1882

HABAKKUK
Introduction
Habakkuk, eighth in order among the twelve Minor Prophets, can be
dated to the late seventh century BCE on the basis of the reference to
the Chaldeans (1.6), whose domination of the Near East began around
612 BCE. Such a date makes the book roughly contemporaneous with
its predecessor, Nahum, and successor, Zephaniah.
Although a Habakkuk legend appears in one of the additions to Daniel
found in the Apocrypha (Bel 33-39), nothing is known about the life of
the prophet, not even his father's name or his hometown. The book
reflects the struggles of the Judahite community in the time between
the death of King Josiah in 609 BCE and the first deportation of exiles
to Babylon in 597 BCE (see 2 Kings 23.34-24.27).
At least three distinct literary forms can be recognized in Habakkuk.
The section 1.2-2.4 is constructed as a dialogue between the prophet
and God; the next section (2.5-20), consisting of five woes, is cast in
classical prophetic style; and ch 3 is a lengthy poem, similar in structure
to the Psalms. Despite their varied texture, the sections build on each
other. In the opening dialogue, the prophet first laments the injustice
of his society (1.2-4). The divine response is that the Chaldeans will
serve as the instrument of judgment (1.5-11). The prophet questions the
justice of this: "the wicked swallow those more righteous than they"
(1.13). The Lord answers by urging the prophet to wait, faithfully, for an
appointed time; this injustice will also be addressed (2.2-4).
The next section (2.5-20) is cast as the taunts addressed to Babylon by
the very nations it had oppressed, once the cycle of divine judgment
runs its full course ("The cup in the LORD's right hand will come around
to you," 2.16). The final section, the song of Habakkuk (3.2-15),
commemorates ancient triumphs of this God who comes in judgment.
1882

HABAKKUK 1883

This psalm serves as the basis of the prophet's resilient hope in the face
of calamity and deprivation (3.17-19) and also can be seen as a prayer
(3.1) to arouse God to action (3.2).
Habakkuk was a contemporary of Jeremiah, who also contended that
an invading foreign power would serve as the divine instrument of
judgment against Judah (cf. Hab 1.6-11 with Jer 4.13; 5.15-17; 6.22-23),
and furthermore that, in time, Babylon itself would come under divine
judgment (Jer 50-51). At the same time, Habakkuk articulates on behalf
of his community their searching question: Is this fair? To this perennial
question the prophet receives an answer that is eternally valid: God is
still sovereign, and in God's own way and at the proper time will deal
with the wicked. In the meantime — in fact, at all times — the
righteous shall live by their faith (2.4), a persistent, patient, and
tenacious adherence to the instructions and promises of God.

[Habakkuk 1]
Title
1 The oracle that the prophet Habakkuk saw.
A dialogue in two cycles; the first cycle
2 O LORD, how long shall I cry for help,
and you will not listen?
Or cry to you "Violence!"
and you will not save?
3 Why do you make me see wrongdoing
and look at trouble?
Destruction and violence are before me;
strife and contention arise.
4 So the law becomes slack
and justice never prevails.
The wicked surround the righteous —
therefore judgment comes forth perverted.

1883

HABAKKUK 1884

5 Look at the nations, and see!
Be astonished! Be astounded!
For a work is being done in your days
that you would not believe if you were told.
6 For I am rousing the Chaldeans,
that fierce and impetuous nation,
who march through the breadth of the earth
to seize dwellings not their own.
7 Dread and fearsome are they;
their justice and dignity proceed from themselves.
8 Their horses are swifter than leopards,
more menacing than wolves at dusk;
their horses charge.
Their horsemen come from far away;
they fly like an eagle swift to devour.
9 They all come for violence,
with faces pressing forward;
they gather captives like sand.
10 At kings they scoff,
and of rulers they make sport.
They laugh at every fortress,
and heap up earth to take it.
11 Then they sweep by like the wind;
they transgress and become guilty;
their own might is their god!
The second cycle
12 Are you not from of old,
O LORD my God, my Holy One?
You shall not die.
O LORD, you have marked them for judgment;
and you, O Rock, have established them for punishment.
13 Your eyes are too pure to behold evil,
and you cannot look on wrongdoing;
why do you look on the treacherous,
and are silent when the wicked swallow
those more righteous than they?

1884

HABAKKUK 1885

14 You have made people like the fish of the sea,
like crawling things that have no ruler.
15 The enemy brings all of them up with a hook;
he drags them out with his net,
he gathers them in his seine;
so he rejoices and exults.
16 Therefore he sacrifices to his net
and makes offerings to his seine;
for by them his portion is lavish,
and his food is rich.
17 Is he then to keep on emptying his net,
and destroying nations without mercy?
[Habakkuk 2]
1 I will stand at my watchpost,
and station myself on the rampart;
I will keep watch to see what he will say to me,
and what he will answer concerning my complaint.
2 Then the LORD answered me and said:
Write the vision;
make it plain on tablets,
so that a runner may read it.
3 For there is still a vision for the appointed time;
it speaks of the end, and does not lie.
If it seems to tarry, wait for it;
it will surely come, it will not delay.
4 Look at the proud!
Their spirit is not right in them,
but the righteous live by their faith.

1885

HABAKKUK 1886

The five woes
5 Moreover, wealth is treacherous;
the arrogant do not endure.
They open their throats wide as Sheol;
like Death they never have enough.
They gather all nations for themselves,
and collect all peoples as their own.
6 Shall not everyone taunt such people and, with mocking riddles, say
about them,
"Alas for you who heap up what is not your own!"
How long will you load yourselves with goods taken in pledge?
7 Will not your own creditors suddenly rise,
and those who make you tremble wake up?
Then you will be booty for them.
8 Because you have plundered many nations,
all that survive of the peoples shall plunder you —
because of human bloodshed, and violence to the earth,
to cities and all who live in them.
9 "Alas for you who get evil gain for your houses,
setting your nest on high
to be safe from the reach of harm!"
10 You have devised shame for your house
by cutting off many peoples;
you have forfeited your life.
11 The very stones will cry out from the wall,
and the plaster will respond from the woodwork.
12 "Alas for you who build a town by bloodshed,
and found a city on iniquity!"
13 Is it not from the LORD of hosts
that peoples labor only to feed the flames,
and nations weary themselves for nothing?
14 But the earth will be filled
with the knowledge of the glory of the LORD,
as the waters cover the sea.

1886

HABAKKUK 1887

15 "Alas for you who make your neighbors drink,
pouring out your wrath until they are drunk,
in order to gaze on their nakedness!"
16 You will be sated with contempt instead of glory.
Drink, you yourself, and stagger!
The cup in the LORD's right hand
will come around to you,
and shame will come upon your glory!
17 For the violence done to Lebanon will overwhelm you;
the destruction of the animals will terrify you —
because of human bloodshed and violence to the earth,
to cities and all who live in them.
18 What use is an idol
once its maker has shaped it —
a cast image, a teacher of lies?
For its maker trusts in what has been made,
though the product is only an idol that cannot speak!
19 Alas for you who say to the wood, "Wake up!"
to silent stone, "Rouse yourself!"
Can it teach?
See, it is gold and silver plated,
and there is no breath in it at all.
20 But the LORD is in his holy temple;
let all the earth keep silence before him!
[Habakkuk 3]
Habakkuk's song
1 A prayer of the prophet Habakkuk according to Shigionoth.
2 O LORD, I have heard of your renown,
and I stand in awe, O LORD, of your work.
In our own time revive it;
in our own time make it known;
in wrath may you remember mercy.

1887

HABAKKUK 1888

3 God came from Teman,
the Holy One from Mount Paran.
His glory covered the heavens,
and the earth was full of his praise.
4 The brightness was like the sun;
rays came forth from his hand,
where his power lay hidden.
5 Before him went pestilence,
and plague followed close behind.
6 He stopped and shook the earth;
he looked and made the nations tremble.
The eternal mountains were shattered;
along his ancient pathways
the everlasting hills sank low.
7 I saw the tents of Cushan under affliction;
the tent-curtains of the land of Midian trembled.
8 Was your wrath against the rivers, O LORD?
Or your anger against the rivers,
or your rage against the sea,
when you drove your horses,
your chariots to victory?
9 You brandished your naked bow,
sated were the arrows at your command.
You split the earth with rivers.
10 The mountains saw you, and writhed;
a torrent of water swept by;
the deep gave forth its voice.
The sun raised high its hands;
11 the moon stood still in its exalted place,
at the light of your arrows speeding by,
at the gleam of your flashing spear.
12 In fury you trod the earth,
in anger you trampled nations.
13 You came forth to save your people,
to save your anointed.
You crushed the head of the wicked house,
laying it bare from foundation to roof.

1888

HABAKKUK 1889

14 You pierced with their own arrows the head of his warriors,
who came like a whirlwind to scatter us,
gloating as if ready to devour the poor who were in hiding.
15 You trampled the sea with your horses,
churning the mighty waters.
16 I hear, and I tremble within;
my lips quiver at the sound.
Rottenness enters into my bones,
and my steps tremble beneath me.
I wait quietly for the day of calamity
to come upon the people who attack us.
17 Though the fig tree does not blossom,
and no fruit is on the vines;
though the produce of the olive fails,
and the fields yield no food;
though the flock is cut off from the fold,
and there is no herd in the stalls,
18 yet I will rejoice in the LORD;
I will exult in the God of my salvation.
19 GOD, the Lord, is my strength;
he makes my feet like the feet of a deer,
and makes me tread upon the heights.
To the leader: with stringed instruments.

1889

ZEPHANIAH 1890

ZEPHANIAH
Introduction
Zephaniah's place in the canonical sequence is apparently
chronological; along with its predecessors, Nahum and Habakkuk, it
stems from the seventh century BCE. The superscription (1.1) traces
Zephaniah's ancestry back to Hezekiah and dates his ministry to the
reign of Josiah (640-609 BCE). Since the name of Hezekiah is
uncommon in the Hebrew Bible, this unusually long genealogical note
probably refers to the famous Judean king (727/715-698/687 BCE).
Whether of royal descent or not, Zephaniah certainly was a
Jerusalemite (1.10-11). His father's name, Cushi (1.1), could mean "the
Cushite," and has prompted some speculation about African ancestry
for the prophet (cf. 2.12; 3.10). Aside from his name (which means
"Yahweh has protected") and these intriguing genealogical issues,
nothing is known about the prophet.
Zephaniah's condemnation of practices prohibited by Deuteronomy
(1.4-6, 8-9, 12; 3.1-13, 7) suggest that he prophesied before Josiah's
reforms of 621 BCE (2 Kings 23). The oracles thus can be dated, perhaps,
to 630-620 BCE, and are roughly contemporaneous with those in
Nahum.
The main motif of the collected oracles is the Day of the Lord. In the
initial oracle (1.2-6), the Day of the Lord is described in terms of a
global catastrophe brought on by worship of other deities (1.4-6). The
next two oracles (or sections of the same oracle), 1.7-13; 1.14-2.3,
maintain this tone of gloom. Invoking traditions about the ancient
flood (see 1.2-3), for Zephaniah it is a case of "the fire next time" (1.18).
Near the end of this section, the prophet gives a muted (perhaps, 2.3)
call for repentance. The next section consists of oracles against Judah's
rival nations (2.4-15), followed by the speeches that indict Jerusalem
1890

ZEPHANIAH 1891

(3.1-8). Oracles of salvation (3.9-20) complete, and balance, the
collection.

[Zephaniah 1]
Superscription
1 The word of the LORD that came to Zephaniah son of Cushi son of
Gedaliah son of Amariah son of Hezekiah, in the days of King Josiah
son of Amon of Judah.
The threat of universal destruction
2 I will utterly sweep away everything
from the face of the earth, says the LORD.
3 I will sweep away humans and animals;
I will sweep away the birds of the air
and the fish of the sea.
I will make the wicked stumble.
I will cut off humanity
from the face of the earth, says the LORD.
4 I will stretch out my hand against Judah,
and against all the inhabitants of Jerusalem;
and I will cut off from this place every remnant of Baal
and the name of the idolatrous priests;
5 those who bow down on the roofs
to the host of the heavens;
those who bow down and swear to the LORD,
but also swear by Milcom;
6 those who have turned back from following the LORD,
who have not sought the LORD or inquired of him.

1891

ZEPHANIAH 1892

The Day of the Lord as a sacrifice
7 Be silent before the Lord GOD!
For the day of the LORD is at hand;
the LORD has prepared a sacrifice,
he has consecrated his guests.
8 And on the day of the LORD's sacrifice
I will punish the officials and the king's sons
and all who dress themselves in foreign attire.
9 On that day I will punish
all who leap over the threshold,
who fill their master's house
with violence and fraud.
10 On that day, says the LORD,
a cry will be heard from the Fish Gate,
a wail from the Second Quarter,
a loud crash from the hills.
11 The inhabitants of the Mortar wail,
for all the traders have perished;
all who weigh out silver are cut off.
12 At that time I will search Jerusalem with lamps,
and I will punish the people
who rest complacently on their dregs,
those who say in their hearts,
"The LORD will not do good,
nor will he do harm."
13 Their wealth shall be plundered,
and their houses laid waste.
Though they build houses,
they shall not inhabit them;
though they plant vineyards,
they shall not drink wine from them.

1892

ZEPHANIAH 1893

The Day of the Lord as divine warfare
14 The great day of the LORD is near,
near and hastening fast;
the sound of the day of the LORD is bitter,
the warrior cries aloud there.
15 That day will be a day of wrath,
a day of distress and anguish,
a day of ruin and devastation,
a day of darkness and gloom,
a day of clouds and thick darkness,
16
a day of trumpet blast and battle cry
against the fortified cities
and against the lofty battlements.
17 I will bring such distress upon people
that they shall walk like the blind;
because they have sinned against the LORD,
their blood shall be poured out like dust,
and their flesh like dung.
18 Neither their silver nor their gold
will be able to save them
on the day of the LORD's wrath;
in the fire of his passion
the whole earth shall be consumed;
for a full, a terrible end
he will make of all the inhabitants of the earth.
[Zephaniah 2]
A muted call to repentance
1 Gather together, gather,
O shameless nation,

1893

ZEPHANIAH 1894

2 before you are driven away
like the drifting chaff,
before there comes upon you
the fierce anger of the LORD,
before there comes upon you
the day of the LORD's wrath.
3 Seek the LORD, all you humble of the land,
who do his commands;
seek righteousness, seek humility;
perhaps you may be hidden
on the day of the LORD's wrath.
Against the nations
4 For Gaza shall be deserted,
and Ashkelon shall become a desolation;
Ashdod's people shall be driven out at noon,
and Ekron shall be uprooted.
5 Ah, inhabitants of the seacoast,
you nation of the Cherethites!
The word of the LORD is against you,
O Canaan, land of the Philistines;
and I will destroy you until no inhabitant is left.
6 And you, O seacoast, shall be pastures,
meadows for shepherds
and folds for flocks.
7 The seacoast shall become the possession
of the remnant of the house of Judah,
on which they shall pasture,
and in the houses of Ashkelon
they shall lie down at evening.
For the LORD their God will be mindful of them
and restore their fortunes.

1894

ZEPHANIAH 1895

8 I have heard the taunts of Moab
and the revilings of the Ammonites,
how they have taunted my people
and made boasts against their territory.
9 Therefore, as I live, says the LORD of hosts,
the God of Israel,
Moab shall become like Sodom
and the Ammonites like Gomorrah,
a land possessed by nettles and salt pits,
and a waste forever.
The remnant of my people shall plunder them,
and the survivors of my nation shall possess them.
10 This shall be their lot in return for their pride,
because they scoffed and boasted
against the people of the LORD of hosts.
11 The LORD will be terrible against them;
he will shrivel all the gods of the earth,
and to him shall bow down,
each in its place,
all the coasts and islands of the nations.
12 You also, O Ethiopians,
shall be killed by my sword.
13 And he will stretch out his hand against the north,
and destroy Assyria;
and he will make Nineveh a desolation,
a dry waste like the desert.
14 Herds shall lie down in it,
every wild animal;
the desert owl and the screech owl
shall lodge on its capitals;
the owl shall hoot at the window,
the raven croak on the threshold;
for its cedar work will be laid bare.

1895

ZEPHANIAH 1896

15 Is this the exultant city
that lived secure,
that said to itself,
"I am, and there is no one else"?
What a desolation it has become,
a lair for wild animals!
Everyone who passes by it
hisses and shakes the fist.
[Zephaniah 3]
Against Jerusalem
1 Ah, soiled, defiled,
oppressing city!
2 It has listened to no voice;
it has accepted no correction.
It has not trusted in the LORD;
it has not drawn near to its God.
3 The officials within it
are roaring lions;
its judges are evening wolves
that leave nothing until the morning.
4 Its prophets are reckless,
faithless persons;
its priests have profaned what is sacred,
they have done violence to the law.
5 The LORD within it is righteous;
he does no wrong.
Every morning he renders his judgment,
each dawn without fail;
but the unjust knows no shame.

1896

ZEPHANIAH 1897

6 I have cut off nations;
their battlements are in ruins;
I have laid waste their streets
so that no one walks in them;
their cities have been made desolate,
without people, without inhabitants.
7 I said, "Surely the city will fear me,
it will accept correction;
it will not lose sight
of all that I have brought upon it."
But they were the more eager
to make all their deeds corrupt.
8 Therefore wait for me, says the LORD,
for the day when I arise as a witness.
For my decision is to gather nations,
to assemble kingdoms,
to pour out upon them my indignation,
all the heat of my anger;
for in the fire of my passion
all the earth shall be consumed.
Oracles of salvation
9 At that time I will change the speech of the peoples
to a pure speech,
that all of them may call on the name of the LORD
and serve him with one accord.
10 From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia
my suppliants, my scattered ones,
shall bring my offering.
11 On that day you shall not be put to shame
because of all the deeds by which you have rebelled against me;
for then I will remove from your midst
your proudly exultant ones,
and you shall no longer be haughty
in my holy mountain.

1897

ZEPHANIAH 1898

12 For I will leave in the midst of you
a people humble and lowly.
They shall seek refuge in the name of the LORD —
13
the remnant of Israel;
they shall do no wrong
and utter no lies,
nor shall a deceitful tongue
be found in their mouths.
Then they will pasture and lie down,
and no one shall make them afraid.
14 Sing aloud, O daughter Zion;
shout, O Israel!
Rejoice and exult with all your heart,
O daughter Jerusalem!
15 The LORD has taken away the judgments against you,
he has turned away your enemies.
The king of Israel, the LORD, is in your midst;
you shall fear disaster no more.
16 On that day it shall be said to Jerusalem:
Do not fear, O Zion;
do not let your hands grow weak.
17 The LORD, your God, is in your midst,
a warrior who gives victory;
he will rejoice over you with gladness,
he will renew you in his love;
he will exult over you with loud singing
18
as on a day of festival.
I will remove disaster from you,
so that you will not bear reproach for it.
19 I will deal with all your oppressors
at that time.
And I will save the lame
and gather the outcast,
and I will change their shame into praise
and renown in all the earth.

1898

ZEPHANIAH 1899

20 At that time I will bring you home,
at the time when I gather you;
for I will make you renowned and praised
among all the peoples of the earth,
when I restore your fortunes
before your eyes, says the LORD.

1899

HAGGAI 1900

HAGGAI
Introduction
Following three prophetic books set in the late preexilic period,
Haggai, along with the subsequent Zechariah and Malachi, is set in the
postexilic period. When the Persian king Cyrus conquered Babylon, he
not only published a decree (538 BCE) allowing the captive Jews to
return to Judah but also encouraged them to rebuild the Temple at
Jerusalem (Ezra 1.1-4), a policy confirmed by Darius (Ezra 5.17-6.5). It is
possible that under Sheshbazzar, the leader of those who returned,
rebuilding was immediately attempted (Ezra 1.8; 2.68; 5.14-16). By 520
BCE, however, no significant progress was evident (Ezra 3.1-7; 5.16). A
successful effort was then begun, and the new Temple was completed
in the spring of 515 BCE (Ezra 6.14-16).
Along with Zechariah (see Introduction to Zechariah), the man
principally responsible for this major accomplishment was the prophet
Haggai. Outside of references to him in Ezra 5.1 and 6.14, we know
nothing about Haggai. The book bearing his name contains no
biographical data, beyond confirming his pivotal role in inspiring the
Jewish leadership and populace to complete reconstruction of the
Temple, the ritual, economic, administrative, and symbolic center of
their community.
HT

TH

Haggai exhorted Zerrubabel the governor and Joshua the high priest,
the joint leaders of the Judean community, to assume official
leadership in the reconstruction of the Temple, and urged the priests
to purify the practices of worship. These twin projects were, first of all,
urgent practical steps toward unifying the disrupted religious life of
the community. But Haggai also saw them as necessary preparations
for the ideal age.

1900

HAGGAI 1901

The book is organized in five sections (1.1-11; 1.12-15a; 1.15b-2.9; 2.10-19;
2.20-23), each precisely dated from the sixth through the ninth months
of 520 BCE. The precision of the date formulas is rivaled among the
prophets only by those of his contemporary Zechariah (cf. Zech 1.1, 7;
7.1). Four of these sections begin with date formulas and contain
addresses of Haggai, and one (1.12-15a, in which the date formula is at
the end rather than the beginning) records the response of Haggai's
audience.
The initial section (1.1-11) is an oracle of judgment directed against the
people for failing to complete the Temple. In the next section, 1.12-15a,
the people respond favorably. The next two sections (1.15b-2.9; 2.10-19)
are oracles encouraging the people in their efforts. The final section
(2.10-23) is an oracle of salvation, promising that cosmic reversals,
terrestrial justice, and national vindication will follow in the wake of
the reconstruction of the Temple.

[Haggai 1]
An oracle or judgment: While the Temple is in ruins, the people are
cursed
1 In the second year of King Darius, in the sixth month, on the first day
of the month, the word of the LORD came by the prophet Haggai to
Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua son of
Jehozadak, the high priest: 2 Thus says the LORD of hosts: These people
say the time has not yet come to rebuild the LORD's house. 3 Then the
word of the LORD came by the prophet Haggai, saying: 4 Is it a time for
you yourselves to live in your paneled houses, while this house lies in
ruins? 5 Now therefore thus says the LORD of hosts: Consider how you
have fared. 6 You have sown much, and harvested little; you eat, but
you never have enough; you drink, but you never have your fill; you
clothe yourselves, but no one is warm; and you that earn wages earn
wages to put them into a bag with holes.

1901

HAGGAI 1902

7 Thus says the LORD of hosts: Consider how you have fared. 8 Go up to
the hills and bring wood and build the house, so that I may take
pleasure in it and be honored, says the LORD. 9 You have looked for
much, and, lo, it came to little; and when you brought it home, I blew
it away. Why? says the LORD of hosts. Because my house lies in ruins,
while all of you hurry off to your own houses. 10 Therefore the heavens
above you have withheld the dew, and the earth has withheld its
produce. 11 And I have called for a drought on the land and the hills,
on the grain, the new wine, the oil, on what the soil produces, on
human beings and animals, and on all their labors.
A favorable response: The people get to work
12 Then Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, and Joshua son of Jehozadak, the
high priest, with all the remnant of the people, obeyed the voice of the
LORD their God, and the words of the prophet Haggai, as the LORD their
God had sent him; and the people feared the LORD. 13 Then Haggai, the
messenger of the LORD, spoke to the people with the LORD's message,
saying, I am with you, says the LORD. 14 And the LORD stirred up the
spirit of Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit
of Joshua son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and the spirit of all the
remnant of the people; and they came and worked on the house of the
LORD of hosts, their God, 15 on the twenty-fourth day of the month, in
the sixth month.
An oracle of encouragement: The new Temple will be more splendid
than the old
In the second year of King Darius, [Haggai 2] 1 in the seventh month,
on the twenty-first day of the month, the word of the LORD came by
the prophet Haggai, saying: 2 Speak now to Zerubbabel son of
Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua son of Jehozadak, the high
priest, and to the remnant of the people, and say, 3 Who is left among
you that saw this house in its former glory? How does it look to you
now? Is it not in your sight as nothing? 4 Yet now take courage, O
Zerubbabel, says the LORD; take courage, O Joshua, son of Jehozadak,
the high priest; take courage, all you people of the land, says the LORD;
work, for I am with you, says the LORD of hosts, 5 according to the

1902

HAGGAI 1903

promise that I made you when you came out of Egypt. My spirit abides
among you; do not fear. 6 For thus says the LORD of hosts: Once again,
in a little while, I will shake the heavens and the earth and the sea and
the dry land; 7 and I will shake all the nations, so that the treasure of
all nations shall come, and I will fill this house with splendor, says the
LORD of hosts. 8 The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, says the LORD
of hosts. 9 The latter splendor of this house shall be greater than the
former, says the LORD of hosts; and in this place I will give prosperity,
says the LORD of hosts.
An oracle of encouragement: Already, the curse is lifting
10 On the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, in the second year of
Darius, the word of the LORD came by the prophet Haggai, saying: 11
Thus says the LORD of hosts: Ask the priests for a ruling: 12 If one carries
consecrated meat in the fold of one's garment, and with the fold
touches bread, or stew, or wine, or oil, or any kind of food, does it
become holy? The priests answered, "No." 13 Then Haggai said, "If one
who is unclean by contact with a dead body touches any of these, does
it become unclean?" The priests answered, "Yes, it becomes unclean."
14 Haggai then said, So is it with this people, and with this nation
before me, says the LORD; and so with every work of their hands; and
what they offer there is unclean. 15 But now, consider what will come
to pass from this day on. Before a stone was placed upon a stone in the
LORD's temple, 16 how did you fare? When one came to a heap of
twenty measures, there were but ten; when one came to the wine vat
to draw fifty measures, there were but twenty. 17 I struck you and all
the products of your toil with blight and mildew and hail; yet you did
not return to me, says the LORD. 18 Consider from this day on, from the
twenty-fourth day of the ninth month. Since the day that the
foundation of the LORD's temple was laid, consider: 19 Is there any seed
left in the barn? Do the vine, the fig tree, the pomegranate, and the
olive tree still yield nothing? From this day on I will bless you.

1903

HAGGAI 1904

An oracle of salvation: The ideal age is imminent
20 The word of the LORD came a second time to Haggai on the twentyfourth day of the month: 21 Speak to Zerubbabel, governor of Judah,
saying, I am about to shake the heavens and the earth, 22 and to
overthrow the throne of kingdoms; I am about to destroy the strength
of the kingdoms of the nations, and overthrow the chariots and their
riders; and the horses and their riders shall fall, every one by the sword
of a comrade. 23 On that day, says the LORD of hosts, I will take you, O
Zerubbabel my servant, son of Shealtiel, says the LORD, and make you
like a signet ring; for I have chosen you, says the LORD of hosts.

1904

ZECHARIAH 1905

ZECHARIAH
Introduction
The book of Zechariah is the longest and most obscure of the Minor
Prophets. Formally, it divides into two parts. The first, chs 1-8, consists
of a series of vision reports. Often referred to as "First Zechariah," it is
closely tied to the preceding book of Haggai by the date formulas in
1.1; 1.7; and 7.1 (cf. Haggai 1.1; 2.1) and the references to Joshua, the
high priest of Jerusalem, and Zerubbabel, its governor.
The second section, chs 9-14, is a collection of sayings organized in two
parts under the title "An Oracle" (9.1; 12.1). "Second Zechariah," as it is
sometimes called, is similar in form to the subsequent book, Malachi,
which itself begins with the same title (Mal 1.1). These oracles cite
neither specific dates nor contemporary persons. Their concerns are for
"that day," the Day of the Lord (e.g., 9.16; 12.3; 13.1; 14.1), and for
unnamed persons such as a king who enters Jerusalem on a donkey
(9.9) and a "shepherd" stricken by a divine sword (13.7).
The prophecies in the first part date from 520-518 BCE. Zechariah, a
contemporary of Haggai, prophesied in the early days of the
restoration, when returning exiles joined with those who never left to
rebuild Judahite society. There are no biographical details in the book
itself, but Zechariah is mentioned, along with Haggai, in Ezra 5.1 and
6.14. He shared Haggai's zeal for a rebuilt Temple, a purified
community, and the coming of an ideal age. But Zechariah differs from
Haggai in the form and presentation of his message. Zechariah speaks
in the dialect of apocalyptic, with angelic interpreters and esoteric
imagery. For his city, Zechariah had utopian expectations: The
rebuilding of the Temple would inaugurate nothing short of the
transformation of the world. For its leaders, Zechariah had messianic
hope (4.14). Yet despite the apocalyptic style, Zech 1-8 also has a down-

1905

ZECHARIAH 1906

to-earth focus on the rebuilding of the Temple, practical concerns such
as fasting (7.1-14), and a given historical moment.
The second part of the book is more difficult to date, and its historical
background is elusive. The reference to "Greece" (9.13) could suggest a
date after Alexander the Great's campaigns (after ca. 330 BCE) but it is
unwise to rely on a single datum. Though its oracles do not mention
other-worldly interpreters, Zech 9-14 also contains an apocalyptic
message. Conflicts in the restoration community are described against
a cosmic backdrop (see the contrast between Judah and Jerusalem in
12.1-5). The ever present vulnerability of Judah to the parade of
empires finds vivid expression: The nations attack Jerusalem but the
Lord intervenes to defeat them and transform Jerusalem into a kind of
Eden (14.1-11).
Zechariah is best read from start to finish: chs 1-8 in conjunction with
Haggai; chs 9-14 in conjunction with Malachi. In terms of the
development of apocalyptic literature in the Hebrew Bible, Zechariah
stands between Ezekiel (e.g., chs 38-39) and Daniel (chs 7-12).

[Zechariah 1]
Visions and oracles about the restoration of Jerusalem; a call to
repentance
1 In the eighth month, in the second year of Darius, the word of the
LORD came to the prophet Zechariah son of Berechiah son of Iddo,
saying: 2 The LORD was very angry with your ancestors. 3 Therefore say
to them, Thus says the LORD of hosts: Return to me, says the LORD of
hosts, and I will return to you, says the LORD of hosts. 4 Do not be like
your ancestors, to whom the former prophets proclaimed, "Thus says
the LORD of hosts, Return from your evil ways and from your evil
deeds." But they did not hear or heed me, says the LORD. 5 Your
ancestors, where are they? And the prophets, do they live forever? 6
But my words and my statutes, which I commanded my servants the
prophets, did they not overtake your ancestors? So they repented and

1906

ZECHARIAH 1907

said, "The LORD of hosts has dealt with us according to our ways and
deeds, just as he planned to do."
The eight visions of Zechariah; the first vision: the divine horsemen
patrol the earth
7 On the twenty-fourth day of the eleventh month, the month of
Shebat, in the second year of Darius, the word of the LORD came to the
prophet Zechariah son of Berechiah son of Iddo; and Zechariah said, 8
In the night I saw a man riding on a red horse! He was standing among
the myrtle trees in the glen; and behind him were red, sorrel, and
white horses. 9 Then I said, "What are these, my lord?" The angel who
talked with me said to me, "I will show you what they are." 10 So the
man who was standing among the myrtle trees answered, "They are
those whom the LORD has sent to patrol the earth." 11 Then they spoke
to the angel of the LORD who was standing among the myrtle trees,
"We have patrolled the earth, and lo, the whole earth remains at
peace." 12 Then the angel of the LORD said, "O LORD of hosts, how long
will you withhold mercy from Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, with
which you have been angry these seventy years?" 13 Then the LORD
replied with gracious and comforting words to the angel who talked
with me. 14 So the angel who talked with me said to me, Proclaim this
message: Thus says the LORD of hosts; I am very jealous for Jerusalem
and for Zion. 15 And I am extremely angry with the nations that are at
ease; for while I was only a little angry, they made the disaster worse.
16 Therefore, thus says the LORD, I have returned to Jerusalem with
compassion; my house shall be built in it, says the LORD of hosts, and
the measuring line shall be stretched out over Jerusalem. 17 Proclaim
further: Thus says the LORD of hosts: My cities shall again overflow with
prosperity; the LORD will again comfort Zion and again choose
Jerusalem.
The second vision: four horns and four smiths
18 And I looked up and saw four horns. 19 I asked the angel who talked
with me, "What are these?" And he answered me, "These are the
horns that have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem." 20 Then the
LORD showed me four blacksmiths. 21 And I asked, "What are they

1907

ZECHARIAH 1908

coming to do?" He answered, "These are the horns that scattered
Judah, so that no head could be raised; but these have come to terrify
them, to strike down the horns of the nations that lifted up their horns
against the land of Judah to scatter its people."
[Zechariah 2]
The third vision: a surveyor measures Jerusalem
1 I looked up and saw a man with a measuring line in his hand. 2 Then I
asked, "Where are you going?" He answered me, "To measure
Jerusalem, to see what is its width and what is its length." 3 Then the
angel who talked with me came forward, and another angel came
forward to meet him, 4 and said to him, "Run, say to that young man:
Jerusalem shall be inhabited like villages without walls, because of the
multitude of people and animals in it. 5 For I will be a wall of fire all
around it, says the LORD, and I will be the glory within it."
A summons to the exiles
6 Up, up! Flee from the land of the north, says the LORD; for I have
spread you abroad like the four winds of heaven, says the LORD. 7 Up!
Escape to Zion, you that live with daughter Babylon. 8 For thus said the
LORD of hosts (after his glory sent me) regarding the nations that
plundered you: Truly, one who touches you touches the apple of my
eye. 9 See now, I am going to raise my hand against them, and they
shall become plunder for their own slaves. Then you will know that the
LORD of hosts has sent me. 10 Sing and rejoice, O daughter Zion! For lo,
I will come and dwell in your midst, says the LORD. 11 Many nations shall
join themselves to the LORD on that day, and shall be my people; and I
will dwell in your midst. And you shall know that the LORD of hosts has
sent me to you. 12 The LORD will inherit Judah as his portion in the holy
land, and will again choose Jerusalem.
13 Be silent, all people, before the LORD; for he has roused himself from
his holy dwelling.

1908

ZECHARIAH 1909

[Zechariah 3]
The fourth vision: Joshua and the Satan
1 Then he showed me the high priest Joshua standing before the angel
of the LORD, and Satan standing at his right hand to accuse him. 2 And
the LORD said to Satan, "The LORD rebuke you, O Satan! The LORD who
has chosen Jerusalem rebuke you! Is not this man a brand plucked from
the fire?" 3 Now Joshua was dressed with filthy clothes as he stood
before the angel. 4 The angel said to those who were standing before
him, "Take off his filthy clothes." And to him he said, "See, I have
taken your guilt away from you, and I will clothe you with festal
apparel." 5 And I said, "Let them put a clean turban on his head." So
they put a clean turban on his head and clothed him with the apparel;
and the angel of the LORD was standing by.
6 Then the angel of the LORD assured Joshua, saying 7 "Thus says the
LORD of hosts: If you will walk in my ways and keep my requirements,
then you shall rule my house and have charge of my courts, and I will
give you the right of access among those who are standing here. 8
Now listen, Joshua, high priest, you and your colleagues who sit before
you! For they are an omen of things to come: I am going to bring my
servant the Branch. 9 For on the stone that I have set before Joshua, on
a single stone with seven facets, I will engrave its inscription, says the
LORD of hosts, and I will remove the guilt of this land in a single day. 10
On that day, says the LORD of hosts, you shall invite each other to come
under your vine and fig tree."
[Zechariah 4]
The fifth vision: a lampstand and two olive trees
1 The angel who talked with me came again, and wakened me, as one
is wakened from sleep. 2 He said to me, "What do you see?" And I said,
"I see a lampstand all of gold, with a bowl on the top of it; there are
seven lamps on it, with seven lips on each of the lamps that are on the
top of it. 3 And by it there are two olive trees, one on the right of the
bowl and the other on its left." 4 I said to the angel who talked with
me, "What are these, my lord?" 5 Then the angel who talked with me
answered me, "Do you not know what these are?" I said, "No, my

1909

ZECHARIAH 1910

lord." 6 He said to me, "This is the word of the LORD to Zerubbabel: Not
by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, says the LORD of hosts. 7 What
are you, O great mountain? Before Zerubbabel you shall become a
plain; and he shall bring out the top stone amid shouts of 'Grace, grace
to it!'"
8 Moreover the word of the LORD came to me, saying, 9 "The hands of
Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house; his hands shall also
complete it. Then you will know that the LORD of hosts has sent me to
you. 10 For whoever has despised the day of small things shall rejoice,
and shall see the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel.
"These seven are the eyes of the LORD, which range through the whole
earth." 11 Then I said to him, "What are these two olive trees on the
right and the left of the lampstand?" 12 And a second time I said to
him, "What are these two branches of the olive trees, which pour out
the oil through the two golden pipes?" 13 He said to me, "Do you not
know what these are?" I said, "No, my lord." 14 Then he said, "These
are the two anointed ones who stand by the Lord of the whole earth."
[Zechariah 5]
The sixth vision: a flying scroll
1 Again I looked up and saw a flying scroll. 2 And he said to me, "What
do you see?" I answered, "I see a flying scroll; its length is twenty
cubits, and its width ten cubits." 3 Then he said to me, "This is the curse
that goes out over the face of the whole land; for everyone who steals
shall be cut off according to the writing on one side, and everyone
who swears falsely shall be cut off according to the writing on the
other side. 4 I have sent it out, says the LORD of hosts, and it shall enter
the house of the thief, and the house of anyone who swears falsely by
my name; and it shall abide in that house and consume it, both timber
and stones."

1910

ZECHARIAH 1911

The seventh vision: a woman in a basket
5 Then the angel who talked with me came forward and said to me,
"Look up and see what this is that is coming out." 6 I said, "What is
it?" He said, "This is a basket coming out." And he said, "This is their
iniquity in all the land." 7 Then a leaden cover was lifted, and there
was a woman sitting in the basket! 8 And he said, "This is Wickedness."
So he thrust her back into the basket, and pressed the leaden weight
down on its mouth. 9 Then I looked up and saw two women coming
forward. The wind was in their wings; they had wings like the wings of
a stork, and they lifted up the basket between earth and sky. 10 Then I
said to the angel who talked with me, "Where are they taking the
basket?" 11 He said to me, "To the land of Shinar, to build a house for
it; and when this is prepared, they will set the basket down there on its
base."
[Zechariah 6]
The eighth vision: four chariots
1 And again I looked up and saw four chariots coming out from
between two mountains — mountains of bronze. 2 The first chariot
had red horses, the second chariot black horses, 3 the third chariot
white horses, and the fourth chariot dappled gray horses. 4 Then I said
to the angel who talked with me, "What are these, my lord?" 5 The
angel answered me, "These are the four winds of heaven going out,
after presenting themselves before the Lord of all the earth. 6 The
chariot with the black horses goes toward the north country, the white
ones go toward the west country, and the dappled ones go toward the
south country." 7 When the steeds came out, they were impatient to
get off and patrol the earth. And he said, "Go, patrol the earth." So
they patrolled the earth. 8 Then he cried out to me, "Lo, those who go
toward the north country have set my spirit at rest in the north
country."

1911

ZECHARIAH 1912

The coronation
9 The word of the LORD came to me: 10 Collect silver and gold from the
exiles — from Heldai, Tobijah, and Jedaiah — who have arrived from
Babylon; and go the same day to the house of Josiah son of Zephaniah.
11 Take the silver and gold and make a crown, and set it on the head of
the high priest Joshua son of Jehozadak; 12 say to him: Thus says the
LORD of hosts: Here is a man whose name is Branch: for he shall branch
out in his place, and he shall build the temple of the LORD. 13 It is he
that shall build the temple of the LORD; he shall bear royal honor, and
shall sit upon his throne and rule. There shall be a priest by his throne,
with peaceful understanding between the two of them. 14 And the
crown shall be in the care of Heldai, Tobijah, Jedaiah, and Josiah son of
Zephaniah, as a memorial in the temple of the LORD.
15 Those who are far off shall come and help to build the temple of the
LORD; and you shall know that the LORD of hosts has sent me to you.
This will happen if you diligently obey the voice of the LORD your God.
[Zechariah 7]
Various oracles
1 In the fourth year of King Darius, the word of the LORD came to
Zechariah on the fourth day of the ninth month, which is Chislev. 2
Now the people of Bethel had sent Sharezer and Regem-melech and
their men, to entreat the favor of the LORD, 3 and to ask the priests of
the house of the LORD of hosts and the prophets, "Should I mourn and
practice abstinence in the fifth month, as I have done for so many
years?" 4 Then the word of the LORD of hosts came to me: 5 Say to all
the people of the land and the priests: When you fasted and lamented
in the fifth month and in the seventh, for these seventy years, was it
for me that you fasted? 6 And when you eat and when you drink, do
you not eat and drink only for yourselves? 7 Were not these the words
that the LORD proclaimed by the former prophets, when Jerusalem was
inhabited and in prosperity, along with the towns around it, and when
the Negeb and the Shephelah were inhabited?

1912

ZECHARIAH 1913

8 The word of the LORD came to Zechariah, saying: 9 Thus says the LORD
of hosts: Render true judgments, show kindness and mercy to one
another; 10 do not oppress the widow, the orphan, the alien, or the
poor; and do not devise evil in your hearts against one another. 11 But
they refused to listen, and turned a stubborn shoulder, and stopped
their ears in order not to hear. 12 They made their hearts adamant in
order not to hear the law and the words that the LORD of hosts had
sent by his spirit through the former prophets. Therefore great wrath
came from the LORD of hosts. 13 Just as, when I called, they would not
hear, so, when they called, I would not hear, says the LORD of hosts, 14
and I scattered them with a whirlwind among all the nations that they
had not known. Thus the land they left was desolate, so that no one
went to and fro, and a pleasant land was made desolate.
[Zechariah 8]
Ten sayings about Jerusalem
1 The word of the LORD of hosts came to me, saying: 2 Thus says the
LORD of hosts: I am jealous for Zion with great jealousy, and I am
jealous for her with great wrath. 3 Thus says the LORD: I will return to
Zion, and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem; Jerusalem shall be called
the faithful city, and the mountain of the LORD of hosts shall be called
the holy mountain. 4 Thus says the LORD of hosts: Old men and old
women shall again sit in the streets of Jerusalem, each with staff in
hand because of their great age. 5 And the streets of the city shall be
full of boys and girls playing in its streets. 6 Thus says the LORD of hosts:
Even though it seems impossible to the remnant of this people in these
days, should it also seem impossible to me, says the LORD of hosts? 7
Thus says the LORD of hosts: I will save my people from the east country
and from the west country; 8 and I will bring them to live in Jerusalem.
They shall be my people and I will be their God, in faithfulness and in
righteousness.
9 Thus says the LORD of hosts: Let your hands be strong — you that
have recently been hearing these words from the mouths of the
prophets who were present when the foundation was laid for the
rebuilding of the temple, the house of the LORD of hosts. 10 For before
those days there were no wages for people or for animals, nor was

1913

ZECHARIAH 1914

there any safety from the foe for those who went out or came in, and I
set them all against one another. 11 But now I will not deal with the
remnant of this people as in the former days, says the LORD of hosts. 12
For there shall be a sowing of peace; the vine shall yield its fruit, the
ground shall give its produce, and the skies shall give their dew; and I
will cause the remnant of this people to possess all these things. 13 Just
as you have been a cursing among the nations, O house of Judah and
house of Israel, so I will save you and you shall be a blessing. Do not be
afraid, but let your hands be strong.
14 For thus says the LORD of hosts: Just as I purposed to bring disaster
upon you, when your ancestors provoked me to wrath, and I did not
relent, says the LORD of hosts, 15 so again I have purposed in these days
to do good to Jerusalem and to the house of Judah; do not be afraid.
16 These are the things that you shall do: Speak the truth to one
another, render in your gates judgments that are true and make for
peace, 17 do not devise evil in your hearts against one another, and
love no false oath; for all these are things that I hate, says the LORD.
18 The word of the LORD of hosts came to me, saying: 19 Thus says the
LORD of hosts: The fast of the fourth month, and the fast of the fifth,
and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth, shall be seasons
of joy and gladness, and cheerful festivals for the house of Judah:
therefore love truth and peace.
20 Thus says the LORD of hosts: Peoples shall yet come, the inhabitants
of many cities; 21 the inhabitants of one city shall go to another,
saying, "Come, let us go to entreat the favor of the LORD, and to seek
the LORD of hosts; I myself am going." 22 Many peoples and strong
nations shall come to seek the LORD of hosts in Jerusalem, and to
entreat the favor of the LORD. 23 Thus says the LORD of hosts: In those
days ten men from nations of every language shall take hold of a Jew,
grasping his garment and saying, "Let us go with you, for we have
heard that God is with you."

1914

ZECHARIAH 1915

[Zechariah 9]
The two burdens of Zechariah; the first burden; the Lord subdues
Israel's neighbors
An Oracle.
1 The word of the LORD is against the land of Hadrach
and will rest upon Damascus.
For to the LORD belongs the capital of Aram,
as do all the tribes of Israel;
2 Hamath also, which borders on it,
Tyre and Sidon, though they are very wise.
3 Tyre has built itself a rampart,
and heaped up silver like dust,
and gold like the dirt of the streets.
4 But now, the Lord will strip it of its possessions
and hurl its wealth into the sea,
and it shall be devoured by fire.
5 Ashkelon shall see it and be afraid;
Gaza too, and shall writhe in anguish;
Ekron also, because its hopes are withered.
The king shall perish from Gaza;
Ashkelon shall be uninhabited;
6 a mongrel people shall settle in Ashdod,
and I will make an end of the pride of Philistia.
7 I will take away its blood from its mouth,
and its abominations from between its teeth;
it too shall be a remnant for our God;
it shall be like a clan in Judah,
and Ekron shall be like the Jebusites.
8 Then I will encamp at my house as a guard,
so that no one shall march to and fro;
no oppressor shall again overrun them,
for now I have seen with my own eyes.

1915

ZECHARIAH 1916

The king of peace
9 Rejoice greatly, O daughter Zion!
Shout aloud, O daughter Jerusalem!
Lo, your king comes to you;
triumphant and victorious is he,
humble and riding on a donkey,
on a colt, the foal of a donkey.
10 He will cut off the chariot from Ephraim
and the war-horse from Jerusalem;
and the battle bow shall be cut off,
and he shall command peace to the nations;
his dominion shall be from sea to sea,
and from the River to the ends of the earth.
The Lord liberates dispersed Israelites and leads them home
11 As for you also, because of the blood of my covenant with you,
I will set your prisoners free from the waterless pit.
12 Return to your stronghold, O prisoners of hope;
today I declare that I will restore to you double.
13 For I have bent Judah as my bow;
I have made Ephraim its arrow.
I will arouse your sons, O Zion,
against your sons, O Greece,
and wield you like a warrior's sword.
14 Then the LORD will appear over them,
and his arrow go forth like lightning;
the Lord GOD will sound the trumpet
and march forth in the whirlwinds of the south.
15 The LORD of hosts will protect them,
and they shall devour and tread down the slingers;
they shall drink their blood like wine,
and be full like a bowl,
drenched like the corners of the altar.

1916

ZECHARIAH 1917

16 On that day the LORD their God will save them
for they are the flock of his people;
for like the jewels of a crown
they shall shine on his land.
17 For what goodness and beauty are his!
Grain shall make the young men flourish,
and new wine the young women.
[Zechariah 10]
An admonition to consult the Lord for the weather
1 Ask rain from the LORD
in the season of the spring rain,
from the LORD who makes the storm clouds,
who gives showers of rain to you,
the vegetation in the field to everyone.
2 For the teraphim utter nonsense,
and the diviners see lies;
the dreamers tell false dreams,
and give empty consolation.
Therefore the people wander like sheep;
they suffer for lack of a shepherd.
The Lord brings Israel home
3 My anger is hot against the shepherds,
and I will punish the leaders;
for the LORD of hosts cares for his flock, the house of Judah,
and will make them like his proud war-horse.
4 Out of them shall come the cornerstone,
out of them the tent peg,
out of them the battle bow,
out of them every commander.
5 Together they shall be like warriors in battle,
trampling the foe in the mud of the streets;
they shall fight, for the LORD is with them,
and they shall put to shame the riders on horses.

1917

ZECHARIAH 1918

6 I will strengthen the house of Judah,
and I will save the house of Joseph.
I will bring them back because I have compassion on them,
and they shall be as though I had not rejected them;
for I am the LORD their God and I will answer them.
7 Then the people of Ephraim shall become like warriors,
and their hearts shall be glad as with wine.
Their children shall see it and rejoice,
their hearts shall exult in the LORD.
8 I will signal for them and gather them in,
for I have redeemed them,
and they shall be as numerous as they were before.
9 Though I scattered them among the nations,
yet in far countries they shall remember me,
and they shall rear their children and return.
10 I will bring them home from the land of Egypt,
and gather them from Assyria;
I will bring them to the land of Gilead and to Lebanon,
until there is no room for them.
11 They shall pass through the sea of distress,
and the waves of the sea shall be struck down,
and all the depths of the Nile dried up.
The pride of Assyria shall be laid low,
and the scepter of Egypt shall depart.
12 I will make them strong in the LORD,
and they shall walk in his name,
says the LORD.
[Zechariah 11]
The fall of the tyrants
1 Open your doors, O Lebanon,
so that fire may devour your cedars!
2 Wail, O cypress, for the cedar has fallen,
for the glorious trees are ruined!
Wail, oaks of Bashan,
for the thick forest has been felled!

1918

ZECHARIAH 1919

3 Listen, the wail of the shepherds,
for their glory is despoiled!
Listen, the roar of the lions,
for the thickets of the Jordan are destroyed!
The worthless shepherd
4 Thus said the LORD my God: Be a shepherd of the flock doomed to
slaughter. 5 Those who buy them kill them and go unpunished; and
those who sell them say, "Blessed be the LORD, for I have become rich";
and their own shepherds have no pity on them. 6 For I will no longer
have pity on the inhabitants of the earth, says the LORD. I will cause
them, every one, to fall each into the hand of a neighbor, and each
into the hand of the king; and they shall devastate the earth, and I will
deliver no one from their hand.
7 So, on behalf of the sheep merchants, I became the shepherd of the
flock doomed to slaughter. I took two staffs; one I named Favor, the
other I named Unity, and I tended the sheep. 8 In one month I disposed
of the three shepherds, for I had become impatient with them, and
they also detested me. 9 So I said, "I will not be your shepherd. What is
to die, let it die; what is to be destroyed, let it be destroyed; and let
those that are left devour the flesh of one another!" 10 I took my staff
Favor and broke it, annulling the covenant that I had made with all the
peoples. 11 So it was annulled on that day, and the sheep merchants,
who were watching me, knew that it was the word of the LORD. 12 I
then said to them, "If it seems right to you, give me my wages; but if
not, keep them." So they weighed out as my wages thirty shekels of
silver. 13 Then the LORD said to me, "Throw it into the treasury" — this
lordly price at which I was valued by them. So I took the thirty shekels
of silver and threw them into the treasury in the house of the LORD. 14
Then I broke my second staff Unity, annulling the family ties between
Judah and Israel.
15 Then the LORD said to me: Take once more the implements of a
worthless shepherd. 16 For I am now raising up in the land a shepherd
who does not care for the perishing, or seek the wandering, or heal

1919

ZECHARIAH 1920

the maimed, or nourish the healthy, but devours the flesh of the fat
ones, tearing off even their hoofs.
17 Oh, my worthless shepherd,
who deserts the flock!
May the sword strike his arm
and his right eye!
Let his arm be completely withered,
his right eye utterly blinded!
[Zechariah 12]
The second burden; sayings about the coming Day of the Lord
An Oracle.
1 The word of the LORD concerning Israel: Thus says the LORD, who
stretched out the heavens and founded the earth and formed the
human spirit within: 2 See, I am about to make Jerusalem a cup of
reeling for all the surrounding peoples; it will be against Judah also in
the siege against Jerusalem. 3 On that day I will make Jerusalem a
heavy stone for all the peoples; all who lift it shall grievously hurt
themselves. And all the nations of the earth shall come together
against it. 4 On that day, says the LORD, I will strike every horse with
panic, and its rider with madness. But on the house of Judah I will keep
a watchful eye, when I strike every horse of the peoples with blindness.
5 Then the clans of Judah shall say to themselves, "The inhabitants of
Jerusalem have strength through the LORD of hosts, their God."
6 On that day I will make the clans of Judah like a blazing pot on a pile
of wood, like a flaming torch among sheaves; and they shall devour to
the right and to the left all the surrounding peoples, while Jerusalem
shall again be inhabited in its place, in Jerusalem.
7 And the LORD will give victory to the tents of Judah first, that the
glory of the house of David and the glory of the inhabitants of
Jerusalem may not be exalted over that of Judah. 8 On that day the
LORD will shield the inhabitants of Jerusalem so that the feeblest
among them on that day shall be like David, and the house of David
shall be like God, like the angel of the LORD, at their head. 9 And on

1920

ZECHARIAH 1921

that day I will seek to destroy all the nations that come against
Jerusalem.
10 And I will pour out a spirit of compassion and supplication on the
house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that, when they
look on the one whom they have pierced, they shall mourn for him, as
one mourns for an only child, and weep bitterly over him, as one
weeps over a firstborn. 11 On that day the mourning in Jerusalem will
be as great as the mourning for Hadad-rimmon in the plain of
Megiddo. 12 The land shall mourn, each family by itself; the family of
the house of David by itself, and their wives by themselves; the family
of the house of Nathan by itself, and their wives by themselves; 13 the
family of the house of Levi by itself, and their wives by themselves; the
family of the Shimeites by itself, and their wives by themselves; 14 and
all the families that are left, each by itself, and their wives by
themselves.
[Zechariah 13]
1 On that day a fountain shall be opened for the house of David and
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, to cleanse them from sin and impurity.
2 On that day, says the LORD of hosts, I will cut off the names of the
idols from the land, so that they shall be remembered no more; and
also I will remove from the land the prophets and the unclean spirit. 3
And if any prophets appear again, their fathers and mothers who bore
them will say to them, "You shall not live, for you speak lies in the
name of the LORD"; and their fathers and their mothers who bore them
shall pierce them through when they prophesy. 4 On that day the
prophets will be ashamed, every one, of their visions when they
prophesy; they will not put on a hairy mantle in order to deceive, 5 but
each of them will say, "I am no prophet, I am a tiller of the soil; for the
land has been my possession since my youth." 6 And if anyone asks
them, "What are these wounds on your chest?" the answer will be
"The wounds I received in the house of my friends."

1921

ZECHARIAH 1922

The stricken shepherd
7 "Awake, O sword, against my shepherd,
against the man who is my associate,"
says the LORD of hosts.
Strike the shepherd, that the sheep may be scattered;
I will turn my hand against the little ones.
8 In the whole land, says the LORD,
two-thirds shall be cut off and perish,
and one-third shall be left alive.
9 And I will put this third into the fire,
refine them as one refines silver,
and test them as gold is tested.
They will call on my name,
and I will answer them.
I will say, "They are my people";
and they will say, "The LORD is our God."
[Zechariah 14]
The final battle
1 See, a day is coming for the LORD, when the plunder taken from you
will be divided in your midst. 2 For I will gather all the nations against
Jerusalem to battle, and the city shall be taken and the houses looted
and the women raped; half the city shall go into exile, but the rest of
the people shall not be cut off from the city. 3 Then the LORD will go
forth and fight against those nations as when he fights on a day of
battle. 4 On that day his feet shall stand on the Mount of Olives, which
lies before Jerusalem on the east; and the Mount of Olives shall be split
in two from east to west by a very wide valley; so that one half of the
Mount shall withdraw northward, and the other half southward. 5 And
you shall flee by the valley of the LORD's mountain, for the valley
between the mountains shall reach to Azal; and you shall flee as you
fled from the earthquake in the days of King Uzziah of Judah. Then
the LORD my God will come, and all the holy ones with him.

1922

ZECHARIAH 1923

6 On that day there shall not be either cold or frost. 7 And there shall
be continuous day (it is known to the LORD), not day and not night, for
at evening time there shall be light.
8 On that day living waters shall flow out from Jerusalem, half of them
to the eastern sea and half of them to the western sea; it shall continue
in summer as in winter.
9 And the LORD will become king over all the earth; on that day the
LORD will be one and his name one.
10 The whole land shall be turned into a plain from Geba to Rimmon
south of Jerusalem. But Jerusalem shall remain aloft on its site from the
Gate of Benjamin to the place of the former gate, to the Corner Gate,
and from the Tower of Hananel to the king's wine presses. 11 And it
shall be inhabited, for never again shall it be doomed to destruction;
Jerusalem shall abide in security.
12 This shall be the plague with which the LORD will strike all the
peoples that wage war against Jerusalem: their flesh shall rot while
they are still on their feet; their eyes shall rot in their sockets, and their
tongues shall rot in their mouths. 13 On that day a great panic from the
LORD shall fall on them, so that each will seize the hand of a neighbor,
and the hand of the one will be raised against the hand of the other;
14 even Judah will fight at Jerusalem. And the wealth of all the
surrounding nations shall be collected — gold, silver, and garments in
great abundance. 15 And a plague like this plague shall fall on the
horses, the mules, the camels, the donkeys, and whatever animals may
be in those camps.
16 Then all who survive of the nations that have come against
Jerusalem shall go up year after year to worship the King, the LORD of
hosts, and to keep the festival of booths. 17 If any of the families of the
earth do not go up to Jerusalem to worship the King, the LORD of hosts,
there will be no rain upon them. 18 And if the family of Egypt do not
go up and present themselves, then on them shall come the plague
that the LORD inflicts on the nations that do not go up to keep the
festival of booths. 19 Such shall be the punishment of Egypt and the

1923

ZECHARIAH 1924

punishment of all the nations that do not go up to keep the festival of
booths.
20 On that day there shall be inscribed on the bells of the horses, "Holy
to the LORD." And the cooking pots in the house of the LORD shall be as
holy as the bowls in front of the altar; 21 and every cooking pot in
Jerusalem and Judah shall be sacred to the LORD of hosts, so that all
who sacrifice may come and use them to boil the flesh of the sacrifice.
And there shall no longer be traders in the house of the LORD of hosts
on that day.

1924

MALACHI 1925

MALACHI
Introduction
The final book of the Minor Prophets is Malachi, whose placement
following Haggai and Zechariah is probably based on a chronological
principle, since the frequent allusions to Temple activity in the book
presume the success of those prophets (e.g., Hag 1.7; Zech 6.15) in the
restoration of the Temple. The superscription to Malachi ("an oracle,"
1.1) further binds the book to its predecessor (cf. Zech 9.1; 12.1).
Nothing is known about the person of Malachi. Even his name, which
means "my messenger," may be only an appellation, based on 3.1 (cf.
2.7). Though the book neither alludes to historical events nor includes
date formulas, it seems to reflect the period of the fifth century BCE,
since it presumes a completed Temple (which occurred in 515 BCE) and
also shared many of the concerns with Ezra and Nehemiah, normally
dated to the second half of the fifth century, including tithing (3.8-12;
Neh 10.37-39; 13.10-14) and mixed marriages (2.10-12; Ezra 9-10; Neh
11.23-27).
This prophetic voice was devoted to the Temple and held a high view
of the priesthood and its responsibilities. he speaks frequently of the
covenant (2.4, 5, 8, 10, 14; 3.1) and shows great respect for the priestly
"instruction" (torah, 2.6-9). Instead of adopting the poetic style used
by earlier prophets, Malachi speaks in a more prosaic voice and adopts
a question-and-answer method of stating his argument. Nevertheless,
his emphases upon sin, judgment, and repentance, and upon an
imminent day of reckoning (3.1-5,7; 4.1-3, 6) mark him as a prophet, and
he may be best understood as a "cultic prophet," like Joel.
The extravagant hopes of the restoration prophets had not
materialized (Hag 2.6-9; Zech 8.1-5, 20-23). The Temple had been rebuilt
but the ideal age had not begun. Malachi probably spoke to a
1925

MALACHI 1926

disheartened audience which questioned both the love (1.2) and justice
(2.17) of God. Malachi reversed the discussion: God, he avers, has been
faithful to the covenant (1.2; 2.5-7; and esp. 3.6, "For I the Lord do not
change"); it is Judah that has been faithless (1.6; 2.8, 14; 3.8).
Furthermore, any lingering doubts about divine justice will be
addressed and overcome, the prophet states, soon enough when the
Lord comes in judgment (2.17-3.5; 3.16-4.6).
Following the superscription (1.1), the book contains six units that
follow a similar pattern. The pattern is argumentative and
disputational. The prophet makes a statement (e.g., "I have love you,
says the Lord," 1.2a), followed by a question voiced by the prophet but
attributed to the audience (e.g., "But you say, 'How have you loved
us?'" 1.2b), followed by the prophet's response. The six units are 1.2-5;
1.6-2.9; 2.10-16; 2.17-3.5; 3.6-12; 3.13-4.3. Two appendices (4.4; 4.5-6),
probably added later, complete the book.
Overall, the book can be read as a single argument. Against a
background of ennui (see the "weariness" of the people in 1.13; of God
in 3.17), the prophet emphasizes God's reliability (1.2-5) and
countercharges that it is the priests (1.6-2.9) and the larger society (2.1016) who have been unfaithful. Nevertheless, divine judgment is
imminent (2.17-3.5), so the people should return to God 3.6-12). In the
end, the faithful remnant in the community will be vindicated (3.134.3).
In Jewish Bibles, Malachi ends the Book of the Twelve and the entire
prophetic collection which, in Hebrew, began with Joshua 1.1-2 (see Mal
4.4-6). In Christian Bibles it ends the Old Testament; its final words
about Elijah as messenger, already in the Gospels and subsequently in
Christian tradition, are traditionally interpreted to foreshadow Jesus as
the Christ. For an expansion of this in early Christian tradition, see Mt
11.7-15; 17.10-13; Mk 6.14-16; Lk 1.17; cf. Sir 48.10.

1926

MALACHI 1927

[Malachi 1]
Superscription
1 An oracle. The word of the LORD to Israel by Malachi.
An affirmation of God's faithfulness to Israel
2 I have loved you, says the LORD. But you say, "How have you loved
us?" Is not Esau Jacob's brother? says the LORD. Yet I have loved Jacob 3
but I have hated Esau; I have made his hill country a desolation and his
heritage a desert for jackals. 4 If Edom says, "We are shattered but we
will rebuild the ruins," the LORD of hosts says: They may build, but I will
tear down, until they are called the wicked country, the people with
whom the LORD is angry forever. 5 Your own eyes shall see this, and
you shall say, "Great is the LORD beyond the borders of Israel!"
The priests have been unfaithful to their covenant
6 A son honors his father, and servants their master. If then I am a
father, where is the honor due me? And if I am a master, where is the
respect due me? says the LORD of hosts to you, O priests, who despise
my name. You say, "How have we despised your name?" 7 By offering
polluted food on my altar. And you say, "How have we polluted it?" By
thinking that the LORD's table may be despised. 8 When you offer blind
animals in sacrifice, is that not wrong? And when you offer those that
are lame or sick, is that not wrong? Try presenting that to your
governor; will he be pleased with you or show you favor? says the LORD
of hosts. 9 And now implore the favor of God, that he may be gracious
to us. The fault is yours. Will he show favor to any of you? says the
LORD of hosts. 10 Oh, that someone among you would shut the temple
doors, so that you would not kindle fire on my altar in vain! I have no
pleasure in you, says the LORD of hosts, and I will not accept an offering
from your hands. 11 For from the rising of the sun to its setting my
name is great among the nations, and in every place incense is offered
to my name, and a pure offering; for my name is great among the
nations, says the LORD of hosts. 12 But you profane it when you say that
the LORD's table is polluted, and the food for it may be despised. 13
"What a weariness this is," you say, and you sniff at me, says the LORD

1927

MALACHI 1928

of hosts. You bring what has been taken by violence or is lame or sick,
and this you bring as your offering! Shall I accept that from your hand?
says the LORD. 14 Cursed be the cheat who has a male in the flock and
vows to give it, and yet sacrifices to the Lord what is blemished; for I
am a great King, says the LORD of hosts, and my name is reverenced
among the nations.
[Malachi 2]
1 And now, O priests, this command is for you. 2 If you will not listen, if
you will not lay it to heart to give glory to my name, says the LORD of
hosts, then I will send the curse on you and I will curse your blessings;
indeed I have already cursed them, because you do not lay it to heart. 3
I will rebuke your offspring, and spread dung on your faces, the dung
of your offerings, and I will put you out of my presence.
4 Know, then, that I have sent this command to you, that my covenant
with Levi may hold, says the LORD of hosts. 5 My covenant with him was
a covenant of life and well-being, which I gave him; this called for
reverence, and he revered me and stood in awe of my name. 6 True
instruction was in his mouth, and no wrong was found on his lips. He
walked with me in integrity and uprightness, and he turned many from
iniquity. 7 For the lips of a priest should guard knowledge, and people
should seek instruction from his mouth, for he is the messenger of the
LORD of hosts. 8 But you have turned aside from the way; you have
caused many to stumble by your instruction; you have corrupted the
covenant of Levi, says the LORD of hosts, 9 and so I make you despised
and abased before all the people, inasmuch as you have not kept my
ways but have shown partiality in your instruction.
The people have been unfaithful to each other
10 Have we not all one father? Has not one God created us? Why then
are we faithless to one another, profaning the covenant of our
ancestors? 11 Judah has been faithless, and abomination has been
committed in Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah has profaned the
sanctuary of the LORD, which he loves, and has married the daughter of
a foreign god. 12 May the LORD cut off from the tents of Jacob anyone

1928

MALACHI 1929

who does this — any to witness or answer, or to bring an offering to
the LORD of hosts.
13 And this you do as well: You cover the LORD's altar with tears, with
weeping and groaning because he no longer regards the offering or
accepts it with favor at your hand. 14 You ask, "Why does he not?"
Because the LORD was a witness between you and the wife of your
youth, to whom you have been faithless, though she is your companion
and your wife by covenant. 15 Did not one God make her? Both flesh
and spirit are his. And what does the one God desire? Godly offspring.
So look to yourselves, and do not let anyone be faithless to the wife of
his youth. 16 For I hate divorce, says the LORD, the God of Israel, and
covering one's garment with violence, says the LORD of hosts. So take
heed to yourselves and do not be faithless.
Judgment is coming
17 You have wearied the LORD with your words. Yet you say, "How
have we wearied him?" By saying, "All who do evil are good in the
sight of the LORD, and he delights in them." Or by asking, "Where is
the God of justice?"
[Malachi 3]
1 See, I am sending my messenger to prepare the way before me, and
the Lord whom you seek will suddenly come to his temple. The
messenger of the covenant in whom you delight — indeed, he is
coming, says the LORD of hosts. 2 But who can endure the day of his
coming, and who can stand when he appears?
For he is like a refiner's fire and like fullers' soap; 3 he will sit as a
refiner and purifier of silver, and he will purify the descendants of Levi
and refine them like gold and silver, until they present offerings to the
LORD in righteousness. 4 Then the offering of Judah and Jerusalem will
be pleasing to the LORD as in the days of old and as in former years.

1929

MALACHI 1930

5 Then I will draw near to you for judgment; I will be swift to bear
witness against the sorcerers, against the adulterers, against those who
swear falsely, against those who oppress the hired workers in their
wages, the widow and the orphan, against those who thrust aside the
alien, and do not fear me, says the LORD of hosts.
A call to repentance
6 For I the LORD do not change; therefore you, O children of Jacob,
have not perished. 7 Ever since the days of your ancestors you have
turned aside from my statutes and have not kept them. Return to me,
and I will return to you, says the LORD of hosts. But you say, "How shall
we return?"
8 Will anyone rob God? Yet you are robbing me! But you say, "How
are we robbing you?" In your tithes and offerings! 9 You are cursed
with a curse, for you are robbing me — the whole nation of you! 10
Bring the full tithe into the storehouse, so that there may be food in
my house, and thus put me to the test, says the LORD of hosts; see if I
will not open the windows of heaven for you and pour down for you
an overflowing blessing. 11 I will rebuke the locust for you, so that it
will not destroy the produce of your soil; and your vine in the field
shall not be barren, says the LORD of hosts. 12 Then all nations will
count you happy, for you will be a land of delight, says the LORD of
hosts.
The righteous and wicked receive their just rewards
13 You have spoken harsh words against me, says the LORD. Yet you say,
"How have we spoken against you?" 14 You have said, "It is vain to
serve God. What do we profit by keeping his command or by going
about as mourners before the LORD of hosts? 15 Now we count the
arrogant happy; evildoers not only prosper, but when they put God to
the test they escape."
16 Then those who revered the LORD spoke with one another. The LORD
took note and listened, and a book of remembrance was written
before him of those who revered the LORD and thought on his name. 17

1930

MALACHI 1931

They shall be mine, says the LORD of hosts, my special possession on the
day when I act, and I will spare them as parents spare their children
who serve them. 18 Then once more you shall see the difference
between the righteous and the wicked, between one who serves God
and one who does not serve him.
[Malachi 4]
1 See, the day is coming, burning like an oven, when all the arrogant
and all evildoers will be stubble; the day that comes shall burn them
up, says the LORD of hosts, so that it will leave them neither root nor
branch. 2 But for you who revere my name the sun of righteousness
shall rise, with healing in its wings. You shall go out leaping like calves
from the stall. 3 And you shall tread down the wicked, for they will be
ashes under the soles of your feet, on the day when I act, says the LORD
of hosts.
Two appendices
4 Remember the teaching of my servant Moses, the statutes and
ordinances that I commanded him at Horeb for all Israel.
5 Lo, I will send you the prophet Elijah before the great and terrible
day of the LORD comes. 6 He will turn the hearts of parents to their
children and the hearts of children to their parents, so that I will not
come and strike the land with a curse.

Copyright ©1989, Division of Christian Education of the National Council of the Churches of Christ in
the United States of America. Used by permission. All rights reserved.

1931

THE APOCRYPHA
with the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical Books

ZAINE RIDLING, Ph.D.
Editor

New Revised Standard Version

Copyright ©1989, Division of Christian Education of the National Council of the Churches
of Christ in the United States of America. Used by permission. All rights reserved.

APOCRYPHA, TABLE OF CONTENTS 1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
to the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical Books

Introduction to the Apocrypha …………….…………………….
Tobit ………………………………………………………………….
Judith …………………………………………………………………
Additions to Esther ……………………………………..…………
Wisdom of Solomon ……………………………………….…..….
Sirach (Ecclesiasticus) ………………………………..…….………
Baruch ……………………………………………………………….
Letter of Jeremiah ………………………………………..……….
Additions to Daniel ………………………………………….……
Prayer of Azariah and the Song of the Three Jews ………
Susanna ………………………………………………………..…
Bel and the Dragon ……………………………………………
1 Maccabees ………………………………………………………..
2 Maccabees ………………………………………………………..
1 Esdras ………………………………………………..…………….
Prayer of Manasseh …………………………………..…………..
Psalm 151 ………………………………………………..………….
3 Maccabees ………………………………………………...……..
2 Esdras ………………………………………………………….….
4 Maccabees …………………………………………………….....
HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

TH

HT

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

TH

TH

HT

HT

HT

TH

1

2
16
44
75
99
138
252
264
270
271
277
283
287
350
397
429
433
435
456
517

INTRO TO THE APOCRYPHA 2

INTRODUCTION TO THE
APOCRYPHAL/DEUTEROCANONICAL BOOKS
Definitions
As the terms are used in the New Revised Standard Version translation,
the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical books are those works that were
included in the Septuagint, the ancient Greek translation of the
Hebrew Bible with additions, or in the Old Latin and Vulgate
translations, but are not included in the Hebrew text that forms both
the canon for Judaism and the Protestant Old Testament. All of these
works, whether they are individual books or additions to the Hebrew
texts of Esther and Daniel, have been regarded as canonical by one or
more Christian communities, but not by all. (The exception to this is 4
Maccabees, which appears in an appendix to the Greek Bible.)
"Apocrypha" means "hidden things," but it is not clear why the term
was chosen to describe these books. It could mean that they were
"hidden" or withdrawn from common use because they were viewed
as containing mysterious or esoteric teaching, too profound to be
communicated to any except the initiated (see 2 Esdras 14.45-46). Or it
could mean that such books deserved to be "hidden" because they
were spurious or heretical. This ambivalence has continued into the
present, although increasingly even scholars from traditions that do
not regard these books as canonical consider them of great value for
understanding Judaism in the Hellenistic and Roman periods, and thus
in the wider contexts, both literary and historical, of the later books in
the Hebrew Bible and of the New Testament as well.
"Deuterocanonical," along with it coordinate term "protocanonical," is
used in Roman Catholic tradition to describe the status of the two
groups of books of the Old Testament. The "protocanon" consists of
the books of the Hebrew Bible and the "deuterocanon" of the books
whose inspiration came to be recognized later, after the matter had
2

INTRO TO THE APOCRYPHA 3

been discussed among some theologians and local churches. This
distinction, introduced by Sixtus of Sienna in 1566, acknowledges the
differences between the two categories while making clear that
Roman Catholics accept as fully canonical those books and parts of
books that Protestants call the Apocrypha (except the Prayer of
Manasseh, Psalm 151, 3 and 4 Maccabees, and 1 and 2 Esdras, which
both groups regard as apocryphal). Thus, although the terms
"Deuterocanonical" and "Apocryphal" can describe the same collection
of writings, they clearly indicated the difference in the status of the
writings among different groups. In the NRSV translation, subheadings
in the table of contents for these books, and in the text itself, explain
the differing canonical status of various writings.
The Roman Catholic, Orthodox, and Protestant Canons of the Old
Testament
Toward the end of the fourth century CE, Pope Damascus
commissioned Jerome, the most learned Christian biblical scholar of his
day, to prepare a standard Latin version of the scriptures (the
translation that was to become known as the Latin Vulgate). In the Old
Testament Jerome followed the Hebrew canon; though he also
translated the apocryphal books, he called attention to their distinct
status in prefaces. Subsequent copyists of the Latin Bible, however, did
not always include Jerome's prefaces, and during the medieval period
the Western Church generally regarded these books as part of the holy
scriptures without differentiation. In 1546 the Council of Trent decreed
that the canon of the Old Testament includes them (with the
exceptions as listed above). Subsequent editions of the Latin Vulgate
text, officially approved by the Roman Catholic Church, place these
books within the Christian sequence of the Old Testament books. Thus
Tobit and Judith come after Nehemiah; the Wisdom of Solomon and
Ecclesiasticus come after the Song of Solomon; Baruch (with the Letter
of Jeremiah as Chapter 6) comes after Lamentations; and 1 and 2
Maccabees conclude the books of the Old Testament. Esther is given in
its longer (Greek) form rather than in the version based solely on the
Hebrew text; the Prayer of Azariah and Song of the Three Jews appear
as vv. 24-90 of ch 3 of Daniel, and the stories of Susanna and Bel and
the Dragon as chs 13 and 14 of Daniel. An appendix after the New

3

INTRO TO THE APOCRYPHA 4

Testament contains the Prayer of Manasseh and 1 and 2 Esdras, without
implying canonical status.
The Eastern Orthodox Churches recognize several other books as
authoritative. Editions of the Old Testament approved by the Holy
Synod of the Greek Orthodox Church contain, besides the Roman
Catholic Deuterocanonical books, 1 Esdras, Psalm 151, the Prayer of
Manasseh, and 3 Maccabees, while 4 Maccabees appears in the
Appendix. Slavonic Bibles approved by the Russian Orthodox Church
contain besides the Deuterocanonical books, 1 and 2 Esdras (called 2
and 3 Esdras), Psalm 151, and 3 Maccabees.
The Status of the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical Books in Christianity
During the first centuries of the Common Era, early Christian
theologians (most of whom knew no Hebrew) quoted, in Greek,
passages both from books in the Hebrew canon and from these
additional works without making any distinction between them. Such
citations were usually preceded by a word or phrase making it clear
that the writer regarded the text being cited as canonical. During this
time, only a few thinkers investigated the Jewish canon or
distinguished between, for instance, the Hebrew text of Daniel and the
addition of the story of Susanna in the Greek version.
By the fourth century, theologians in the eastern (Greek) churches had
begun to recognize a distinction between the books of the Hebrew
canon and the rest, thought they continued to cite all of them as
scripture. During the following centuries the matter was debated and,
consequently, practice varied in the East, but at the Synod of Jerusalem
in 1672 (which expressed the Orthodox churches' reaction to the
Protestant Reformation), Tobit, Judith, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom,
Additions to Daniel, and 1 and 2 Maccabees were expressly designated
as canonical.

4

INTRO TO THE APOCRYPHA 5

In the western (Latin) church, on the other hand, though there has
been some variety of opinion, in general theologians have regarded
these books as canonical. More than one local synodical council (e.g.,
Hippo, 393, and Carthage, 397 and 419) justified and authorized their
use as scripture. The so-called Decretum Gelasianum, a Latin document
probably dating to the sixth century, contains lists of the books to be
read as scripture and of books to be avoided as apocryphal. The former
list, which is not present in all the manuscripts, includes among the
biblical books Tobit, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and 1 and 2
Maccabees.
Occasionally, however, theologians questioned the status of these
books, Jerome, near the end of the fourth century, thought that books
not in the Hebrew canon should be classed as apocryphal, and other
thinkers, though always a minority, followed his view, at least
theoretically. Toward the close of the fourteenth century John Wycliffe
and his disciples produced the first English version of the Bible. This
translation of the Latin Vulgate included all of the disputed books,
with the exception of 2 Esdras. In the Prologue to the Old Testament,
however, it makes a distinction between the books of the Hebrew
canon, listed there, and others which, the writer says, "shall be set
among the apocrypha, that is, without authority of belief." In the
books of Esther and Daniel the translators included a rendering of
Jerome's notes calling the reader's attention to the additions.
At the time of the Reformation, Protestant thinkers came to the
conclusion fairly early that they would need to determine which books
were authoritative for the establishment of doctrine and which were
not. For instance, disputes over the doctrine of Purgatory and of the
usefulness o prayers and Masses for the dead involved the authority of
2 Maccabees, which contains what was held to be scriptural warrant for
them (12.43-45). The first extensive Protestant discussion of the canon
was Andreas Bodenstein's treatise De Canonicis Scripturis Libellus
(1520). Bodenstein (or Carlstadt, after his place of birth) distinguished
the books of the Hebrew Old Testament from the books of the
Apocrypha, classifying the Apocrypha into two divisions. Concerning
Wisdom, Sirach (Ecclesiasticus), Judith, Tobit, and 1 and 2 Maccabees, he

5

INTRO TO THE APOCRYPHA 6

says, "These are the Apocrypha, that is, are outside the Hebrew canon;
yet they are holy writings" (sect. 114). He continues:
What they contain is not to be despised at once; still it is not
right that Christians should relieve, much less slake, their thirst
with them.... Before all things things the best books must be
read, that is, those that are canonical beyond all controversy;
afterwards, if one has the time, it is allowed to peruse the
controverted books, provided that you have the set purpose
of comparing and collating the non-canonical books with
those which are truly canonical (§118).
The second group, 1 and 2 Esdras, Baruch, Prayer of Manasseh, and the
Additions to Daniel, he declared without worth.
The first Bible in a modern vernacular language to segregate the
apocryphal books from the others was the Dutch Bible published by
Jacob van Liesveldt in 1526 at Antwerp. After Malachi there follows a
section embodying the Apocrypha, which is titled, "The books which
are not in the canon, that is to say, which one does not find among the
Jews in the Hebrew."
The first edition of the Swiss-German Bible was published in six
volumes (Zurich, 1527-29), the fifth of which contains the Apocrypha.
The title page of this volume states, "These are the books which are
not reckoned as biblical by the ancients, nor are found among the
Hebrews." A one-volume edition of the Zurich Bible, which appeared
in 1530, contains the apocryphal books grouped together after the New
Testament. One Swiss reformer, Oecolampadius, declared in 1530: "We
do not despise Judith, Tobit, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, the last two books
of Esdras, the three books of Maccabees, the Additions to Daniel; but
we do not allow them divine authority with the others."
In reaction to Protestant criticism of the disputed books, on 8 April
1546, the Council of Trent gave what is regarded by Roman Catholics as
the definitive declaration on the canon on the canon of the holy
scriptures. After enumerating the books, which in the Old Testament
include Tobit, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, and the two

6

INTRO TO THE APOCRYPHA 7

books of Maccabees, the decree pronounces an anathema upon
anyone who "does not accept as sacred and canonical the aforesaid
books in their entirety and with all their parts, as they have been
accustomed to be read in the Catholic Church and as they are
contained in the old Latin Vulgate Edition" (tr. Father H.J. Schroeder).
The reference to "books in their entirety and with all their parts" is
intended to cover the Letter of Jeremiah as chapter 6 of Baruch, the
Additions to Esther, and the chapters in Daniel including the Prayer of
Azariah, the Song of the Three Jews, Susanna, and Bel and the Dragon.
It is noteworthy, however, that the Prayer of Manasseh and 1 and 2
Esdras, though included in some manuscripts of the Latin Vulgate,
were denied canonical status by the Council. In the official edition of
the Vulgate, published in 1592, these three are printed as an appendix
after the New Testament, "lest they should perish altogether."
In England, though Protestants were unanimous in declaring that the
apocryphal books were not to be used to establish any doctrine,
differences arose as to the proper use and place of noncanonical
books. A milder view prevailed in the Church of England, and the
lectionary attached to the Book of Common Prayer, from 1549 onward,
has always contained prescribed lessons from the Apocrypha. In
addition, portions of the Song of the Three Jews are used as a canticle,
or song of praise, alongside selected Psalms in the service of Morning
Prayer. In reply to those who urged the discontinuance of reading
lessons from apocryphal books, as being inconsistent with the
sufficiency of scripture, the bishops at the Savoy Conference, held in
1661, replied that the same objection could be raised against the
preaching of sermons, and that it was much to be desired that all
sermons should give as useful instruction as did the chapters selected
from the Apocrypha.
The Historical Background to the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical Books
With the destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple by the Babylonians
in 586 BCE, and the subsequent exile of the leading citizens of Judah in
Babylon, the history of Israel underwent a decisive break. Henceforth
there would always be Jewish communities outside the land of Israel,

7

INTRO TO THE APOCRYPHA 8

and even after the Persian king Cyrus allowed the exiles to return in
538 BCE, large communities flourished in Babylon and elsewhere.
For two centuries the Persians controlled the Near East, but little is
known about Jewish history during this time. The Persian period came
to an end when Alexander the Great completed a series of conquests
that put him in control of Greece, the former Persian Empire, and
Egypt. When Alexander died in 323, his empire was divided among his
warring generals, and two of them — Seleucus, king of Syria, and
Ptolemy, king of Egypt — and their successors fought over the territory
of Judah, which fell first under Ptolemaic and then Seleucid dynastic
control. Despite the political changes, however, the overall cultural
influence remained: This was the era of the triumph of Hellenistic
culture, including the use of the Greek language as the standard for
the whole empire.
There had already been, in the Hebrew Bible, contention about such
issues as intermarriage (Ezra 9.1-10.44; Neh 13.23-31). Now, with large
numbers of Jews living outside the land as minorities within much
larger and more dominant cultures, this issue and those of other
religious observances came to be much more important. Stories of
faithfully observant Jews among non-Jewish populations (Tobit, 3
Maccabees) were joined by expanded versions of books that
strengthened this point (Greek Esther, the Prayer of Azariah, and Song
of the Three Jews in ch 3 of Daniel).
The Seleucid kings increasingly pressured the Jews to adopt Hellenistic
ways in their religious observance, and in fact had some success. This
effort came to a head under Antiochus IV Epiphanes (175-164). He
installed Hellenizing high priests (Jason and Menelaus), against whom
observant Jews rebelled. In response, Antiochus invaded Jerusalem in
169; in 167 he effectively outlawed the Jewish religion, making the
teaching of the Torah a crime and establishing polytheistic worship in
the Temple. This final provocation led to the ultimately successful
Jewish revolt under the Hasmonean family, led by Mattathias and his
five sons, one of whom, Judas, was known as Maccabeus, "the
hammer." The revolt and the subsequent establishment of a Jewish
government (which took more than twenty years to accomplish) are

8

INTRO TO THE APOCRYPHA 9

therefore referred to as Maccabean. This rule lasted for eighty years,
until (because of constant power struggles among the various factions
of Jews) the Romans were able to intervene and take direct control of
the territory in 63 BCE.
Kinds of Literature in the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical Books
The Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical books contain several different
literary genres, including histories, historical fiction, wisdom,
devotional writings, letters, and an apocalypse. Though several of the
books combine more than one of these genres, most of the books can
be classified as predominantly one or another. Thus 1 Esdras, 1
Maccabees, and, in a certain sense, 2 Maccabees are histories. First
Esdras summarizes 2 Chr 35.1-36.23 and reproduces all of Ezra and Neh
7.38-8.12. Only 1 Esd 3.1-5.6 is a significant addition. First Maccabees
recounts the history of the Seleucid persecutions and the rebellion and
rise of the Maccabees. Second Maccabees, with its bombastic rhetoric
and abundant use of invectives against the Seleucid tyrants and
Hellenizing Jews, is an example of a popular Hellenistic genre, the
"pathetic history," which uses highly charged language, exhortation,
exaggeration, and other methods to stimulate the imaginations and
emotions ("pathos") of readers. Third Maccabees is misleadingly
named: It actually has nothing to do with the Maccabean period or the
Seleucid dynasty, but deals with a period a half-century earlier and
concerns the sufferings of the Jewish community in Egypt under the
Ptolemaic rulers. It is a religious novel, written in Greek by an
Alexandrian Jew sometime between 100 BCE and 70 CE. Using
legendary elements, it tells three stories of conflict between Ptolemy IV
(221-205 BCE) and the Jewish community in Egypt. The most dramatic
section (5.1-6.21) describes Ptolemy's scheme to martyr the Jews: They
were to be herded into an arena near Alexandria to be trampled under
the foot of five hundred intoxicated elephants. The king's plan was
finally foiled when angelic intervention terrorized those supervising
the persecutions and also frightened the elephants into turning upon
the Egyptian soldiers.

9

INTRO TO THE APOCRYPHA 10

Fourth Maccabees is not a historical narrative but rather a Greek
philosophical treatise addressed to Jews on the supremacy of reason
over the passions of the body and soul. In the form of a Stoic diatribe,
or popular address, it uses narratives of exemplary behavior, and the
conversations and arguments of character in the narratives, to explore
philosophical issues. The author begins with a philosophical exposition
of his theme, which he then illustrates at length with examples of the
martyrs drawn from 2 Maccabees, who preferred death to committing
apostasy. The book was probably written by a Hellenistic Jew before 70
CE. In early Christianity the Maccabean martyrs were venerated as
saints and eventually accorded a yearly festival in the ecclesiastical
calendar (August 1).
Judith, Tobit, Susanna, and Bel and the Dragon are short historical
fictions written to convey a moral point, as well as to entertain. Except
for Judith, which is set in Judah, the rest are sometimes referred to as
"Diaspora novels" since they are all set in the Jewish Diaspora of
Mesopotamia. Yet they differ from one another in other respects. Like
the canonical stories of Daniel 1-6, Bel and the Dragon are court tales,
in which the hero's relationship with the king and other members of
the court provides the conflict of the plot. The motif of the lion's den,
which occurs in Daniel 6, also occurs in the story of the dragon. In
contrast to the earlier Daniel tales, however, Bel and the Dragon is
preoccupied with the theme of the exposure of idols as false gods and
their priests as fraudulent (see also the Letter of Jeremiah). Bel and the
Dragon and Susanna are sometimes referred to as ancient examples of
the detective story. Whereas Daniel functioned as an interpreter of
dreams and visions in Daniel 1-6, in these stories Daniel uses cleverness
and logical deduction to disclose deception.
Although Tobit, like Daniel, is represented as a court official of a
Mesopotamian king, the story is concerned with personal and family
affairs, not a rivalry at court. Thematically, Tobit maybe be compared
with the prose story of Job, since it concerns the suffering of the
righteous (both Tobit and his daughter-in-law Sarah). The book of
Tobit is distinguished by the use of various folktale motifs (e.g., the
motifs of the grateful dead, the angel in disguise, the dangerous bride,

10

INTRO TO THE APOCRYPHA 11

and the demon lover), and by its reference to Ahikar, the hero of a
non-Jewish folktale from Mesopotamia.
Judith might seem to bear comparison with 1 and 2 Maccabees, since it
concerns a threat to the people from a foreign army. But whereas 1
and 2 Maccabees are histories, the fictional nature of Judith is evident
from the story's flagrant historical inaccuracies (describing
Nebuchadnezzar as king of Assyria and the invasion as taking place
after the people's return from exile!). A better comparison might be
between Judith and Esther. Though set in Judah rather than in the
Diaspora, Judith, like Esther, tells how a courageous Jewish woman
saves her people from enemies bent on destroying them.
Didactic literature is represented in the Apocrypha by the two treatises
on wisdom: the Wisdom of Solomon, and the Wisdom of Jesus son of
Sirach (also known as Ecclesiasticus). Sirach, which was originally
composed in Hebrew ca. 180 BCE, shows particularly close connections
with the style and content of the book of Proverbs in the Hebrew
Bible, from which it is a natural development. The Wisdom of Solomon,
by contrast, contains no proverbial material, such as characterizes the
Hebrew wisdom tradition. It does, however, share with Proverbs and
Sirach an interest in the figure of wisdom personified as a woman.
What makes the Wisdom of Solomon distinctive is the strong influence
of Greek literary styles and philosophical ideas. Thus, it comes from the
Greek-speaking Diaspora, most probably from Alexandria.
The Prayer of Manasseh is a hymnic lament of great feeling and literary
skill. The Prayer of Azariah and the Song of the Three Jews are both
modeled on psalms that are liturgical in form. In addition to the 150
psalms comprising the Book of Psalms in the Hebrew Bible, during the
Hellenistic and Roman periods such hymns were composed in Hebrew
and in other languages; there are a number of such compositions in
the Dead Sea Scrolls. Another, which celebrates the prowess of young
David at slaying Goliath, is appended (as Ps 151) to the Psalter in Greek
manuscripts.

11

INTRO TO THE APOCRYPHA 12

The Hebrew Bible contains no books that are in the form of a letter,
although letters (or excerpts) occur at various places. There are decrees
(Ezra 1.1-6), diplomatic correspondence (1 Kings 5.2-6), royal commands
(2 Sam 11.14-15), even forgeries (1 Kings 21.8-10), but all are used to
advance the narratives in which they occur, or explain incidents that
follow, so it is unclear how representative they are. Twenty-one of the
twenty-seven books of the New Testament are in the form of letters,
though some (for instance, Hebrews) are more like sermons than
letters. The Letter of Jeremiah, which dates from the Hellenistic period,
may have provided later, Christian writers with an example of how this
literary form could be used for religious purposes, combining
theological content with a direct personal approach.
Finally, 2 Esdras, a book that purports to reveal the future, is a
specimen of apocalypse. An apocalypse is literally "an unveiling." Like
the last six chapters of Daniel in the Hebrew Bible and the book of
Revelation in the New Testament, which are also apocalypses, 2 Esdras
uses metaphoric language, symbolic numbers and animals (including
composites, like the eagle with three heads and numerous wings in ch
11), and angelic messengers who reveal hidden information.
Despite this diversity of genres, most of which parallel or are
developed from similar ones in the Hebrew Bible, there is no
correlative to classical prophecy. Even within the prophetic books of
the Hebrew Bible, apocalyptic elements had already begun to supplant
strict prophecy (for instance, Isaiah chs 24-27; Ezekiel chs 38-39; Joel ch
2; Zechariah chs 9-14). This absence perhaps supports the view that
Josephus, the Jewish historian, expressed (Ag. Ap. 1.8), that "the exact
succession of the prophets" had been broken after the Persian period;
a similar idea is found in later rabbinic literature. Sometimes there is a
direct statement that "prophets ceased to appear" (1 Macc 9.27); at
other times the writers express the hope that prophecy might one day
return (1 Macc 4.46; 14.41). When a writer imitates prophetic style, as in
the book of Baruch, he repeats with slight modifications the language
of the older prophets. But the introductory phrase, "Thus says the
LORD," which occurs so frequently in the prophetic literature of the
Hebrew Bible, is absent from the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical books.

12

INTRO TO THE APOCRYPHA 13

The Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical Books within Judaism
All of the writings in the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical books are
Jewish in origin, but it is not clear that they were collected by any
particular community of Jews. Some of them (for instance, Sirach) were
quoted by the rabbis, but for others no evidence exists that they were
regarded as central to the Jewish community at any point. Some (Tobit,
parts of Sirach, the Letter of Jeremiah, and Psalm 151) are among the
Dead Sea Scrolls, and were therefore presumably of importance to the
Essene community there, but whether or not they were considered
"canonical" is not clear.
Nevertheless, influences from some of these works are apparent within
Judaism. As mentioned above, rabbinic literature quotes and
appropriates sayings from Sirach. The martyrdom of the woman and
her seven sons (2 Macc 7.1-42; 4 Macc 8.3-18.24) is recounted in several
places (Lam. Rab 1. 50; Git. 57b; Seder Eliyahu R 29).
First and Second Maccabees (1 Macc 4.36-59; 2 Macc 10.1-8) provide the
original accounts of the purification of the Temple in 164 BCE, which is
commemorated in the festival of Hanukkah. The Talmudic legend
(Shab. 21b) that oil in the Temple, though only enough for one day,
nevertheless burned for eight — the supposed reason for the eight-day
length of the observance — is not found in the books of the
Maccabees. Judith was, during the Middle Ages, associated with
Hanukkah as well, on the grounds that both had to do with rallying an
oppressed Jewish population to overthrow a threatening or occupying
power.
Both Tobit and 2 Esdras influenced later Jewish literature and were
popular during the Middle Ages. Baruch may have been read in
synagogues at one time (see Bar 1.14), and Baruch himself, and
therefore his writing, were regarded in some rabbinic writings as
sharing Jeremiah's prophetic status (Sifre Num 78; Seder Olam R 20;
Bab Meg. 14b; Jer Sot. 9.12). Susanna's story is recounted in the
Babylonian Talmud (b. San. 93a).

13

INTRO TO THE APOCRYPHA 14

New Testament Uses of the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical Books
None of the books of the New Testament quote directly from any
Apocryphal book, in distinction from the frequent quotation of the
thirty-nine books in the Hebrew Bible. On the other hand, several New
Testament writers make allusions to one or more apocryphal books. For
example, what seem to be literary echoes from the Wisdom of
Solomon are present in Paul's Letter to the Romans (cf Rom 1.20-29
with Wis 13.5, 8; 14.24, 27; and Rom 9.20-23 with Wis 12.12, 20; 15.7) and
in his correspondence with the Corinthians (compare 2 Cor 5.1, 4 with
Wis 9.15). The short Letter of James, a typical bit of "wisdom literature"
in the New Testament, contains allusions not only to the book of
Proverbs in the Hebrew Bible but to gnomic sayings in Sirach as well (cf
Jas 1.19 with Sir 5.11; and Jas 1.13 with Sir 15.11-12).
The Further Influence of the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical Books
The influence of the Apocrypha has been widespread, inspiring
homilies, meditations, and liturgical forms, and providing subjects for
poets, dramatists, composers, and artists. Some common expressions
and proverbs have come from the Apocrypha. The sayings, "A good
name endures forever" and "You can't touch pitch without being
defiled," are derived from Sir 41.13 and 13.1. The affirmation in 1 Esd
4.41, "Great is Truth, and mighty above all things" (King James
Version), or its Latin form, Magna est veritas et praevalet, has been
used as a motto or maxim in a wide variety of contexts.
The importance of these books extends to the information they supply
concerning the development of Jewish life and thought just prior to
the beginning of the Common Era. The stirring political fortunes of the
Jews in the time of the Maccabees; the rise of what has been called
normative Judaism, and the emergence of the sects of the Pharisees
and and Sadducees; the lush growth of popular belief in the activities
of angels and demons, and the use of magic to drive away malevolent
influences; the first reflections on "original sin" and its relation to the
"evil inclination" present in every person; the blossoming of
apocalyptic hopes relating to the messiah, the resurrection of the body,

14

INTRO TO THE APOCRYPHA 15

and the vindication of the righteous — all these and many other topics
receive welcome light from the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical books.

Copyright ©2001, New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha: New Revised Standard
Version. Ed. Michael D. Coogan. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001. Used by
permission. All rights reserved.

15

TOBIT 16

TOBIT
Introduction
Combining ethical exhortation, prayers, and doxologies with broad
humor, a rollicking plot, and vivid characters, the book of Tobit is a
splendid example of the Jewish novella. In addition to its
entertainment value, it offers to historians information about the
postexilic period and to theologians a view of a God who test the
faithful, responds to prayers, and redeems the covenent community.
The title character, Tobit, was exiled with his wife Anna from the
region of Galilee held by the tribe of Naptali. Removed to Assyria, he
eventually, like Joseph, Mordecai, and Daniel, found himself in the
service of a foreign ruler — in Tobit's case, as an officer of the court of
Shalmaneser. This pious Israelite too is tested: First he is removed from
his official position and then he is persecuted by Shalmaneser's
successor for his insistence on burying the corpses of his fellow Jews.
Most ignominious of all: One evening, following yet another burial,
Tobit is blinded by a bird with unfortunate aim. Forced to depend on
others, including his wife, for support, and following an argument with
her in which she questions the value of his piety, Tobit prays for death.
At the same time his relative Sarah is also praying for death. The
demon Asmodeus, who has fallen in love with her, has killed each of
her seven successive grooms on the wedding night. To resolve these
somewhat improbable situations, the angel Raphael will escort Tobit's
son, Tobias, first to Media to exorcise the demon and marry Sarah and
then back to Nineveh to cure Tobit.
The relatively complex plot is tied together by the parallel situations of
older father and bride-to-be, frequent doxologies, almost incessant
references to almsgiving, and the shifting of scenes between Nineveh
and Ecbatana. The humorous aspects of the tale — from the angel in
16

TOBIT 17

disguise to the attack of a magical fish — make the stories of Tobit and
Sarah border on the farcical and so prevent the book from becoming
tragic or mauldlin. Readers familiar with biblical motifs will recognize
various genres and themes incorporated in the volume: wisdom
sayings, the antipathy between Sarah of Genesis and her maidservant
Hagar, the search for a bride for Isaac, the success of the Jew in the
royal court, the problems of life in the Diaspora, Job's trials, the role of
angels, the centrality of Jerusalem, the fulfillment of prophecy and,
especially, the importance of charity. The numerous personal prayers,
found also in the stories of Judith, Daniel and the Additions (Prayer of
Azariah and the Song of the Three Jews, Susanna, and Bel and the
Dragon), the Greek Additions to Esther, and elsewhere in Jewish
postexilic literature, emphasize the universal authority and
righteousness of God.
The book of Tobit is also replete with information concerning family
life, travel, burial and eating customs, gender roles, and medicine.
More than mere data, these various matters testify to the author's
interest in providing guidance for life in exile: Where Temple sacrifice
is unavailable and the people are scattered, the story insists that Jews
maintain their identity not only through piety and practice, but also
through strong bonds between parents and children, between
husbands and wives, and with family members and fellow Jews. To
preserve the community, Tobit also insists that his son imitate
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who "took wives from among their
kindred" (4.12-13).
In addition to its references to biblical prophecy, characters, and
theology, the volume offers connections to well-known folktale motifs,
including the dangerous bride, the monster in the nuptial chamber, the
supernatural being in disguise, the miraculous animal, and the grateful
dead. Specifically mentioned are the characters of Ahikar and his
nephew, whose story was well known in antiquity; there may also be
some hints of Homer's 'Odyssey.'

17

TOBIT 18

Although the original language of the document was likely Aramaic,
that text has not survived. The translation below is based on the Greek
text of Codex Sinaiticus; other versions include the Old Latin, Jerome's
Vulgate, a medieval Aramaic rendering, Coptic, Syriac, Ethiopic,
Armenian, and even fragments in both Hebrew and Aramaic from
Qumran (the Dead Sea Scrolls). The book dates to the early postexilic
period, likely sometime in the third century BCE; its place of
composition remains unknown, with plausible suggestions including
the eastern Diaspora, Egypt, and Israel.

[Tobit 1]
Exilic context
1 This book tells the story of Tobit son of Tobiel son of Hananiel son of
Aduel son of Gabael son of Raphael son of Raguel of the descendants
of Asiel, of the tribe of Naphtali, 2 who in the days of King
Shalmaneser of the Assyrians was taken into captivity from Thisbe,
which is to the south of Kedesh Naphtali in Upper Galilee, above Asher
toward the west, and north of Phogor.
Tobit's background
3 I, Tobit, walked in the ways of truth and righteousness all the days of
my life. I performed many acts of charity for my kindred and my people
who had gone with me in exile to Nineveh in the land of the Assyrians.
4 When I was in my own country, in the land of Israel, while I was still a
young man, the whole tribe of my ancestor Naphtali deserted the
house of David and Jerusalem. This city had been chosen from among
all the tribes of Israel, where all the tribes of Israel should offer
sacrifice and where the temple, the dwelling of God, had been
consecrated and established for all generations forever.
5 All my kindred and our ancestral house of Naphtali sacrificed to the
calf that King Jeroboam of Israel had erected in Dan and on all the
mountains of Galilee. 6 But I alone went often to Jerusalem for the

18

TOBIT 19

festivals, as it is prescribed for all Israel by an everlasting decree. I
would hurry off to Jerusalem with the first fruits of the crops and the
firstlings of the flock, the tithes of the cattle, and the first shearings of
the sheep. 7 I would give these to the priests, the sons of Aaron, at the
altar; likewise the tenth of the grain, wine, olive oil, pomegranates,
figs, and the rest of the fruits to the sons of Levi who ministered at
Jerusalem. Also for six years I would save up a second tenth in money
and go and distribute it in Jerusalem. 8 A third tenth I would give to
the orphans and widows and to the converts who had attached
themselves to Israel. I would bring it and give it to them in the third
year, and we would eat it according to the ordinance decreed
concerning it in the law of Moses and according to the instructions of
Deborah, the mother of my father Tobiel, for my father had died and
left me an orphan. 9 When I became a man I married a woman, a
member of our own family, and by her I became the father of a son
whom I named Tobias.
Early captivity
10 After I was carried away captive to Assyria and came as a captive to
Nineveh, everyone of my kindred and my people ate the food of the
Gentiles, 11 but I kept myself from eating the food of the Gentiles. 12
Because I was mindful of God with all my heart, 13 the Most High gave
me favor and good standing with Shalmaneser, and I used to buy
everything he needed. 14 Until his death I used to go into Media, and
buy for him there. While in the country of Media I left bags of silver
worth ten talents in trust with Gabael, the brother of Gabri. 15 But
when Shalmaneser died, and his son Sennacherib reigned in his place,
the highways into Media became unsafe and I could no longer go
there.
16 In the days of Shalmaneser I performed many acts of charity to my
kindred, those of my tribe. 17 I would give my food to the hungry and
my clothing to the naked; and if I saw the dead body of any of my
people thrown out behind the wall of Nineveh, I would bury it. 18 I
also buried any whom King Sennacherib put to death when he came
fleeing from Judea in those days of judgment that the king of heaven
executed upon him because of his blasphemies. For in his anger he put

19

TOBIT 20

to death many Israelites; but I would secretly remove the bodies and
bury them. So when Sennacherib looked for them he could not find
them. 19 Then one of the Ninevites went and informed the king about
me, that I was burying them; so I hid myself. But when I realized that
the king knew about me and that I was being searched for to be put to
death, I was afraid and ran away. 20 Then all my property was
confiscated; nothing was left to me that was not taken into the royal
treasury except my wife Anna and my son Tobias.
21 But not forty days passed before two of Sennacherib's sons killed
him, and they fled to the mountains of Ararat, and his son Esar-haddon
reigned after him. He appointed Ahikar, the son of my brother Hanael
over all the accounts of his kingdom, and he had authority over the
entire administration. 22 Ahikar interceded for me, and I returned to
Nineveh. Now Ahikar was chief cupbearer, keeper of the signet, and in
charge of administration of the accounts under King Sennacherib of
Assyria; so Esar-haddon reappointed him. He was my nephew and so a
close relative.
[Tobit 2]
Tobit's blindness
1 Then during the reign of Esar-haddon I returned home, and my wife
Anna and my son Tobias were restored to me. At our festival of
Pentecost, which is the sacred festival of weeks, a good dinner was
prepared for me and I reclined to eat. 2 When the table was set for me
and an abundance of food placed before me, I said to my son Tobias,
"Go, my child, and bring whatever poor person you may find of our
people among the exiles in Nineveh, who is wholeheartedly mindful of
God, and he shall eat together with me. I will wait for you, until you
come back." 3 So Tobias went to look for some poor person of our
people. When he had returned he said, "Father!" And I replied, "Here I
am, my child." Then he went on to say, "Look, father, one of our own
people has been murdered and thrown into the market place, and now
he lies there strangled." 4 Then I sprang up, left the dinner before even
tasting it, and removed the body from the square and laid it in one of
the rooms until sunset when I might bury it. 5 When I returned, I

20

TOBIT 21

washed myself and ate my food in sorrow. 6 Then I remembered the
prophecy of Amos, how he said against Bethel,
"Your festivals shall be turned into mourning,
and all your songs into lamentation."
And I wept.
7 When the sun had set, I went and dug a grave and buried him. 8 And
my neighbors laughed and said, "Is he still not afraid? He has already
been hunted down to be put to death for doing this, and he ran away;
yet here he is again burying the dead!" 9 That same night I washed
myself and went into my courtyard and slept by the wall of the
courtyard; and my face was uncovered because of the heat. 10 I did not
know that there were sparrows on the wall; their fresh droppings fell
into my eyes and produced white films. I went to physicians to be
healed, but the more they treated me with ointments the more my
vision was obscured by the white films, until I became completely blind.
For four years I remained unable to see. All my kindred were sorry for
me, and Ahikar took care of me for two years before he went to
Elymais.
The argument
11 At that time, also, my wife Anna earned money at women's work. 12
She used to send what she made to the owners and they would pay
wages to her. One day, the seventh of Dystrus, when she cut off a piece
she had woven and sent it to the owners, they paid her full wages and
also gave her a young goat for a meal. 13 When she returned to me,
the goat began to bleat. So I called her and said, "Where did you get
this goat? It is surely not stolen, is it? Return it to the owners; for we
have no right to eat anything stolen." 14 But she said to me, "It was
given to me as a gift in addition to my wages." But I did not believe
her, and told her to return it to the owners. I became flushed with
anger against her over this. Then she replied to me, "Where are your
acts of charity? Where are your righteous deeds? These things are
known about you!"

21

TOBIT 22

[Tobit 3]
Tobit's prayer
1 Then with much grief and anguish of heart I wept, and with groaning
began to pray:
2 "You are righteous, O Lord,
and all your deeds are just;
all your ways are mercy and truth;
you judge the world.
3 And now, O Lord, remember me
and look favorably upon me.
Do not punish me for my sins
and for my unwitting offenses
and those that my ancestors committed before you.
They sinned against you,
4
and disobeyed your commandments.
So you gave us over to plunder, exile, and death,
to become the talk, the byword, and an object of reproach
among all the nations among whom you have dispersed us.
5 And now your many judgments are true
in exacting penalty from me for my sins.
For we have not kept your commandments
and have not walked in accordance with truth before you.
6 So now deal with me as you will;
command my spirit to be taken from me,
so that I may be released from the face of the earth and
become dust.
For it is better for me to die than to live,
because I have had to listen to undeserved insults,
and great is the sorrow within me.
Command, O Lord, that I be released from this distress;
release me to go to the eternal home,
and do not, O Lord, turn your face away from me.
For it is better for me to die
than to see so much distress in my life
and to listen to insults."

22

TOBIT 23

Sarah's plight and prayer
7 On the same day, at Ecbatana in Media, it also happened that Sarah,
the daughter of Raguel, was reproached by one of her father's maids.
8 For she had been married to seven husbands, and the wicked demon
Asmodeus had killed each of them before they had been with her as is
customary for wives. So the maid said to her, "You are the one who
kills your husbands! See, you have already been married to seven
husbands and have not borne the name of a single one of them. 9 Why
do you beat us? Because your husbands are dead? Go with them! May
we never see a son or daughter of yours!"
10 On that day she was grieved in spirit and wept. When she had gone
up to her father's upper room, she intended to hang herself. But she
thought it over and said, "Never shall they reproach my father, saying
to him, 'You had only one beloved daughter but she hanged herself
because of her distress.' And I shall bring my father in his old age down
in sorrow to Hades. It is better for me not to hang myself, but to pray
the Lord that I may die and not listen to these reproaches anymore." 11
At that same time, with hands outstretched toward the window, she
prayed and said,
"Blessed are you, merciful God!
Blessed is your name forever;
let all your works praise you forever.
12 And now, Lord, I turn my face to you,
and raise my eyes toward you.
13 Command that I be released from the earth
and not listen to such reproaches any more.
14 You know, O Master, that I am innocent
of any defilement with a man,

23

TOBIT 24

15 and that I have not disgraced my name
or the name of my father in the land of my exile.
I am my father's only child;
he has no other child to be his heir;
and he has no close relative or other kindred
for whom I should keep myself as wife.
Already seven husbands of mine have died.
Why should I still live?
But if it is not pleasing to you, O Lord, to take my life,
hear me in my disgrace."
Divine response
16 At that very moment, the prayers of both of them were heard in the
glorious presence of God. 17 So Raphael was sent to heal both of them:
Tobit, by removing the white films from his eyes, so that he might see
God's light with his eyes; and Sarah, daughter of Raguel, by giving her
in marriage to Tobias son of Tobit, and by setting her free from the
wicked demon Asmodeus. For Tobias was entitled to have her before
all others who had desired to marry her. At the same time that Tobit
returned from the courtyard into his house, Sarah daughter of Raguel
came down from her upper room.
[Tobit 4]
Tobit's advice on the family
1 That same day Tobit remembered the money that he had left in trust
with Gabael at Rages in Media, 2 and he said to himself, "Now I have
asked for death. Why do I not call my son Tobias and explain to him
about the money before I die?" 3 Then he called his son Tobias, and
when he came to him he said, "My son, when I die, give me a proper
burial. Honor your mother and do not abandon her all the days of her
life. Do whatever pleases her, and do not grieve her in anything. 4
Remember her, my son, because she faced many dangers for you while
you were in her womb. And when she dies, bury her beside me in the
same grave.

24

TOBIT 25

5 "Revere the Lord all your days, my son, and refuse to sin or to
transgress his commandments. Live uprightly all the days of your life,
and do not walk in the ways of wrongdoing; 6 for those who act in
accordance with truth will prosper in all their activities. To all those
who practice righteousness 7 give alms from your possessions, and do
not let your eye begrudge the gift when you make it. Do not turn your
face away from anyone who is poor, and the face of God will not be
turned away from you. 8 If you have many possessions, make your gift
from them in proportion; if few, do not be afraid to give according to
the little you have. 9 So you will be laying up a good treasure for
yourself against the day of necessity. 10 For almsgiving delivers from
death and keeps you from going into the Darkness. 11 Indeed,
almsgiving, for all who practice it, is an excellent offering in the
presence of the Most High.
12 "Beware, my son, of every kind of fornication. First of all, marry a
woman from among the descendants of your ancestors; do not marry a
foreign woman, who is not of your father's tribe; for we are the
descendants of the prophets. Remember, my son, that Noah, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, our ancestors of old, all took wives from among their
kindred. They were blessed in their children, and their posterity will
inherit the land. 13 So now, my son, love your kindred, and in your
heart do not disdain your kindred, the sons and daughters of your
people, by refusing to take a wife for yourself from among them. For
in pride there is ruin and great confusion. And in idleness there is loss
and dire poverty, because idleness is the mother of famine.
Popular wisdom
14 "Do not keep over until the next day the wages of those who work
for you, but pay them at once. If you serve God you will receive
payment. Watch yourself, my son, in everything you do, and discipline
yourself in all your conduct. 15 And what you hate, do not do to
anyone. Do not drink wine to excess or let drunkenness go with you on
your way. 16 Give some of your food to the hungry, and some of your
clothing to the naked. Give all your surplus as alms, and do not let your
eye begrudge your giving of alms. 17 Place your bread on the grave of
the righteous, but give none to sinners. 18 Seek advice from every wise

25

TOBIT 26

person and do not despise any useful counsel. 19 At all times bless the
Lord God, and ask him that your ways may be made straight and that
all your paths and plans may prosper. For none of the nations has
understanding, but the Lord himself will give them good counsel; but if
he chooses otherwise, he casts down to deepest Hades. So now, my
child, remember these commandments, and do not let them be erased
from your heart.
Obtaining funds left in trust
20 "And now, my son, let me explain to you that I left ten talents of
silver in trust with Gabael son of Gabrias, at Rages in Media. 21 Do not
be afraid, my son, because we have become poor. You have great
wealth if you fear God and flee from every sin and do what is good in
the sight of the Lord your God."
[Tobit 5]
Raphael's disguise
1 Then Tobias answered his father Tobit, "I will do everything that you
have commanded me, father; 2 but how can I obtain the money from
him, since he does not know me and I do not know him? What
evidence am I to give him so that he will recognize and trust me, and
give me the money? Also, I do not know the roads to Media, or how to
get there." 3 Then Tobit answered his son Tobias, "He gave me his
bond and I gave him my bond. I divided his in two; we each took one
part, and I put one with the money. And now twenty years have passed
since I left this money in trust. So now, my son, find yourself a
trustworthy man to go with you, and we will pay him wages until you
return. But get back the money from Gabael."
4 So Tobias went out to look for a man to go with him to Media,
someone who was acquainted with the way. He went out and found
the angel Raphael standing in front of him; but he did not perceive
that he was an angel of God. 5 Tobias said to him, "Where do you
come from, young man?" "From your kindred, the Israelites," he
replied, "and I have come here to work." Then Tobias said to him, "Do
you know the way to go to Media?" 6 "Yes," he replied, "I have been

26

TOBIT 27

there many times; I am acquainted with it and know all the roads. I
have often traveled to Media, and would stay with our kinsman Gabael
who lives in Rages of Media. It is a journey of two days from Ecbatana
to Rages; for it lies in a mountainous area, while Ecbatana is in the
middle of the plain." 7 Then Tobias said to him, "Wait for me, young
man, until I go in and tell my father; for I do need you to travel with
me, and I will pay you your wages." 8 He replied, "All right, I will wait;
but do not take too long."
9 So Tobias went in to tell his father Tobit and said to him, "I have just
found a man who is one of our own Israelite kindred!" He replied,
"Call the man in, my son, so that I may learn about his family and to
what tribe he belongs, and whether he is trustworthy enough to go
with you."
10 Then Tobias went out and called him, and said, "Young man, my
father is calling for you." So he went in to him, and Tobit greeted him
first. He replied, "Joyous greetings to you!" But Tobit retorted, "What
joy is left for me any more? I am a man without eyesight; I cannot see
the light of heaven, but I lie in darkness like the dead who no longer
see the light. Although still alive, I am among the dead. I hear people
but I cannot see them." But the young man said, "Take courage; the
time is near for God to heal you; take courage." Then Tobit said to
him, "My son Tobias wishes to go to Media. Can you accompany him
and guide him? I will pay your wages, brother." He answered, "I can go
with him and I know all the roads, for I have often gone to Media and
have crossed all its plains, and I am familiar with its mountains and all
of its roads."
11 Then Tobit said to him, "Brother, of what family are you and from
what tribe? Tell me, brother." 12 He replied, "Why do you need to
know my tribe?" But Tobit said, "I want to be sure, brother, whose son
you are and what your name is." 13 He replied, "I am Azariah, the son
of the great Hananiah, one of your relatives." 14 Then Tobit said to
him, "Welcome! God save you, brother. Do not feel bitter toward me,
brother, because I wanted to be sure about your ancestry. It turns out
that you are a kinsman, and of good and noble lineage. For I knew
Hananiah and Nathan, the two sons of Shemeliah, and they used to go

27

TOBIT 28

with me to Jerusalem and worshiped with me there, and were not led
astray. Your kindred are good people; you come of good stock. Hearty
welcome!"
15 Then he added, "I will pay you a drachma a day as wages, as well as
expenses for yourself and my son. So go with my son, 16 and I will add
something to your wages." Raphael answered, "I will go with him; so
do not fear. We shall leave in good health and return to you in good
health, because the way is safe." 17 So Tobit said to him, "Blessings be
upon you, brother."
Then he called his son and said to him, "Son, prepare supplies for the
journey and set out with your brother. May God in heaven bring you
safely there and return you in good health to me; and may his angel,
my son, accompany you both for your safety."
Before he went out to start his journey, he kissed his father and
mother. Tobit then said to him, "Have a safe journey."
Anna's lament
18 But his mother began to weep, and said to Tobit, "Why is it that you
have sent my child away? Is he not the staff of our hand as he goes in
and out before us? 19 Do not heap money upon money, but let it be a
ransom for our child. 20 For the life that is given to us by the Lord is
enough for us." 21 Tobit said to her, "Do not worry; our child will leave
in good health and return to us in good health. Your eyes will see him
on the day when he returns to you in good health. Say no more! Do
not fear for them, my sister. 22 For a good angel will accompany him;
his journey will be successful, and he will come back in good health."
[Tobit 6] 1a So she stopped weeping.
[Tobit 6, continued]
Dangerous journey
1b The young man went out and the angel went with him; 2 and the
dog came out with him and went along with them. So they both
journeyed along, and when the first night overtook them they camped

28

TOBIT 29

by the Tigris river. 3 Then the young man went down to wash his feet
in the Tigris river. Suddenly a large fish leaped up from the water and
tried to swallow the young man's foot, and he cried out. 4 But the
angel said to the young man, "Catch hold of the fish and hang on to
it!" So the young man grasped the fish and drew it up on the land. 5
Then the angel said to him, "Cut open the fish and take out its gall,
heart, and liver. Keep them with you, but throw away the intestines.
For its gall, heart, and liver are useful as medicine." 6 So after cutting
open the fish the young man gathered together the gall, heart, and
liver; then he roasted and ate some of the fish, and kept some to be
salted.
The two continued on their way together until they were near Media.
7 Then the young man questioned the angel and said to him, "Brother
Azariah, what medicinal value is there in the fish's heart and liver, and
in the gall?" 8 He replied, "As for the fish's heart and liver, you must
burn them to make a smoke in the presence of a man or woman
afflicted by a demon or evil spirit, and every affliction will flee away
and never remain with that person any longer. 9 And as for the gall,
anoint a person's eyes where white films have appeared on them; blow
upon them, upon the white films, and the eyes will be healed."
Prenuptial instructions
10 When he entered Media and already was approaching Ecbatana, 11
Raphael said to the young man, "Brother Tobias." "Here I am," he
answered. Then Raphael said to him, "We must stay this night in the
home of Raguel. He is your relative, and he has a daughter named
Sarah. 12 He has no male heir and no daughter except Sarah only, and
you, as next of kin to her, have before all other men a hereditary claim
on her. Also it is right for you to inherit her father's possessions.
Moreover, the girl is sensible, brave, and very beautiful, and her father
is a good man." 13 He continued, "You have every right to take her in
marriage. So listen to me, brother; tonight I will speak to her father
about the girl, so that we may take her to be your bride. When we
return from Rages we will celebrate her marriage. For I know that
Raguel can by no means keep her from you or promise her to another
man without incurring the penalty of death according to the decree of

29

TOBIT 30

the book of Moses. Indeed he knows that you, rather than any other
man, are entitled to marry his daughter. So now listen to me, brother,
and tonight we shall speak concerning the girl and arrange her
engagement to you. And when we return from Rages we will take her
and bring her back with us to your house."
14 Then Tobias said in answer to Raphael, "Brother Azariah, I have
heard that she already has been married to seven husbands and that
they died in the bridal chamber. On the night when they went in to
her, they would die. I have heard people saying that it was a demon
that killed them. 15 It does not harm her, but it kills anyone who
desires to approach her. So now, since I am the only son my father has,
I am afraid that I may die and bring my father's and mother's life down
to their grave, grieving for me — and they have no other son to bury
them."
16 But Raphael said to him, "Do you not remember your father's orders
when he commanded you to take a wife from your father's house?
Now listen to me, brother, and say no more about this demon. Take
her. I know that this very night she will be given to you in marriage. 17
When you enter the bridal chamber, take some of the fish's liver and
heart, and put them on the embers of the incense. An odor will be
given off; 18 the demon will smell it and flee, and will never be seen
near her any more. Now when you are about to go to bed with her,
both of you must first stand up and pray, imploring the Lord of heaven
that mercy and safety may be granted to you. Do not be afraid, for she
was set apart for you before the world was made. You will save her,
and she will go with you. I presume that you will have children by her,
and they will be as brothers to you. Now say no more!" When Tobias
heard the words of Raphael and learned that she was his kinswoman,
related through his father's lineage, he loved her very much, and his
heart was drawn to her.
[Tobit 7]
Tobit and Sarah marry
1 Now when they entered Ecbatana, Tobias said to him, "Brother
Azariah, take me straight to our brother Raguel." So he took him to

30

TOBIT 31

Raguel's house, where they found him sitting beside the courtyard
door. They greeted him first, and he replied, "Joyous greetings,
brothers; welcome and good health!" Then he brought them into his
house. 2 He said to his wife Edna, "How much the young man
resembles my kinsman Tobit!" 3 Then Edna questioned them, saying,
"Where are you from, brothers?" They answered, "We belong to the
descendants of Naphtali who are exiles in Nineveh." 4 She said to
them, "Do you know our kinsman Tobit?" And they replied, "Yes, we
know him." Then she asked them, "Is he in good health?" 5 They
replied, "He is alive and in good health." And Tobias added, "He is my
father!" 6 At that Raguel jumped up and kissed him and wept. 7 He
also spoke to him as follows, "Blessings on you, my child, son of a good
and noble father! O most miserable of calamities that such an upright
and beneficent man has become blind!" He then embraced his kinsman
Tobias and wept. 8 His wife Edna also wept for him, and their
daughter Sarah likewise wept. 9 Then Raguel slaughtered a ram from
the flock and received them very warmly.
When they had bathed and washed themselves and had reclined to
dine, Tobias said to Raphael, "Brother Azariah, ask Raguel to give me
my kinswoman Sarah." 10 But Raguel overheard it and said to the lad,
"Eat and drink, and be merry tonight. For no one except you, brother,
has the right to marry my daughter Sarah. Likewise I am not at liberty
to give her to any other man than yourself, because you are my nearest
relative. But let me explain to you the true situation more fully, my
child. 11 I have given her to seven men of our kinsmen, and all died on
the night when they went in to her. But now, my child, eat and drink,
and the Lord will act on behalf of you both." But Tobias said, "I will
neither eat nor drink anything until you settle the things that pertain
to me." So Raguel said, "I will do so. She is given to you in accordance
with the decree in the book of Moses, and it has been decreed from
heaven that she be given to you. Take your kinswoman; from now on
you are her brother and she is your sister. She is given to you from
today and forever. May the Lord of heaven, my child, guide and
prosper you both this night and grant you mercy and peace." 12 Then
Raguel summoned his daughter Sarah. When she came to him he took
her by the hand and gave her to Tobias, saying, "Take her to be your
wife in accordance with the law and decree written in the book of

31

TOBIT 32

Moses. Take her and bring her safely to your father. And may the God
of heaven prosper your journey with his peace." 13 Then he called her
mother and told her to bring writing material; and he wrote out a copy
of a marriage contract, to the effect that he gave her to him as wife
according to the decree of the law of Moses. 14 Then they began to eat
and drink.
15 Raguel called his wife Edna and said to her, "Sister, get the other
room ready, and take her there." 16 So she went and made the bed in
the room as he had told her, and brought Sarah there. She wept for
her daughter. Then, wiping away the tears, she said to her, "Take
courage, my daughter; the Lord of heaven grant you joy in place of
your sorrow. Take courage, my daughter." Then she went out.
[Tobit 8]
Asmodeus is exorcised
1 When they had finished eating and drinking they wanted to retire; so
they took the young man and brought him into the bedroom. 2 Then
Tobias remembered the words of Raphael, and he took the fish's liver
and heart out of the bag where he had them and put them on the
embers of the incense. 3 The odor of the fish so repelled the demon
that he fled to the remotest parts of Egypt. But Raphael followed him,
and at once bound him there hand and foot.
4 When the parents had gone out and shut the door of the room,
Tobias got out of bed and said to Sarah, "Sister, get up, and let us pray
and implore our Lord that he grant us mercy and safety." 5 So she got
up, and they began to pray and implore that they might be kept safe.
Tobias began by saying,
"Blessed are you, O God of our ancestors,
and blessed is your name in all generations forever.
Let the heavens and the whole creation bless you forever.
6 You made Adam, and for him you made his wife Eve
as a helper and support.
From the two of them the human race has sprung.
You said, 'It is not good that the man should be alone;
let us make a helper for him like himself.'

32

TOBIT 33

7 I now am taking this kinswoman of mine,
not because of lust,
but with sincerity.
Grant that she and I may find mercy
and that we may grow old together."
8 And they both said, "Amen, Amen." 9 Then they went to sleep for
the night.
Raguel's fears are assuaged
But Raguel arose and called his servants to him, and they went and dug
a grave, 10 for he said, "It is possible that he will die and we will
become an object of ridicule and derision." 11 When they had finished
digging the grave, Raguel went into his house and called his wife, 12
saying, "Send one of the maids and have her go in to see if he is alive.
But if he is dead, let us bury him without anyone knowing it." 13 So
they sent the maid, lit a lamp, and opened the door; and she went in
and found them sound asleep together. 14 Then the maid came out
and informed them that he was alive and that nothing was wrong. 15
So they blessed the God of heaven, and Raguel said,
"Blessed are you, O God, with every pure blessing;
let all your chosen ones bless you.
Let them bless you forever.
16 Blessed are you because you have made me glad.
It has not turned out as I expected,
but you have dealt with us according to your great mercy.
17 Blessed are you because you had compassion
on two only children.
Be merciful to them, O Master, and keep them safe;
bring their lives to fulfillment
in happiness and mercy."
18 Then he ordered his servants to fill in the grave before daybreak.
The wedding celebrated and tasks fulfilled
19 After this he asked his wife to bake many loaves of bread; and he
went out to the herd and brought two steers and four rams and
ordered them to be slaughtered. So they began to make preparations.

33

TOBIT 34

20 Then he called for Tobias and swore on oath to him in these words:
"You shall not leave here for fourteen days, but shall stay here eating
and drinking with me; and you shall cheer up my daughter, who has
been depressed. 21 Take at once half of what I own and return in safety
to your father; the other half will be yours when my wife and I die.
Take courage, my child. I am your father and Edna is your mother, and
we belong to you as well as to your wife now and forever. Take
courage, my child."
[Tobit 9]
1 Then Tobias called Raphael and said to him, 2 "Brother Azariah, take
four servants and two camels with you and travel to Rages. Go to the
home of Gabael, give him the bond, get the money, and then bring
him with you to the wedding celebration. 4 For you know that my
father must be counting the days, and if I delay even one day I will
upset him very much. 3 You are witness to the oath Raguel has sworn,
and I cannot violate his oath." 5 So Raphael with the four servants and
two camels went to Rages in Media and stayed with Gabael. Raphael
gave him the bond and informed him that Tobit's son Tobias had
married and was inviting him to the wedding celebration. So Gabael
got up and counted out to him the money bags, with their seals intact;
then they loaded them on the camels. 6 In the morning they both got
up early and went to the wedding celebration. When they came into
Raguel's house they found Tobias reclining at table. He sprang up and
greeted Gabael, who wept and blessed him with the words, "Good and
noble son of a father good and noble, upright and generous! May the
Lord grant the blessing of heaven to you and your wife, and to your
wife's father and mother. Blessed be God, for I see in Tobias the very
image of my cousin Tobit."
[Tobit 10]
Anxiety at home
1 Now, day by day, Tobit kept counting how many days Tobias would
need for going and for returning. And when the days had passed and
his son did not appear, 2 he said, "Is it possible that he has been
detained? Or that Gabael has died, and there is no one to give him the

34

TOBIT 35

money?" 3 And he began to worry. 4 His wife Anna said, "My child has
perished and is no longer among the living." And she began to weep
and mourn for her son, saying, 5 "Woe to me, my child, the light of my
eyes, that I let you make the journey." 6 But Tobit kept saying to her,
"Be quiet and stop worrying, my dear; he is all right. Probably
something unexpected has happened there. The man who went with
him is trustworthy and is one of our own kin. Do not grieve for him, my
dear; he will soon be here." 7 She answered him, "Be quiet yourself!
Stop trying to deceive me! My child has perished." She would rush out
every day and watch the road her son had taken, and would heed no
one. When the sun had set she would go in and mourn and weep all
night long, getting no sleep at all.
Return to Nineveh
Now when the fourteen days of the wedding celebration had ended
that Raguel had sworn to observe for his daughter, Tobias came to him
and said, "Send me back, for I know that my father and mother do not
believe that they will see me again. So I beg of you, father, to let me
go so that I may return to my own father. I have already explained to
you how I left him." 8 But Raguel said to Tobias, "Stay, my child, stay
with me; I will send messengers to your father Tobit and they will
inform him about you." 9 But he said, "No! I beg you to send me back
to my father." 10 So Raguel promptly gave Tobias his wife Sarah, as
well as half of all his property: male and female slaves, oxen and sheep,
donkeys and camels, clothing, money, and household goods. 11 Then he
saw them safely off; he embraced Tobias and said, "Farewell, my child;
have a safe journey. The Lord of heaven prosper you and your wife
Sarah, and may I see children of yours before I die." 12 Then he kissed
his daughter Sarah and said to her, "My daughter, honor your fatherin-law and your mother-in-law, since from now on they are as much
your parents as those who gave you birth. Go in peace, daughter, and
may I hear a good report about you as long as I live." Then he bade
them farewell and let them go. Then Edna said to Tobias, "My child
and dear brother, the Lord of heaven bring you back safely, and may I
live long enough to see children of you and of my daughter Sarah
before I die. In the sight of the Lord I entrust my daughter to you; do
nothing to grieve her all the days of your life. Go in peace, my child.

35

TOBIT 36

From now on I am your mother and Sarah is your beloved wife. May
we all prosper together all the days of our lives." Then she kissed them
both and saw them safely off. 13 Tobias parted from Raguel with
happiness and joy, praising the Lord of heaven and earth, King over all,
because he had made his journey a success. Finally, he blessed Raguel
and his wife Edna, and said, "I have been commanded by the Lord to
honor you all the days of my life."
[Tobit 11]
Tobias returns
1 When they came near to Kaserin, which is opposite Nineveh, Raphael
said, 2 "You are aware of how we left your father. 3 Let us run ahead
of your wife and prepare the house while they are still on the way." 4
As they went on together Raphael said to him, "Have the gall ready."
And the dog went along behind them.
5 Meanwhile Anna sat looking intently down the road by which her
son would come. 6 When she caught sight of him coming, she said to
his father, "Look, your son is coming, and the man who went with
him!"
Tobit is healed
7 Raphael said to Tobias, before he had approached his father, "I know
that his eyes will be opened. 8 Smear the gall of the fish on his eyes;
the medicine will make the white films shrink and peel off from his
eyes, and your father will regain his sight and see the light."
9 Then Anna ran up to her son and threw her arms around him, saying,
"Now that I have seen you, my child, I am ready to die." And she wept.
10 Then Tobit got up and came stumbling out through the courtyard
door. Tobias went up to him, 11 with the gall of the fish in his hand,
and holding him firmly, he blew into his eyes, saying, "Take courage,
father." With this he applied the medicine on his eyes, 12 and it made
them smart. 13 Next, with both his hands he peeled off the white films
from the corners of his eyes. Then Tobit saw his son and threw his arms

36

TOBIT 37

around him, 14 and he wept and said to him, "I see you, my son, the
light of my eyes!" Then he said,
"Blessed be God,
and blessed be his great name,
and blessed be all his holy angels.
May his holy name be blessed
throughout all the ages.
15 Though he afflicted me,
he has had mercy upon me.
Now I see my son Tobias!"
So Tobit went in rejoicing and praising God at the top of his voice.
Tobias reported to his father that his journey had been successful, that
he had brought the money, that he had married Raguel's daughter
Sarah, and that she was, indeed, on her way there, very near to the
gate of Nineveh.
16 Then Tobit, rejoicing and praising God, went out to meet his
daughter-in-law at the gate of Nineveh. When the people of Nineveh
saw him coming, walking along in full vigor and with no one leading
him, they were amazed. 17 Before them all, Tobit acknowledged that
God had been merciful to him and had restored his sight. When Tobit
met Sarah the wife of his son Tobias, he blessed her saying, "Come in,
my daughter, and welcome. Blessed be your God who has brought you
to us, my daughter. Blessed be your father and your mother, blessed be
my son Tobias, and blessed be you, my daughter. Come in now to your
home, and welcome, with blessing and joy. Come in, my daughter." So
on that day there was rejoicing among all the Jews who were in
Nineveh. 18 Ahikar and his nephew Nadab were also present to share
Tobit's joy. With merriment they celebrated Tobias's wedding feast for
seven days, and many gifts were given to him.
[Tobit 12]
Raphael's revelations
1 When the wedding celebration was ended, Tobit called his son Tobias
and said to him, "My child, see to paying the wages of the man who
went with you, and give him a bonus as well." 2 He replied, "Father,
how much shall I pay him? It would do no harm to give him half of the

37

TOBIT 38

possessions brought back with me. 3 For he has led me back to you
safely, he cured my wife, he brought the money back with me, and he
healed you. How much extra shall I give him as a bonus?" 4 Tobit said,
"He deserves, my child, to receive half of all that he brought back." 5
So Tobias called him and said, "Take for your wages half of all that you
brought back, and farewell."
6 Then Raphael called the two of them privately and said to them,
"Bless God and acknowledge him in the presence of all the living for
the good things he has done for you. Bless and sing praise to his name.
With fitting honor declare to all people the deeds of God. Do not be
slow to acknowledge him. 7 It is good to conceal the secret of a king,
but to acknowledge and reveal the works of God, and with fitting
honor to acknowledge him. Do good and evil will not overtake you. 8
Prayer with fasting is good, but better than both is almsgiving with
righteousness. A little with righteousness is better than wealth with
wrongdoing. It is better to give alms than to lay up gold. 9 For
almsgiving saves from death and purges away every sin. Those who
give alms will enjoy a full life, 10 but those who commit sin and do
wrong are their own worst enemies.
11 "I will now declare the whole truth to you and will conceal nothing
from you. Already I have declared it to you when I said, 'It is good to
conceal the secret of a king, but to reveal with due honor the works of
God.' 12 So now when you and Sarah prayed, it was I who brought and
read the record of your prayer before the glory of the Lord, and
likewise whenever you would bury the dead. 13 And that time when
you did not hesitate to get up and leave your dinner to go and bury
the dead, 14 I was sent to you to test you. And at the same time God
sent me to heal you and Sarah your daughter-in-law. 15 I am Raphael,
one of the seven angels who stand ready and enter before the glory of
the Lord."
16 The two of them were shaken; they fell face down, for they were
afraid. 17 But he said to them, "Do not be afraid; peace be with you.
Bless God forevermore. 18 As for me, when I was with you, I was not
acting on my own will, but by the will of God. Bless him each and every
day; sing his praises. 19 Although you were watching me, I really did

38

TOBIT 39

not eat or drink anything — but what you saw was a vision. 20 So now
get up from the ground, and acknowledge God. See, I am ascending to
him who sent me. Write down all these things that have happened to
you." And he ascended. 21 Then they stood up, and could see him no
more. 22 They kept blessing God and singing his praises, and they
acknowledged God for these marvelous deeds of his, when an angel of
God had appeared to them.
[Tobit 13]
Tobit's hymn
1 Then Tobit said:
"Blessed be God who lives forever,
because his kingdom lasts throughout all ages.
2 For he afflicts, and he shows mercy;
he leads down to Hades in the lowest regions of the earth,
and he brings up from the great abyss,
and there is nothing that can escape his hand.
3 Acknowledge him before the nations, O children of Israel;
for he has scattered you among them.
4
He has shown you his greatness even there.
Exalt him in the presence of every living being,
because he is our Lord and he is our God;
he is our Father and he is God forever.
5 He will afflict you for your iniquities,
but he will again show mercy on all of you.
He will gather you from all the nations
among whom you have been scattered.

39

TOBIT 40

6 If you turn to him with all your heart and with all your soul,
to do what is true before him,
then he will turn to you
and will no longer hide his face from you.
So now see what he has done for you;
acknowledge him at the top of your voice.
Bless the Lord of righteousness,
and exalt the King of the ages.
In the land of my exile I acknowledge him,
and show his power and majesty to a nation of sinners:
'Turn back, you sinners, and do what is right before him;
perhaps he may look with favor upon you and show you mercy.'
7 As for me, I exalt my God,
and my soul rejoices in the King of heaven.
8 Let all people speak of his majesty,
and acknowledge him in Jerusalem.
9 O Jerusalem, the holy city,
he afflicted you for the deeds of your hands,
but will again have mercy on the children of the righteous.
10 Acknowledge the Lord, for he is good,
and bless the King of the ages,
so that his tent may be rebuilt in you in joy.
May he cheer all those within you who are captives,
and love all those within you who are distressed,
to all generations forever.
11 A bright light will shine to all the ends of the earth;
many nations will come to you from far away,
the inhabitants of the remotest parts of the earth to your holy name,
bearing gifts in their hands for the King of heaven.
Generation after generation will give joyful praise in you;
the name of the chosen city will endure forever.

40

TOBIT 41

12 Cursed are all who speak a harsh word against you;
cursed are all who conquer you
and pull down your walls,
all who overthrow your towers
and set your homes on fire.
But blessed forever will be all who revere you.
13 Go, then, and rejoice over the children of the righteous,
for they will be gathered together
and will praise the Lord of the ages.
14 Happy are those who love you,
and happy are those who rejoice in your prosperity.
Happy also are all people who grieve with you
because of your afflictions;
for they will rejoice with you
and witness all your glory forever.
15 My soul blesses the Lord, the great King!
16 For Jerusalem will be built as his house for all ages.
How happy I will be if a remnant of my descendants should survive
to see your glory and acknowledge the King of heaven.
The gates of Jerusalem will be built with sapphire and emerald,
and all your walls with precious stones.
The towers of Jerusalem will be built with gold,
and their battlements with pure gold.
The streets of Jerusalem will be paved
with ruby and with stones of Ophir.
17 The gates of Jerusalem will sing hymns of joy,
and all her houses will cry, 'Hallelujah!
Blessed be the God of Israel!'
and the blessed will bless the holy name forever and ever."
[Tobit 14] 1 So ended Tobit's words of praise.
Tobit's testament
2 Tobit died in peace when he was one hundred twelve years old, and
was buried with great honor in Nineveh. He was sixty-two years old
when he lost his eyesight, and after regaining it he lived in prosperity,

41

TOBIT 42

giving alms and continually blessing God and acknowledging God's
majesty.
3 When he was about to die, he called his son Tobias and the seven
sons of Tobias and gave this command: "My son, take your children 4
and hurry off to Media, for I believe the word of God that Nahum
spoke about Nineveh, that all these things will take place and overtake
Assyria and Nineveh. Indeed, everything that was spoken by the
prophets of Israel, whom God sent, will occur. None of all their words
will fail, but all will come true at their appointed times. So it will be
safer in Media than in Assyria and Babylon. For I know and believe that
whatever God has said will be fulfilled and will come true; not a single
word of the prophecies will fail. All of our kindred, inhabitants of the
land of Israel, will be scattered and taken as captives from the good
land; and the whole land of Israel will be desolate, even Samaria and
Jerusalem will be desolate. And the temple of God in it will be burned
to the ground, and it will be desolate for a while.
5 "But God will again have mercy on them, and God will bring them
back into the land of Israel; and they will rebuild the temple of God,
but not like the first one until the period when the times of fulfillment
shall come. After this they all will return from their exile and will
rebuild Jerusalem in splendor; and in it the temple of God will be
rebuilt, just as the prophets of Israel have said concerning it. 6 Then the
nations in the whole world will all be converted and worship God in
truth. They will all abandon their idols, which deceitfully have led them
into their error; 7 and in righteousness they will praise the eternal God.
All the Israelites who are saved in those days and are truly mindful of
God will be gathered together; they will go to Jerusalem and live in
safety forever in the land of Abraham, and it will be given over to
them. Those who sincerely love God will rejoice, but those who commit
sin and injustice will vanish from all the earth. 8,9 So now, my children,
I command you, serve God faithfully and do what is pleasing in his
sight. Your children are also to be commanded to do what is right and
to give alms, and to be mindful of God and to bless his name at all
times with sincerity and with all their strength. So now, my son, leave
Nineveh; do not remain here. 10 On whatever day you bury your
mother beside me, do not stay overnight within the confines of the

42

TOBIT 43

city. For I see that there is much wickedness within it, and that much
deceit is practiced within it, while the people are without shame. See,
my son, what Nadab did to Ahikar who had reared him. Was he not,
while still alive, brought down into the earth? For God repaid him to
his face for this shameful treatment. Ahikar came out into the light,
but Nadab went into the eternal darkness, because he tried to kill
Ahikar. Because he gave alms, Ahikar escaped the fatal trap that
Nadab had set for him, but Nadab fell into it himself, and was
destroyed. 11 So now, my children, see what almsgiving accomplishes,
and what injustice does — it brings death! But now my breath fails
me."
Tobit and Anna die
Then they laid him on his bed, and he died; and he received an
honorable funeral. 12 When Tobias's mother died, he buried her beside
his father. Then he and his wife and children returned to Media and
settled in Ecbatana with Raguel his father-in-law. 13 He treated his
parents-in-law with great respect in their old age, and buried them in
Ecbatana of Media. He inherited both the property of Raguel and that
of his father Tobit. 14 He died highly respected at the age of one
hundred seventeen years. 15 Before he died he heard of the
destruction of Nineveh, and he saw its prisoners being led into Media,
those whom King Cyaxares of Media had taken captive. Tobias praised
God for all he had done to the people of Nineveh and Assyria; before
he died he rejoiced over Nineveh, and he blessed the Lord God forever
and ever. Amen.

43

JUDITH 44

JUDITH
Introduction
Judith, perhaps more than any other biblical book, consistently reverses
the reader's expectations. The potent Assyrian army, able to defeat
mighty nations both east and west, is routed by the tiny town of
Bethulia. Judith, a Jewish widow, so beguiles Holofernes, the invincible
head of the Assyrian army, and all his servants and soldiers that she is
able to assassinate him in the middle of his camp and sneak away
without being caught. The book's characters and scenes resonate with
irony, humor, wordplay, suspense, and the unexpected. The story's
characters are vividly drawn and take on lives of their own. Judith is an
especially compelling figure. She is morally ambiguous: Although
pious, faithful, and religiously observant, she lies, seduces, and
murders. She is introduced as a traditionally ideal Jewish woman in
many aspects: beautiful, well-connected, devoted to God and her late
husband; yet it is she, and not the male rulers of Bethulia, who acts to
save the town and rallies the people to her cause. She has often been
viewed as a model for human liberation, and her courage and
complexity have fascinated artists, writers, and composers for centuries.
The book of Judith is a well-crafted work of fiction, an example of the
ancient Jewish novel in the Greco-Roman period. Its tone is
exaggerated throughout; it contains historical inaccuracies so great
that they strike a reader as absurd; and many of the geographical sites,
including the principal scene of the action (the town of Bethulia), are
unknown. Religion is a primary concern of the book. The plot's central
conflict revolves around the question of whether true power lies with
Israel's God or with the military might of a foreign ruler. The work
provides evidence of traditional religious practices, including prayer,
fasting, and observation of dietary laws.

44

JUDITH 45

The unity of plot and detail suggests that the book of Judith is almost
certainly the work of a single anonymous author. Because the story
reflects Assyrian, Babylonian, Persian, and Hellenistic persons and
practices, it is difficult to know when the book was originally
composed. Most scholars agree that it was written at some point
during the Hasmonean dynasty (165-37 BCE). As 1 Clement mentions
Judith in the first century CE, it is clear that the book was completed
and well known by this time. The geographical setting of the story in
Palestine, along with its emphasis upon worship in Jerusalem, may
suggest that it was composed by a Palestinian Jew.
The figure of Judith and her mode of operation have been variously
compared to the biblical characters of Jael and Deborah (Judg 4.4-5.31),
Moses, Esther, Abraham, Delilah (Judg 16), and Woman Wisdom (Prov
8). Yet she also may have been fashioned after the real-life persons
Judas Maccabeus (hence her name "Judith") or the popular queen
Salome Alexandra. It is probably best to view Judith as a fabricated
character, a composite of the traits and activities of many other figures
from the Bible and from history.
Although the character after whom the book is named does not
appear until ch 8, the first seven chapters establish the narrative
themes that frame the entire story: fear, deceit, hearing, blessing, and
the proper recipient of worship. Contrasts such as weakness and
strength, innocence and guilt, courage and timidity, and godliness and
ungodliness
should
be
noted.
False
appearances
and
misunderstandings occur regularly; for instance, the Assyrian army only
seems strong. Judith's lies are often interpreted as wisdom, and the
success of her mission is achieved by means of cosmetic adornment.
The book is divided into two main parts, each with a chiastic structure
and thematic repetition. The first part (1.1-7.32), which narrates the
Assyrian campaign and revenge against western nations, begins with
Nebuchadnezzar's
campaign
against
Arphaxad
(1.1-16),
his
commissioning Holofernes's campaign, the people of other nations
surrender (2.14-3.10), and consequently Israel is afraid and Joakim
prepares for war (4.1-15). After advising Holofernes, Achior is expelled
(5.1-6.11). Then the pattern reverses itself: Achior is received into

45

JUDITH 46

Bethulia and advises the Israelites (6.12-21); when Holofernes prepares
for war, Israel is afraid (7.1-5); and in the campaign against Bethulia,
the people wish to surrender (7.6-32). In the second part Judith
accomplishes her victory over the Assyrians (8.1-16.25). Judith is
introduced (8.1-8) and plans to save Israel (8.9-10.8). Judith and her
servant leave Bethulia (10.9-10), and Judith's stratagem succeeds: She
overcomes Holofernes (10.11-13.10a). Then the pattern in part two
reverses itself: Judith and her servant return to Bethulia (13.10b-11),
Judith plans to destroy Israel's enemy (13.12-16.20), and the narrative
concludes with a summary of Judith's remaining life (16.21-25).

[Judith 1]
Nebuchadnezzar is introduced. He declares ware on Arphaxad, the
king of Media
1 It was the twelfth year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, who ruled
over the Assyrians in the great city of Nineveh. In those days Arphaxad
ruled over the Medes in Ecbatana. 2 He built walls around Ecbatana
with hewn stones three cubits thick and six cubits long; he made the
walls seventy cubits high and fifty cubits wide. 3 At its gates he raised
towers one hundred cubits high and sixty cubits wide at the
foundations. 4 He made its gates seventy cubits high and forty cubits
wide to allow his armies to march out in force and his infantry to form
their ranks. 5 Then King Nebuchadnezzar made war against King
Arphaxad in the great plain that is on the borders of Ragau. 6 There
rallied to him all the people of the hill country and all those who lived
along the Euphrates, the Tigris, and the Hydaspes, and, on the plain,
Arioch, king of the Elymeans. Thus, many nations joined the forces of
the Chaldeans.
The Persians and the western nations disregard Nebuchadnezzar's
pleas for assistance
7 Then Nebuchadnezzar, king of the Assyrians, sent messengers to all
who lived in Persia and to all who lived in the west, those who lived in

46

JUDITH 47

Cilicia and Damascus, Lebanon and Antilebanon, and all who lived
along the seacoast, 8 and those among the nations of Carmel and
Gilead, and Upper Galilee and the great plain of Esdraelon, 9 and all
who were in Samaria and its towns, and beyond the Jordan as far as
Jerusalem and Bethany and Chelous and Kadesh and the river of Egypt,
and Tahpanhes and Raamses and the whole land of Goshen, 10 even
beyond Tanis and Memphis, and all who lived in Egypt as far as the
borders of Ethiopia. 11 But all who lived in the whole region
disregarded the summons of Nebuchadnezzar, king of the Assyrians,
and refused to join him in the war; for they were not afraid of him, but
regarded him as only one man. So they sent back his messengers
empty-handed and in disgrace.
Nebuchadnezzar vows revenge upon the western nations and alone
defeats Arphaxad
12 Then Nebuchadnezzar became very angry with this whole region,
and swore by his throne and kingdom that he would take revenge on
the whole territory of Cilicia and Damascus and Syria, that he would
kill with his sword also all the inhabitants of the land of Moab, and the
people of Ammon, and all Judea, and every one in Egypt, as far as the
coasts of the two seas.
13 In the seventeenth year he led his forces against King Arphaxad and
defeated him in battle, overthrowing the whole army of Arphaxad and
all his cavalry and all his chariots. 14 Thus he took possession of his
towns and came to Ecbatana, captured its towers, plundered its
markets, and turned its glory into disgrace. 15 He captured Arphaxad in
the mountains of Ragau and struck him down with his spears, thus
destroying him once and for all. 16 Then he returned to Nineveh, he
and all his combined forces, a vast body of troops; and there he and his
forces rested and feasted for one hundred twenty days.

47

JUDITH 48

[Judith 2]
Nebuchadnezzar commissions Holofernes to lead a punitive expedition
against the disobedient nations
1 In the eighteenth year, on the twenty-second day of the first month,
there was talk in the palace of Nebuchadnezzar, king of the Assyrians,
about carrying out his revenge on the whole region, just as he had
said. 2 He summoned all his ministers and all his nobles and set before
them his secret plan and recounted fully, with his own lips, all the
wickedness of the region. 3 They decided that every one who had not
obeyed his command should be destroyed.
4 When he had completed his plan, Nebuchadnezzar, king of the
Assyrians, called Holofernes, the chief general of his army, second only
to himself, and said to him, 5 "Thus says the Great King, the lord of the
whole earth: Leave my presence and take with you men confident in
their strength, one hundred twenty thousand foot soldiers and twelve
thousand cavalry. 6 March out against all the land to the west, because
they disobeyed my orders. 7 Tell them to prepare earth and water, for I
am coming against them in my anger, and will cover the whole face of
the earth with the feet of my troops, to whom I will hand them over to
be plundered. 8 Their wounded shall fill their ravines and gullies, and
the swelling river shall be filled with their dead. 9 I will lead them away
captive to the ends of the whole earth. 10 You shall go and seize all
their territory for me in advance. They must yield themselves to you,
and you shall hold them for me until the day of their punishment. 11
But to those who resist show no mercy, but hand them over to
slaughter and plunder throughout your whole region. 12 For as I live,
and by the power of my kingdom, what I have spoken I will accomplish
by my own hand. 13 And you — take care not to transgress any of your
lord's commands, but carry them out exactly as I have ordered you; do
it without delay."
Holofernes musters an enormous army, attacking and defeating the
western nations
14 So Holofernes left the presence of his lord, and summoned all the
commanders, generals, and officers of the Assyrian army. 15 He

48

JUDITH 49

mustered the picked troops by divisions as his lord had ordered him to
do, one hundred twenty thousand of them, together with twelve
thousand archers on horseback, 16 and he organized them as a great
army is marshaled for a campaign. 17 He took along a vast number of
camels and donkeys and mules for transport, and innumerable sheep
and oxen and goats for food; 18 also ample rations for everyone, and a
huge amount of gold and silver from the royal palace.
19 Then he set out with his whole army, to go ahead of King
Nebuchadnezzar and to cover the whole face of the earth to the west
with their chariots and cavalry and picked foot soldiers. 20 Along with
them went a mixed crowd like a swarm of locusts, like the dust of the
earth — a multitude that could not be counted.
21 They marched for three days from Nineveh to the plain of Bectileth,
and camped opposite Bectileth near the mountain that is to the north
of Upper Cilicia. 22 From there Holofernes took his whole army, the
infantry, cavalry, and chariots, and went up into the hill country. 23 He
ravaged Put and Lud, and plundered all the Rassisites and the
Ishmaelites on the border of the desert, south of the country of the
Chelleans. 24 Then he followed the Euphrates and passed through
Mesopotamia and destroyed all the fortified towns along the brook
Abron, as far as the sea. 25 He also seized the territory of Cilicia, and
killed everyone who resisted him. Then he came to the southern
borders of Japheth, facing Arabia. 26 He surrounded all the Midianites,
and burned their tents and plundered their sheepfolds. 27 Then he
went down into the plain of Damascus during the wheat harvest, and
burned all their fields and destroyed their flocks and herds and sacked
their towns and ravaged their lands and put all their young men to the
sword.
The peoples of the seacoast become afraid and surrender
28 So fear and dread of him fell upon all the people who lived along
the seacoast, at Sidon and Tyre, and those who lived in Sur and Ocina
and all who lived in Jamnia. Those who lived in Azotus and Ascalon
feared him greatly.

49

JUDITH 50

[Judith 3]
1 They therefore sent messengers to him to sue for peace in these
words: 2 "We, the servants of Nebuchadnezzar, the Great King, lie
prostrate before you. Do with us whatever you will. 3 See, our
buildings and all our land and all our wheat fields and our flocks and
herds and all our encampments lie before you; do with them as you
please. 4 Our towns and their inhabitants are also your slaves; come
and deal with them as you see fit."
Despite the peoples' submission, Holofernes destroys their religious
sites
5 The men came to Holofernes and told him all this. 6 Then he went
down to the seacoast with his army and stationed garrisons in the
fortified towns and took picked men from them as auxiliaries. 7 These
people and all in the countryside welcomed him with garlands and
dances and tambourines. 8 Yet he demolished all their shrines and cut
down their sacred groves; for he had been commissioned to destroy all
the gods of the land, so that all nations should worship
Nebuchadnezzar alone, and that all their dialects and tribes should call
upon him as a god.
9 Then he came toward Esdraelon, near Dothan, facing the great ridge
of Judea; 10 he camped between Geba and Scythopolis, and remained
for a whole month in order to collect all the supplies for his army.
[Judith 4]
The Israelites become afraid, prepare for battle, and pray
1 When the Israelites living in Judea heard of everything that
Holofernes, the general of Nebuchadnezzar, the king of the Assyrians,
had done to the nations, and how he had plundered and destroyed all
their temples, 2 they were therefore greatly terrified at his approach;
they were alarmed both for Jerusalem and for the temple of the Lord
their God. 3 For they had only recently returned from exile, and all the
people of Judea had just now gathered together, and the sacred
vessels and the altar and the temple had been consecrated after their

50

JUDITH 51

profanation. 4 So they sent word to every district of Samaria, and to
Kona, Beth-horon, Belmain, and Jericho, and to Choba and Aesora, and
the valley of Salem. 5 They immediately seized all the high hilltops and
fortified the villages on them and stored up food in preparation for
war — since their fields had recently been harvested.
6 The high priest, Joakim, who was in Jerusalem at the time, wrote to
the people of Bethulia and Betomesthaim, which faces Esdraelon
opposite the plain near Dothan, 7 ordering them to seize the mountain
passes, since by them Judea could be invaded; and it would be easy to
stop any who tried to enter, for the approach was narrow, wide
enough for only two at a time to pass.
8 So the Israelites did as they had been ordered by the high priest
Joakim and the senate of the whole people of Israel, in session at
Jerusalem. 9 And every man of Israel cried out to God with great
fervor, and they humbled themselves with much fasting. 10 They and
their wives and their children and their cattle and every resident alien
and hired laborer and purchased slave — they all put sackcloth around
their waists. 11 And all the Israelite men, women, and children living at
Jerusalem prostrated themselves before the temple and put ashes on
their heads and spread out their sackcloth before the Lord. 12 They
even draped the altar with sackcloth and cried out in unison, praying
fervently to the God of Israel not to allow their infants to be carried off
and their wives to be taken as booty, and the towns they had inherited
to be destroyed, and the sanctuary to be profaned and desecrated to
the malicious joy of the Gentiles.
13 The Lord heard their prayers and had regard for their distress; for
the people fasted many days throughout Judea and in Jerusalem
before the sanctuary of the Lord Almighty. 14 The high priest Joakim
and all the priests who stood before the Lord and ministered to the
Lord, with sackcloth around their loins, offered the daily burnt
offerings, the votive offerings, and freewill offerings of the people. 15
With ashes on their turbans, they cried out to the Lord with all their
might to look with favor on the whole house of Israel.

51

JUDITH 52

[Judith 5]
Holofernes questions the unique character of the Israelites
1 It was reported to Holofernes, the general of the Assyrian army, that
the people of Israel had prepared for war and had closed the mountain
passes and fortified all the high hilltops and set up barricades in the
plains. 2 In great anger he called together all the princes of Moab and
the commanders of Ammon and all the governors of the coastland, 3
and said to them, "Tell me, you Canaanites, what people is this that
lives in the hill country? What towns do they inhabit? How large is
their army, and in what does their power and strength consist? Who
rules over them as king and leads their army? 4 And why have they
alone, of all who live in the west, refused to come out and meet me?"
Achior instructs Holofernes by outlining the history of the Israelites
5 Then Achior, the leader of all the Ammonites, said to him, "May my
lord please listen to a report from the mouth of your servant, and I will
tell you the truth about this people that lives in the mountain district
near you. No falsehood shall come from your servant's mouth. 6 These
people are descended from the Chaldeans. 7 At one time they lived in
Mesopotamia, because they did not wish to follow the gods of their
ancestors who were in Chaldea. 8 Since they had abandoned the ways
of their ancestors, and worshiped the God of heaven, the God they had
come to know, their ancestors drove them out from the presence of
their gods. So they fled to Mesopotamia, and lived there for a long
time. 9 Then their God commanded them to leave the place where
they were living and go to the land of Canaan. There they settled, and
grew very prosperous in gold and silver and very much livestock. 10
When a famine spread over the land of Canaan they went down to
Egypt and lived there as long as they had food. There they became so
great a multitude that their race could not be counted. 11 So the king
of Egypt became hostile to them; he exploited them and forced them
to make bricks. 12 They cried out to their God, and he afflicted the
whole land of Egypt with incurable plagues. So the Egyptians drove
them out of their sight. 13 Then God dried up the Red Sea before them,
14 and he led them by the way of Sinai and Kadesh-barnea. They drove
out all the people of the desert, 15 and took up residence in the land of

52

JUDITH 53

the Amorites, and by their might destroyed all the inhabitants of
Heshbon; and crossing over the Jordan they took possession of all the
hill country. 16 They drove out before them the Canaanites, the
Perizzites, the Jebusites, the Shechemites, and all the Gergesites, and
lived there a long time.
17 "As long as they did not sin against their God they prospered, for
the God who hates iniquity is with them. 18 But when they departed
from the way he had prescribed for them, they were utterly defeated
in many battles and were led away captive to a foreign land. The
temple of their God was razed to the ground, and their towns were
occupied by their enemies. 19 But now they have returned to their God,
and have come back from the places where they were scattered, and
have occupied Jerusalem, where their sanctuary is, and have settled in
the hill country, because it was uninhabited.
20 "So now, my master and lord, if there is any oversight in this people
and they sin against their God and we find out their offense, then we
can go up and defeat them. 21 But if they are not a guilty nation, then
let my lord pass them by; for their Lord and God will defend them, and
we shall become the laughingstock of the whole world."
22 When Achior had finished saying these things, all the people
standing around the tent began to complain; Holofernes' officers and
all the inhabitants of the seacoast and Moab insisted that he should be
cut to pieces. 23 They said, "We are not afraid of the Israelites; they are
a people with no strength or power for making war. 24 Therefore let
us go ahead, Lord Holofernes, and your vast army will swallow them
up."
[Judith 6]
Holofernes denounces Achior and ejects him from the camp
1 When the disturbance made by the people outside the council had
died down, Holofernes, the commander of the Assyrian army, said to
Achior in the presence of all the foreign contingents:

53

JUDITH 54

2 "Who are you, Achior and you mercenaries of Ephraim, to prophesy
among us as you have done today and tell us not to make war against
the people of Israel because their God will defend them? What god is
there except Nebuchadnezzar? He will send his forces and destroy
them from the face of the earth. Their God will not save them; 3 we
the king's servants will destroy them as one man. They cannot resist the
might of our cavalry. 4 We will overwhelm them; their mountains will
be drunk with their blood, and their fields will be full of their dead.
Not even their footprints will survive our attack; they will utterly
perish. So says King Nebuchadnezzar, lord of the whole earth. For he
has spoken; none of his words shall be in vain.
5 "As for you, Achior, you Ammonite mercenary, you have said these
words in a moment of perversity; you shall not see my face again from
this day until I take revenge on this race that came out of Egypt. 6
Then at my return the sword of my army and the spear of my servants
shall pierce your sides, and you shall fall among their wounded. 7 Now
my slaves are going to take you back into the hill country and put you
in one of the towns beside the passes. 8 You will not die until you
perish along with them. 9 If you really hope in your heart that they will
not be taken, then do not look downcast! I have spoken, and none of
my words shall fail to come true."
10 Then Holofernes ordered his slaves, who waited on him in his tent,
to seize Achior and take him away to Bethulia and hand him over to
the Israelites. 11 So the slaves took him and led him out of the camp
into the plain, and from the plain they went up into the hill country
and came to the springs below Bethulia. 12 When the men of the town
saw them, they seized their weapons and ran out of the town to the
top of the hill, and all the slingers kept them from coming up by
throwing stones at them. 13 So having taken shelter below the hill,
they bound Achior and left him lying at the foot of the hill, and
returned to their master.
The Israelites find and rescue Achior, bringing him into Bethulia
14 Then the Israelites came down from their town and found him; they
untied him and brought him into Bethulia and placed him before the

54

JUDITH 55

magistrates of their town, 15 who in those days were Uzziah son of
Micah, of the tribe of Simeon, and Chabris son of Gothoniel, and
Charmis son of Melchiel. 16 They called together all the elders of the
town, and all their young men and women ran to the assembly. They
set Achior in the midst of all their people, and Uzziah questioned him
about what had happened. 17 He answered and told them what had
taken place at the council of Holofernes, and all that he had said in the
presence of the Assyrian leaders, and all that Holofernes had boasted
he would do against the house of Israel. 18 Then the people fell down
and worshiped God, and cried out:
19 "O Lord God of heaven, see their arrogance, and have pity on our
people in their humiliation, and look kindly today on the faces of those
who are consecrated to you."
20 Then they reassured Achior, and praised him highly. 21 Uzziah took
him from the assembly to his own house and gave a banquet for the
elders; and all that night they called on the God of Israel for help.
[Judith 7]
The Assyrians begin war preparations; the Israelites are again
frightened and prepare to fight
1 The next day Holofernes ordered his whole army, and all the allies
who had joined him, to break camp and move against Bethulia, and to
seize the passes up into the hill country and make war on the Israelites.
2 So all their warriors marched off that day; their fighting forces
numbered one hundred seventy thousand infantry and twelve
thousand cavalry, not counting the baggage and the foot soldiers
handling it, a very great multitude. 3 They encamped in the valley near
Bethulia, beside the spring, and they spread out in breadth over
Dothan as far as Balbaim and in length from Bethulia to Cyamon,
which faces Esdraelon.
4 When the Israelites saw their vast numbers, they were greatly
terrified and said to one another, "They will now strip clean the whole
land; neither the high mountains nor the valleys nor the hills will bear

55

JUDITH 56

their weight." 5 Yet they all seized their weapons, and when they had
kindled fires on their towers, they remained on guard all that night.
Holofernes, on the advice of his leaders, decides to seize Bethulia's
water supply
6 On the second day Holofernes led out all his cavalry in full view of
the Israelites in Bethulia. 7 He reconnoitered the approaches to their
town, and visited the springs that supplied their water; he seized them
and set guards of soldiers over them, and then returned to his army.
8 Then all the chieftains of the Edomites and all the leaders of the
Moabites and the commanders of the coastland came to him and said,
9 "Listen to what we have to say, my lord, and your army will suffer no
losses. 10 This people, the Israelites, do not rely on their spears but on
the height of the mountains where they live, for it is not easy to reach
the tops of their mountains. 11 Therefore, my lord, do not fight against
them in regular formation, and not a man of your army will fall. 12
Remain in your camp, and keep all the men in your forces with you; let
your servants take possession of the spring of water that flows from
the foot of the mountain, 13 for this is where all the people of Bethulia
get their water. So thirst will destroy them, and they will surrender
their town. Meanwhile, we and our people will go up to the tops of
the nearby mountains and camp there to keep watch to see that no
one gets out of the town. 14 They and their wives and children will
waste away with famine, and before the sword reaches them they will
be strewn about in the streets where they live. 15 Thus you will pay
them back with evil, because they rebelled and did not receive you
peaceably."
16 These words pleased Holofernes and all his attendants, and he gave
orders to do as they had said. 17 So the army of the Ammonites moved
forward, together with five thousand Assyrians, and they encamped in
the valley and seized the water supply and the springs of the Israelites.
18 And the Edomites and Ammonites went up and encamped in the hill
country opposite Dothan; and they sent some of their men toward the
south and the east, toward Egrebeh, which is near Chusi beside the
Wadi Mochmur. The rest of the Assyrian army encamped in the plain,

56

JUDITH 57

and covered the whole face of the land. Their tents and supply trains
spread out in great number, and they formed a vast multitude.
Driven to desperation, the citizens of Bethulia urge the leaders to
surrender
19 The Israelites then cried out to the Lord their God, for their courage
failed, because all their enemies had surrounded them, and there was
no way of escape from them. 20 The whole Assyrian army, their
infantry, chariots, and cavalry, surrounded them for thirty-four days,
until all the water containers of every inhabitant of Bethulia were
empty; 21 their cisterns were going dry, and on no day did they have
enough water to drink, for their drinking water was rationed. 22 Their
children were listless, and the women and young men fainted from
thirst and were collapsing in the streets of the town and in the
gateways; they no longer had any strength.
23 Then all the people, the young men, the women, and the children,
gathered around Uzziah and the rulers of the town and cried out with
a loud voice, and said before all the elders, 24 "Let God judge between
you and us! You have done us a great injury in not making peace with
the Assyrians. 25 For now we have no one to help us; God has sold us
into their hands, to be strewn before them in thirst and exhaustion. 26
Now summon them and surrender the whole town as booty to the
army of Holofernes and to all his forces. 27 For it would be better for us
to be captured by them. We shall indeed become slaves, but our lives
will be spared, and we shall not witness our little ones dying before
our eyes, and our wives and children drawing their last breath. 28 We
call to witness against you heaven and earth and our God, the Lord of
our ancestors, who punishes us for our sins and the sins of our
ancestors; do today the things that we have described!"
Uzziah advises instead a delay of five days
29 Then great and general lamentation arose throughout the assembly,
and they cried out to the Lord God with a loud voice. 30 But Uzziah
said to them, "Courage, my brothers and sisters! Let us hold out for
five days more; by that time the Lord our God will turn his mercy to us

57

JUDITH 58

again, for he will not forsake us utterly. 31 But if these days pass by,
and no help comes for us, I will do as you say."
32 Then he dismissed the people to their various posts, and they went
up on the walls and towers of their town. The women and children he
sent home. In the town they were in great misery.
[Judith 8]
Judith is introduced
1 Now in those days Judith heard about these things: she was the
daughter of Merari son of Ox son of Joseph son of Oziel son of Elkiah
son of Ananias son of Gideon son of Raphain son of Ahitub son of
Elijah son of Hilkiah son of Eliab son of Nathanael son of Salamiel son
of Sarasadai son of Israel. 2 Her husband Manasseh, who belonged to
her tribe and family, had died during the barley harvest. 3 For as he
stood overseeing those who were binding sheaves in the field, he was
overcome by the burning heat, and took to his bed and died in his
town Bethulia. So they buried him with his ancestors in the field
between Dothan and Balamon. 4 Judith remained as a widow for three
years and four months 5 at home where she set up a tent for herself on
the roof of her house. She put sackcloth around her waist and dressed
in widow's clothing. 6 She fasted all the days of her widowhood,
except the day before the sabbath and the sabbath itself, the day
before the new moon and the day of the new moon, and the festivals
and days of rejoicing of the house of Israel. 7 She was beautiful in
appearance, and was very lovely to behold. Her husband Manasseh had
left her gold and silver, men and women slaves, livestock, and fields;
and she maintained this estate. 8 No one spoke ill of her, for she
feared God with great devotion.
Judith upbraids the Bethulian leaders
9 When Judith heard the harsh words spoken by the people against the
ruler, because they were faint for lack of water, and when she heard
all that Uzziah said to them, and how he promised them under oath to
surrender the town to the Assyrians after five days, 10 she sent her
maid, who was in charge of all she possessed, to summon Uzziah and

58

JUDITH 59

Chabris and Charmis, the elders of her town. 11 They came to her, and
she said to them:
"Listen to me, rulers of the people of Bethulia! What you have said to
the people today is not right; you have even sworn and pronounced
this oath between God and you, promising to surrender the town to
our enemies unless the Lord turns and helps us within so many days. 12
Who are you to put God to the test today, and to set yourselves up in
the place of God in human affairs? 13 You are putting the Lord
Almighty to the test, but you will never learn anything! 14 You cannot
plumb the depths of the human heart or understand the workings of
the human mind; how do you expect to search out God, who made all
these things, and find out his mind or comprehend his thought? No,
my brothers, do not anger the Lord our God. 15 For if he does not
choose to help us within these five days, he has power to protect us
within any time he pleases, or even to destroy us in the presence of our
enemies. 16 Do not try to bind the purposes of the Lord our God; for
God is not like a human being, to be threatened, or like a mere mortal,
to be won over by pleading. 17 Therefore, while we wait for his
deliverance, let us call upon him to help us, and he will hear our voice,
if it pleases him.
18 "For never in our generation, nor in these present days, has there
been any tribe or family or people or town of ours that worships gods
made with hands, as was done in days gone by. 19 That was why our
ancestors were handed over to the sword and to pillage, and so they
suffered a great catastrophe before our enemies. 20 But we know no
other god but him, and so we hope that he will not disdain us or any
of our nation. 21 For if we are captured, all Judea will be captured and
our sanctuary will be plundered; and he will make us pay for its
desecration with our blood. 22 The slaughter of our kindred and the
captivity of the land and the desolation of our inheritance — all this he
will bring on our heads among the Gentiles, wherever we serve as
slaves; and we shall be an offense and a disgrace in the eyes of those
who acquire us. 23 For our slavery will not bring us into favor, but the
Lord our God will turn it to dishonor.

59

JUDITH 60

24 "Therefore, my brothers, let us set an example for our kindred, for
their lives depend upon us, and the sanctuary — both the temple and
the altar — rests upon us. 25 In spite of everything let us give thanks to
the Lord our God, who is putting us to the test as he did our ancestors.
26 Remember what he did with Abraham, and how he tested Isaac, and
what happened to Jacob in Syrian Mesopotamia, while he was tending
the sheep of Laban, his mother's brother. 27 For he has not tried us
with fire, as he did them, to search their hearts, nor has he taken
vengeance on us; but the Lord scourges those who are close to him in
order to admonish them."
The leaders acknowledge Judith's wisdom and she vows to deliver the
city
28 Then Uzziah said to her, "All that you have said was spoken out of a
true heart, and there is no one who can deny your words. 29 Today is
not the first time your wisdom has been shown, but from the
beginning of your life all the people have recognized your
understanding, for your heart's disposition is right. 30 But the people
were so thirsty that they compelled us to do for them what we have
promised, and made us take an oath that we cannot break. 31 Now
since you are a God-fearing woman, pray for us, so that the Lord may
send us rain to fill our cisterns. Then we will no longer feel faint from
thirst."
32 Then Judith said to them, "Listen to me. I am about to do something
that will go down through all generations of our descendants. 33 Stand
at the town gate tonight so that I may go out with my maid; and
within the days after which you have promised to surrender the town
to our enemies, the Lord will deliver Israel by my hand. 34 Only, do not
try to find out what I am doing; for I will not tell you until I have
finished what I am about to do."
35 Uzziah and the rulers said to her, "Go in peace, and may the Lord
God go before you, to take vengeance on our enemies." 36 So they
returned from the tent and went to their posts.

60

JUDITH 61

[Judith 9]
The Prayer of Judith
1 Then Judith prostrated herself, put ashes on her head, and uncovered
the sackcloth she was wearing. At the very time when the evening
incense was being offered in the house of God in Jerusalem, Judith
cried out to the Lord with a loud voice, and said,
2 "O Lord God of my ancestor Simeon, to whom you gave a sword to
take revenge on those strangers who had torn off a virgin's clothing to
defile her, and exposed her thighs to put her to shame, and polluted
her womb to disgrace her; for you said, 'It shall not be done' — yet
they did it; 3 so you gave up their rulers to be killed, and their bed,
which was ashamed of the deceit they had practiced, was stained with
blood, and you struck down slaves along with princes, and princes on
their thrones. 4 You gave up their wives for booty and their daughters
to captivity, and all their booty to be divided among your beloved
children who burned with zeal for you and abhorred the pollution of
their blood and called on you for help. O God, my God, hear me also, a
widow.
5 "For you have done these things and those that went before and
those that followed. You have designed the things that are now, and
those that are to come. What you had in mind has happened; 6 the
things you decided on presented themselves and said, 'Here we are!'
For all your ways are prepared in advance, and your judgment is with
foreknowledge.
7 "Here now are the Assyrians, a greatly increased force, priding
themselves in their horses and riders, boasting in the strength of their
foot soldiers, and trusting in shield and spear, in bow and sling. They
do not know that you are the Lord who crushes wars; the Lord is your
name. 8 Break their strength by your might, and bring down their
power in your anger; for they intend to defile your sanctuary, and to
pollute the tabernacle where your glorious name resides, and to break
off the horns of your altar with the sword. 9 Look at their pride, and
send your wrath upon their heads. Give to me, a widow, the strong
hand to do what I plan. 10 By the deceit of my lips strike down the

61

JUDITH 62

slave with the prince and the prince with his servant; crush their
arrogance by the hand of a woman.
11 "For your strength does not depend on numbers, nor your might on
the powerful. But you are the God of the lowly, helper of the
oppressed, upholder of the weak, protector of the forsaken, savior of
those without hope. 12 Please, please, God of my father, God of the
heritage of Israel, Lord of heaven and earth, Creator of the waters,
King of all your creation, hear my prayer! 13 Make my deceitful words
bring wound and bruise on those who have planned cruel things
against your covenant, and against your sacred house, and against
Mount Zion, and against the house your children possess. 14 Let your
whole nation and every tribe know and understand that you are God,
the God of all power and might, and that there is no other who
protects the people of Israel but you alone!"
[Judith 10]
Judith bathes and dresses in preparation for her mission
1 When Judith had stopped crying out to the God of Israel, and had
ended all these words, 2 she rose from where she lay prostrate. She
called her maid and went down into the house where she lived on
sabbaths and on her festal days. 3 She removed the sackcloth she had
been wearing, took off her widow's garments, bathed her body with
water, and anointed herself with precious ointment. She combed her
hair, put on a tiara, and dressed herself in the festive attire that she
used to wear while her husband Manasseh was living. 4 She put sandals
on her feet, and put on her anklets, bracelets, rings, earrings, and all
her other jewelry. Thus she made herself very beautiful, to entice the
eyes of all the men who might see her. 5 She gave her maid a skin of
wine and a flask of oil, and filled a bag with roasted grain, dried fig
cakes, and fine bread; then she wrapped up all her dishes and gave
them to her to carry.
The elders bless Judith and she and her servant leave Bethulia
6 Then they went out to the town gate of Bethulia and found Uzziah
standing there with the elders of the town, Chabris and Charmis. 7

62

JUDITH 63

When they saw her transformed in appearance and dressed differently,
they were very greatly astounded at her beauty and said to her, 8
"May the God of our ancestors grant you favor and fulfill your plans,
so that the people of Israel may glory and Jerusalem may be exalted."
She bowed down to God.
9 Then she said to them, "Order the gate of the town to be opened for
me so that I may go out and accomplish the things you have just said to
me." So they ordered the young men to open the gate for her, as she
requested. 10 When they had done this, Judith went out, accompanied
by her maid. The men of the town watched her until she had gone
down the mountain and passed through the valley, where they lost
sight of her.
The two women are captured by the Assyrians and brought to
Holofernes
11 As the women were going straight on through the valley, an
Assyrian patrol met her 12 and took her into custody. They asked her,
"To what people do you belong, and where are you coming from, and
where are you going?" She replied, "I am a daughter of the Hebrews,
but I am fleeing from them, for they are about to be handed over to
you to be devoured. 13 I am on my way to see Holofernes the
commander of your army, to give him a true report; I will show him a
way by which he can go and capture all the hill country without losing
one of his men, captured or slain."
14 When the men heard her words, and observed her face — she was in
their eyes marvelously beautiful — they said to her, 15 "You have saved
your life by hurrying down to see our lord. Go at once to his tent; some
of us will escort you and hand you over to him. 16 When you stand
before him, have no fear in your heart, but tell him what you have just
said, and he will treat you well."
17 They chose from their number a hundred men to accompany her and
her maid, and they brought them to the tent of Holofernes. 18 There
was great excitement in the whole camp, for her arrival was reported
from tent to tent. They came and gathered around her as she stood

63

JUDITH 64

outside the tent of Holofernes, waiting until they told him about her.
19 They marveled at her beauty and admired the Israelites, judging
them by her. They said to one another, "Who can despise these people,
who have women like this among them? It is not wise to leave one of
their men alive, for if we let them go they will be able to beguile the
whole world!"
20 Then the guards of Holofernes and all his servants came out and led
her into the tent. 21 Holofernes was resting on his bed under a canopy
that was woven with purple and gold, emeralds and other precious
stones. 22 When they told him of her, he came to the front of the tent,
with silver lamps carried before him. 23 When Judith came into the
presence of Holofernes and his servants, they all marveled at the
beauty of her face. She prostrated herself and did obeisance to him,
but his slaves raised her up.
[Judith 11]
Holofernes welcomes Judith
1 Then Holofernes said to her, "Take courage, woman, and do not be
afraid in your heart, for I have never hurt anyone who chose to serve
Nebuchadnezzar, king of all the earth. 2 Even now, if your people who
live in the hill country had not slighted me, I would never have lifted
my spear against them. They have brought this on themselves. 3 But
now tell me why you have fled from them and have come over to us. In
any event, you have come to safety. Take courage! You will live
tonight and ever after. 4 No one will hurt you. Rather, all will treat you
well, as they do the servants of my lord King Nebuchadnezzar."
Judith's explanation of her departure commends her to Holofernes
and his advisors
5 Judith answered him, "Accept the words of your slave, and let your
servant speak in your presence. I will say nothing false to my lord this
night. 6 If you follow out the words of your servant, God will
accomplish something through you, and my lord will not fail to achieve
his purposes. 7 By the life of Nebuchadnezzar, king of the whole earth,
and by the power of him who has sent you to direct every living being!

64

JUDITH 65

Not only do human beings serve him because of you, but also the
animals of the field and the cattle and the birds of the air will live,
because of your power, under Nebuchadnezzar and all his house. 8 For
we have heard of your wisdom and skill, and it is reported throughout
the whole world that you alone are the best in the whole kingdom, the
most informed and the most astounding in military strategy.
9 "Now as for Achior's speech in your council, we have heard his words,
for the people of Bethulia spared him and he told them all he had said
to you. 10 Therefore, lord and master, do not disregard what he said,
but keep it in your mind, for it is true. Indeed our nation cannot be
punished, nor can the sword prevail against them, unless they sin
against their God.
11 "But now, in order that my lord may not be defeated and his
purpose frustrated, death will fall upon them, for a sin has overtaken
them by which they are about to provoke their God to anger when
they do what is wrong. 12 Since their food supply is exhausted and
their water has almost given out, they have planned to kill their
livestock and have determined to use all that God by his laws has
forbidden them to eat. 13 They have decided to consume the first fruits
of the grain and the tithes of the wine and oil, which they had
consecrated and set aside for the priests who minister in the presence
of our God in Jerusalem — things it is not lawful for any of the people
even to touch with their hands. 14 Since even the people in Jerusalem
have been doing this, they have sent messengers there in order to
bring back permission from the council of the elders. 15 When the
response reaches them and they act upon it, on that very day they will
be handed over to you to be destroyed.
16 "So when I, your slave, learned all this, I fled from them. God has
sent me to accomplish with you things that will astonish the whole
world wherever people shall hear about them. 17 Your servant is
indeed God-fearing and serves the God of heaven night and day. So,
my lord, I will remain with you; but every night your servant will go out
into the valley and pray to God. He will tell me when they have
committed their sins. 18 Then I will come and tell you, so that you may
go out with your whole army, and not one of them will be able to

65

JUDITH 66

withstand you. 19 Then I will lead you through Judea, until you come
to Jerusalem; there I will set your throne. You will drive them like
sheep that have no shepherd, and no dog will so much as growl at you.
For this was told me to give me foreknowledge; it was announced to
me, and I was sent to tell you."
20 Her words pleased Holofernes and all his servants. They marveled at
her wisdom and said, 21 "No other woman from one end of the earth
to the other looks so beautiful or speaks so wisely!" 22 Then
Holofernes said to her, "God has done well to send you ahead of the
people, to strengthen our hands and bring destruction on those who
have despised my lord. 23 You are not only beautiful in appearance,
but wise in speech. If you do as you have said, your God shall be my
God, and you shall live in the palace of King Nebuchadnezzar and be
renowned throughout the whole world."
[Judith 12]
Judith establishes a pattern of leaving the camp for prayer
1 Then he commanded them to bring her in where his silver dinnerware
was kept, and ordered them to set a table for her with some of his own
delicacies, and with some of his own wine to drink. 2 But Judith said, "I
cannot partake of them, or it will be an offense; but I will have enough
with the things I brought with me." 3 Holofernes said to her, "If your
supply runs out, where can we get you more of the same? For none of
your people are here with us." 4 Judith replied, "As surely as you live,
my lord, your servant will not use up the supplies I have with me
before the Lord carries out by my hand what he has determined."
5 Then the servants of Holofernes brought her into the tent, and she
slept until midnight. Toward the morning watch she got up 6 and sent
this message to Holofernes: "Let my lord now give orders to allow your
servant to go out and pray." 7 So Holofernes commanded his guards
not to hinder her. She remained in the camp three days. She went out
each night to the valley of Bethulia, and bathed at the spring in the
camp. 8 After bathing, she prayed the Lord God of Israel to direct her
way for the triumph of his people. 9 Then she returned purified and
stayed in the tent until she ate her food toward evening.

66

JUDITH 67

Holofernes invites Judith to a banquet
10 On the fourth day Holofernes held a banquet for his personal
attendants only, and did not invite any of his officers. 11 He said to
Bagoas, the eunuch who had charge of his personal affairs, "Go and
persuade the Hebrew woman who is in your care to join us and to eat
and drink with us. 12 For it would be a disgrace if we let such a woman
go without having intercourse with her. If we do not seduce her, she
will laugh at us."
13 So Bagoas left the presence of Holofernes, and approached her and
said, "Let this pretty girl not hesitate to come to my lord to be honored
in his presence, and to enjoy drinking wine with us, and to become
today like one of the Assyrian women who serve in the palace of
Nebuchadnezzar." 14 Judith replied, "Who am I to refuse my lord?
Whatever pleases him I will do at once, and it will be a joy to me until
the day of my death." 15 So she proceeded to dress herself in all her
woman's finery. Her maid went ahead and spread for her on the
ground before Holofernes the lambskins she had received from Bagoas
for her daily use in reclining.
16 Then Judith came in and lay down. Holofernes' heart was ravished
with her and his passion was aroused, for he had been waiting for an
opportunity to seduce her from the day he first saw her. 17 So
Holofernes said to her, "Have a drink and be merry with us!" 18 Judith
said, "I will gladly drink, my lord, because today is the greatest day in
my whole life." 19 Then she took what her maid had prepared and ate
and drank before him. 20 Holofernes was greatly pleased with her, and
drank a great quantity of wine, much more than he had ever drunk in
any one day since he was born.
[Judith 13]
Judith, alone with Holofernes, decapitates him
1 When evening came, his slaves quickly withdrew. Bagoas closed the
tent from outside and shut out the attendants from his master's
presence. They went to bed, for they all were weary because the

67

JUDITH 68

banquet had lasted so long. 2 But Judith was left alone in the tent,
with Holofernes stretched out on his bed, for he was dead drunk.
3 Now Judith had told her maid to stand outside the bedchamber and
to wait for her to come out, as she did on the other days; for she said
she would be going out for her prayers. She had said the same thing to
Bagoas. 4 So everyone went out, and no one, either small or great, was
left in the bedchamber. Then Judith, standing beside his bed, said in
her heart, "O Lord God of all might, look in this hour on the work of
my hands for the exaltation of Jerusalem. 5 Now indeed is the time to
help your heritage and to carry out my design to destroy the enemies
who have risen up against us."
6 She went up to the bedpost near Holofernes' head, and took down
his sword that hung there. 7 She came close to his bed, took hold of
the hair of his head, and said, "Give me strength today, O Lord God of
Israel!" 8 Then she struck his neck twice with all her might, and cut off
his head. 9 Next she rolled his body off the bed and pulled down the
canopy from the posts. Soon afterward she went out and gave
Holofernes' head to her maid, 10 who placed it in her food bag.
Judith flees the enemy camp and returns to Bethulia
Then the two of them went out together, as they were accustomed to
do for prayer. They passed through the camp, circled around the valley,
and went up the mountain to Bethulia, and came to its gates. 11 From a
distance Judith called out to the sentries at the gates, "Open, open the
gate! God, our God, is with us, still showing his power in Israel and his
strength against our enemies, as he has done today!"
12 When the people of her town heard her voice, they hurried down to
the town gate and summoned the elders of the town. 13 They all ran
together, both small and great, for it seemed unbelievable that she
had returned. They opened the gate and welcomed them. Then they lit
a fire to give light, and gathered around them. 14 Then she said to
them with a loud voice, "Praise God, O praise him! Praise God, who has
not withdrawn his mercy from the house of Israel, but has destroyed
our enemies by my hand this very night!"

68

JUDITH 69

15 Then she pulled the head out of the bag and showed it to them, and
said, "See here, the head of Holofernes, the commander of the
Assyrian army, and here is the canopy beneath which he lay in his
drunken stupor. The Lord has struck him down by the hand of a
woman. 16 As the Lord lives, who has protected me in the way I went, I
swear that it was my face that seduced him to his destruction, and that
he committed no sin with me, to defile and shame me."
17 All the people were greatly astonished. They bowed down and
worshiped God, and said with one accord, "Blessed are you our God,
who have this day humiliated the enemies of your people."
18 Then Uzziah said to her, "O daughter, you are blessed by the Most
High God above all other women on earth; and blessed be the Lord
God, who created the heavens and the earth, who has guided you to
cut off the head of the leader of our enemies. 19 Your praise will never
depart from the hearts of those who remember the power of God. 20
May God grant this to be a perpetual honor to you, and may he reward
you with blessings, because you risked your own life when our nation
was brought low, and you averted our ruin, walking in the straight
path before our God." And all the people said, "Amen. Amen."
[Judith 14]
Judith directs the Israelites' military strategy
1 Then Judith said to them, "Listen to me, my friends. Take this head
and hang it upon the parapet of your wall. 2 As soon as day breaks and
the sun rises on the earth, each of you take up your weapons, and let
every able-bodied man go out of the town; set a captain over them, as
if you were going down to the plain against the Assyrian outpost; only
do not go down. 3 Then they will seize their arms and go into the camp
and rouse the officers of the Assyrian army. They will rush into the tent
of Holofernes and will not find him. Then panic will come over them,
and they will flee before you. 4 Then you and all who live within the
borders of Israel will pursue them and cut them down in their tracks. 5
But before you do all this, bring Achior the Ammonite to me so that he
may see and recognize the man who despised the house of Israel and
sent him to us as if to his death."

69

JUDITH 70

Achior identifies the head of Holofernes and converts
6 So they summoned Achior from the house of Uzziah. When he came
and saw the head of Holofernes in the hand of one of the men in the
assembly of the people, he fell down on his face in a faint. 7 When
they raised him up he threw himself at Judith's feet, and did obeisance
to her, and said, "Blessed are you in every tent of Judah! In every
nation those who hear your name will be alarmed. 8 Now tell me what
you have done during these days."
So Judith told him in the presence of the people all that she had done,
from the day she left until the moment she began speaking to them. 9
When she had finished, the people raised a great shout and made a
joyful noise in their town. 10 When Achior saw all that the God of Israel
had done, he believed firmly in God. So he was circumcised, and joined
the house of Israel, remaining so to this day.
The enemy discovers Holofernes's death
11 As soon as it was dawn they hung the head of Holofernes on the
wall. Then they all took their weapons, and they went out in
companies to the mountain passes. 12 When the Assyrians saw them
they sent word to their commanders, who then went to the generals
and the captains and to all their other officers. 13 They came to
Holofernes' tent and said to the steward in charge of all his personal
affairs, "Wake up our lord, for the slaves have been so bold as to come
down against us to give battle, to their utter destruction."
14 So Bagoas went in and knocked at the entry of the tent, for he
supposed that he was sleeping with Judith. 15 But when no one
answered, he opened it and went into the bedchamber and found him
sprawled on the floor dead, with his head missing. 16 He cried out with
a loud voice and wept and groaned and shouted, and tore his clothes.
17 Then he went to the tent where Judith had stayed, and when he did
not find her, he rushed out to the people and shouted, 18 "The slaves
have tricked us! One Hebrew woman has brought disgrace on the
house of King Nebuchadnezzar. Look, Holofernes is lying on the
ground, and his head is missing!"

70

JUDITH 71

19 When the leaders of the Assyrian army heard this, they tore their
tunics and were greatly dismayed, and their loud cries and shouts rose
up throughout the camp.
[Judith 15]
The Assyrians flee in panic; the Israelites follow and lay waste to them
1 When the men in the tents heard it, they were amazed at what had
happened. 2 Overcome with fear and trembling, they did not wait for
one another, but with one impulse all rushed out and fled by every
path across the plain and through the hill country. 3 Those who had
camped in the hills around Bethulia also took to flight. Then the
Israelites, everyone that was a soldier, rushed out upon them. 4 Uzziah
sent men to Betomasthaim and Choba and Kola, and to all the
frontiers of Israel, to tell what had taken place and to urge all to rush
out upon the enemy to destroy them. 5 When the Israelites heard it,
with one accord they fell upon the enemy, and cut them down as far as
Choba. Those in Jerusalem and all the hill country also came, for they
were told what had happened in the camp of the enemy. The men in
Gilead and in Galilee outflanked them with great slaughter, even
beyond Damascus and its borders. 6 The rest of the people of Bethulia
fell upon the Assyrian camp and plundered it, acquiring great riches. 7
And the Israelites, when they returned from the slaughter, took
possession of what remained. Even the villages and towns in the hill
country and in the plain got a great amount of booty, since there was
a vast quantity of it.
Judith is honored and leads in triumph to Jerusalem
8 Then the high priest Joakim and the elders of the Israelites who lived
in Jerusalem came to witness the good things that the Lord had done
for Israel, and to see Judith and to wish her well. 9 When they met her,
they all blessed her with one accord and said to her, "You are the glory
of Jerusalem, you are the great boast of Israel, you are the great pride
of our nation! 10 You have done all this with your own hand; you have
done great good to Israel, and God is well pleased with it. May the
Almighty Lord bless you forever!" And all the people said, "Amen."

71

JUDITH 72

11 All the people plundered the camp for thirty days. They gave Judith
the tent of Holofernes and all his silver dinnerware, his beds, his bowls,
and all his furniture. She took them and loaded her mules and hitched
up her carts and piled the things on them.
12 All the women of Israel gathered to see her, and blessed her, and
some of them performed a dance in her honor. She took ivy-wreathed
wands in her hands and distributed them to the women who were
with her; 13 and she and those who were with her crowned themselves
with olive wreaths. She went before all the people in the dance,
leading all the women, while all the men of Israel followed, bearing
their arms and wearing garlands and singing hymns.
Judith and the people sing a thanksgiving psalm
14 Judith began this thanksgiving before all Israel, and all the people
loudly sang this song of praise. [Judith 16] 1 And Judith said,
Begin a song to my God with tambourines,
sing to my Lord with cymbals.
Raise to him a new psalm;
exalt him, and call upon his name.
2 For the Lord is a God who crushes wars;
he sets up his camp among his people;
he delivered me from the hands of my pursuers.
3 The Assyrian came down from the mountains of the north;
he came with myriads of his warriors;
their numbers blocked up the wadis,
and their cavalry covered the hills.
4 He boasted that he would burn up my territory,
and kill my young men with the sword,
and dash my infants to the ground,
and seize my children as booty,
and take my virgins as spoil.

72

JUDITH 73

5 But the Lord Almighty has foiled them
by the hand of a woman.
6 For their mighty one did not fall by the hands of the young men,
nor did the sons of the Titans strike him down,
nor did tall giants set upon him;
but Judith daughter of Merari
with the beauty of her countenance undid him.
7 For she put away her widow's clothing
to exalt the oppressed in Israel.
She anointed her face with perfume;
8
she fastened her hair with a tiara
and put on a linen gown to beguile him.
9 Her sandal ravished his eyes,
her beauty captivated his mind,
and the sword severed his neck!
10 The Persians trembled at her boldness,
the Medes were daunted at her daring.
11 Then my oppressed people shouted;
my weak people cried out, and the enemy trembled;
they lifted up their voices, and the enemy were turned back.
12 Sons of slave-girls pierced them through
and wounded them like the children of fugitives;
they perished before the army of my Lord.
13 I will sing to my God a new song:
O Lord, you are great and glorious,
wonderful in strength, invincible.
14 Let all your creatures serve you,
for you spoke, and they were made.
You sent forth your spirit, and it formed them;
there is none that can resist your voice.
15 For the mountains shall be shaken to their foundations with
the waters;
before your glance the rocks shall melt like wax.
But to those who fear you
you show mercy.

73

JUDITH 74

16 For every sacrifice as a fragrant offering is a small thing,
and the fat of all whole burnt offerings to you is a very little
thing; but whoever fears the Lord is great forever.
17 Woe to the nations that rise up against my people!
The Lord Almighty will take vengeance on them in the day
of judgment; he will send fire and worms into their flesh;
they shall weep in pain forever.
The procession arrives in Jerusalem
18 When they arrived at Jerusalem, they worshiped God. As soon as the
people were purified, they offered their burnt offerings, their freewill
offerings, and their gifts. 19 Judith also dedicated to God all the
possessions of Holofernes, which the people had given her; and the
canopy that she had taken for herself from his bedchamber she gave as
a votive offering. 20 For three months the people continued feasting in
Jerusalem before the sanctuary, and Judith remained with them.
Judith's subsequent life
21 After this they all returned home to their own inheritances. Judith
went to Bethulia, and remained on her estate. For the rest of her life
she was honored throughout the whole country. 22 Many desired to
marry her, but she gave herself to no man all the days of her life after
her husband Manasseh died and was gathered to his people. 23 She
became more and more famous, and grew old in her husband's house,
reaching the age of one hundred five. She set her maid free. She died
in Bethulia, and they buried her in the cave of her husband Manasseh;
24 and the house of Israel mourned her for seven days. Before she died
she distributed her property to all those who were next of kin to her
husband Manasseh, and to her own nearest kindred. 25 No one ever
again spread terror among the Israelites during the lifetime of Judith,
or for a long time after her death.

74

ESTHER 75

ADDITIONS TO ESTHER
ADDITIONS TO ESTHER
NOTE. The deuterocanonical portions of the Book of Esther are several
additional passages found in the Greek translation of the Hebrew Book
of Esther, a translation that differs also in other respects from the
Hebrew text (the latter is translated in the NRSV Old Testament). The
disordered chapter numbers come from the displacement of the
additions to the end of the canonical Book of Esther by Jerome in his
Latin translation and from the subsequent division of the Bible into
chapters by Stephen Langton, who numbered the additions
consecutively as though they formed a direct continuation of the
Hebrew text. So that the additions may be read in their proper context,
the whole of the Greek version is here translated, though certain
familiar names are given according to their Hebrew rather than their
Greek form; for example, Mordecai and Vashti instead of Mardocheus
and Astin. The order followed is that of the Greek text, but the chapter
and verse numbers conform to those of the King James or Authorized
Version. The additions, conveniently indicated by the letters A-F, are
located as follows: A, before 1.1; B, after 3.13; C and D, after 4.17; E,
after 8.12; F, after 10.3.
Most importantly, the following textual order follows the Greek
edition of Esther found in the New Oxford Annotated Bible with the
Apocrypha: New Revised Standard Version. 3rd edition, ed. Michael D.
Coogan (Oxford University Press, 2001).

Introduction
The Greek version of Esther is a translation of the canonical Hebrew
book of Esther (i.e., the one included in the "Hebrew Scriptures"

75

ESTHER 76

portion of this New Revised Standard Version Bible). The translation
was made for Greek-speaking Jews in the second and first century BCE.
The translator — very likely the Lysimachus of Jerusalem mentioned in
11.1 — produced a systematic but relatively free translation of the
Hebrew. Besides numerous small but often significant omissions and
additions, the Greek version includes six extra sections that have no
counterparts in the Hebrew. These additional sections are clearly
intrusive and secondary, for they contradict the Hebrew at a number of
points. While they sometimes make the characters and events more
vivid or dramatic, their main purpose is to transform the comparatively
subtle and enigmatic Hebrew story of Esther into a more conventional
tale of divine intervention and exemplary Jewish piety.
The Additions to the book of Esther comprise 107 verses. Their contents
are as follows:
*Addition A:
*Addition B:
*Addition C:
*Addition D:
*Addition E:
*Addition F:

Mordecai's dream (11.2-12) and his discovery of a plot
against the king (12.1-6)
The royal edict dictated by Haman, decreeing the
extermination of the Jews (13.1-7)
The prayers of Mordecai (13.8-18) and Esther (14.1-19)
Esther's appearing unsummoned, before the
king (15.4-19)
The royal edict dictated by Mordecai, counteracting
the edict sent by Haman (16.1-24)
The interpretation of Mordecai's dream (10.4-13) and
the colophon (an inscription at the end of a
manuscript) to the Greek version (1.11)

Although there is no mention of God in the Hebrew narrative, in the
Greek version the terms "Lord" or "God" appear more than fifty times.
Most of the these occurrences are in the Additions, but occasionally the
Greek translation inserts references to God into verses that correspond
to the canonical Hebrew text (see 2.20; 4.8; 6.13).
The additions provided their authors with an opportunity to express
their own particular theological views. Additions A and F introduce

76

ESTHER 77

apocalyptic motifs to emphasize God's providential care for the people
Israel in a universally hostile world. Addition C attests to the efficacy of
prayer and expresses Queen Esther's abhorrence at being married to a
Gentile, her loathing of all things worldly and courtly, and her strict
observance of Jewish dietary laws — none of which is so much as
hinted at in the Hebrew. Thanks largely to Addition D, the climax of
the Greek version is reached when God miraculously changes to
gentleness the king's "fierce anger" at Esther's unannounced entrance.
Taken together, the six additions deemphasize the establishment of
Purim and express a deep distrust of Gentiles.
Besides giving the story a more explicitly religious character, the
additions create new emphases. A and F, which frame the story, graft
onto it a new apocalyptic perspective of cosmic struggle between good
and evil. The juxtaposition of C's extensive praise of God, with similar
terms and phrases applied to Ahasuerus in D, makes explicit the Greek
version's intent to contrast the capricious earthly king with God the
trustworthy heavenly king. Similarly, the royal decrees in B and E
highlight the theme of human commandments versus the law of Moses
to which Esther also alludes when she prays in C.
Originally, A, C, D, and F were probably composed in either Hebrew or
Aramaic (both Semitic languages) and, if so, were already part of that
particular Semitic text used by the Greek translator. The florid
phraseology of B and E indicates that they must originally have been
composed in Greek, perhaps in Alexandria, a sophisticated GreekJewish center.
The additions were not composed at the same time. The latest possible
date for B, C, D, and E is 93 CE, when the historian Josephus
paraphrased them in his 'Jewish Antiquities.' The colophon's location
(11.1) immediately after F suggests that A as well as F were part of the
Semitic text at the time that Lysimachus made his Greek translation in
the late second or first century BCE.

77

ESTHER 78

Esther (The Greek Version Containing the Additional Chapters)
ADDITION A
[Esther 11]
Mordecai's prophetic dream of impending danger to the Jews
2 In the second year of the reign of Artaxerxes the Great, on the first
day of Nisan, Mordecai son of Jair son of Shimei son of Kish, of the
tribe of Benjamin, had a dream. 3 He was a Jew living in the city of
Susa, a great man, serving in the court of the king. 4 He was one of the
captives whom King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon had brought from
Jerusalem with King Jeconiah of Judea. And this was his dream: 5
Noises and confusion, thunders and earthquake, tumult on the earth! 6
Then two great dragons came forward, both ready to fight, and they
roared terribly. 7 At their roaring every nation prepared for war, to
fight against the righteous nation. 8 It was a day of darkness and
gloom, of tribulation and distress, affliction and great tumult on the
earth! 9 And the whole righteous nation was troubled; they feared the
evils that threatened them, and were ready to perish. 10 Then they
cried out to God; and at their outcry, as though from a tiny spring,
there came a great river, with abundant water; 11 light came, and the
sun rose, and the lowly were exalted and devoured those held in
honor.
12 Mordecai saw in this dream what God had determined to do, and
after he awoke he had it on his mind, seeking all day to understand it
in every detail.
[Esther 12]
Mordecai saves the king's life
1 Now Mordecai took his rest in the courtyard with Gabatha and
Tharra, the two eunuchs of the king who kept watch in the courtyard.
2 He overheard their conversation and inquired into their purposes,
and learned that they were preparing to lay hands on King Artaxerxes;
and he informed the king concerning them. 3 Then the king examined
the two eunuchs, and after they had confessed it, they were led away

78

ESTHER 79

to execution. 4 The king made a permanent record of these things, and
Mordecai wrote an account of them. 5 And the king ordered Mordecai
to serve in the court, and rewarded him for these things. 6 But Haman
son of Hammedatha, a Bougean, who was in great honor with the
king, determined to injure Mordecai and his people because of the two
eunuchs of the king.
END OF ADDITION A
[Esther 1]
Artaxerxes's banquet
1 It was after this that the following things happened in the days of
Artaxerxes, the same Artaxerxes who ruled over one hundred twentyseven provinces from India to Ethiopia. 2 In those days, when King
Artaxerxes was enthroned in the city of Susa, 3 in the third year of his
reign, he gave a banquet for his Friends and other persons of various
nations, the Persians and Median nobles, and the governors of the
provinces. 4 After this, when he had displayed to them the riches of his
kingdom and the splendor of his bountiful celebration during the
course of one hundred eighty days, 5 at the end of the festivity the
king gave a drinking party for the people of various nations who lived
in the city. This was held for six days in the courtyard of the royal
palace, 6 which was adorned with curtains of fine linen and cotton,
held by cords of purple linen attached to gold and silver blocks on
pillars of marble and other stones. Gold and silver couches were placed
on a mosaic floor of emerald, mother-of-pearl, and marble. There were
coverings of gauze, embroidered in various colors, with roses arranged
around them. 7 The cups were of gold and silver, and a miniature cup
was displayed, made of ruby, worth thirty thousand talents. There was
abundant sweet wine, such as the king himself drank. 8 The drinking
was not according to a fixed rule; but the king wished to have it so,
and he commanded his stewards to comply with his pleasure and with
that of the guests.
9 Meanwhile, Queen Vashti gave a drinking party for the women in
the palace where King Artaxerxes was.

79

ESTHER 80

The fall of Vashti and the king's first edict
10 On the seventh day, when the king was in good humor, he told
Haman, Bazan, Tharra, Boraze, Zatholtha, Abataza, and Tharaba, the
seven eunuchs who served King Artaxerxes, 11 to escort the queen to
him in order to proclaim her as queen and to place the diadem on her
head, and to have her display her beauty to all the governors and the
people of various nations, for she was indeed a beautiful woman. 12
But Queen Vashti refused to obey him and would not come with the
eunuchs. This offended the king and he became furious. 13 He said to
his Friends, "This is how Vashti has answered me. Give therefore your
ruling and judgment on this matter." 14 Arkesaeus, Sarsathaeus, and
Malesear, then the governors of the Persians and Medes who were
closest to the king — Arkesaeus, Sarsathaeus, and Malesear, who sat
beside him in the chief seats — came to him 15 and told him what must
be done to Queen Vashti for not obeying the order that the king had
sent her by the eunuchs. 16 Then Muchaeus said to the king and the
governors, "Queen Vashti has insulted not only the king but also all
the king's governors and officials" 17 (for he had reported to them
what the queen had said and how she had defied the king). "And just
as she defied King Artaxerxes, 18 so now the other ladies who are
wives of the Persian and Median governors, on hearing what she has
said to the king, will likewise dare to insult their husbands. 19 If
therefore it pleases the king, let him issue a royal decree, inscribed in
accordance with the laws of the Medes and Persians so that it may not
be altered, that the queen may no longer come into his presence; but
let the king give her royal rank to a woman better than she. 20 Let
whatever law the king enacts be proclaimed in his kingdom, and thus
all women will give honor to their husbands, rich and poor alike." 21
This speech pleased the king and the governors, and the king did as
Muchaeus had recommended. 22 The king sent the decree into all his
kingdom, to every province in its own language, so that in every house
respect would be shown to every husband.

80

ESTHER 81

[Esther 2]
Esther becomes the new queen
1 After these things, the king's anger abated, and he no longer was
concerned about Vashti or remembered what he had said and how he
had condemned her. 2 Then the king's servants said, "Let beautiful and
virtuous girls be sought out for the king. 3 The king shall appoint
officers in all the provinces of his kingdom, and they shall select
beautiful young virgins to be brought to the harem in Susa, the capital.
Let them be entrusted to the king's eunuch who is in charge of the
women, and let ointments and whatever else they need be given them.
4 And the woman who pleases the king shall be queen instead of
Vashti." This pleased the king, and he did so.
Mordecai and Esther
5 Now there was a Jew in Susa the capital whose name was Mordecai
son of Jair son of Shimei son of Kish, of the tribe of Benjamin; 6 he had
been taken captive from Jerusalem among those whom King
Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon had captured. 7 And he had a foster child,
the daughter of his father's brother, Aminadab, and her name was
Esther. When her parents died, he brought her up to womanhood as
his own. The girl was beautiful in appearance. 8 So, when the decree
of the king was proclaimed, and many girls were gathered in Susa the
capital in custody of Gai, Esther also was brought to Gai, who had
custody of the women. 9 The girl pleased him and won his favor, and
he quickly provided her with ointments and her portion of food, as
well as seven maids chosen from the palace; he treated her and her
maids with special favor in the harem. 10 Now Esther had not disclosed
her people or country, for Mordecai had commanded her not to make
it known. 11 And every day Mordecai walked in the courtyard of the
harem, to see what would happen to Esther.
Esther becomes queen
12 Now the period after which a girl was to go to the king was twelve
months. During this time the days of beautification are completed —
six months while they are anointing themselves with oil of myrrh, and

81

ESTHER 82

six months with spices and ointments for women. 13 Then she goes in
to the king; she is handed to the person appointed, and goes with him
from the harem to the king's palace. 14 In the evening she enters and
in the morning she departs to the second harem, where Gai the king's
eunuch is in charge of the women; and she does not go in to the king
again unless she is summoned by name.
15 When the time was fulfilled for Esther daughter of Aminadab, the
brother of Mordecai's father, to go in to the king, she neglected none
of the things that Gai, the eunuch in charge of the women, had
commanded. Now Esther found favor in the eyes of all who saw her. 16
So Esther went in to King Artaxerxes in the twelfth month, which is
Adar, in the seventh year of his reign. 17 And the king loved Esther and
she found favor beyond all the other virgins, so he put on her the
queen's diadem. 18 Then the king gave a banquet lasting seven days
for all his Friends and the officers to celebrate his marriage to Esther;
and he granted a remission of taxes to those who were under his rule.
Mordecai and Esther save the king's life
19 Meanwhile Mordecai was serving in the courtyard. 20 Esther had not
disclosed her country — such were the instructions of Mordecai; but
she was to fear God and keep his laws, just as she had done when she
was with him. So Esther did not change her mode of life.
21 Now the king's eunuchs, who were chief bodyguards, were angry
because of Mordecai's advancement, and they plotted to kill King
Artaxerxes. 22 The matter became known to Mordecai, and he warned
Esther, who in turn revealed the plot to the king. 23 He investigated
the two eunuchs and hanged them. Then the king ordered a
memorandum to be deposited in the royal library in praise of the
goodwill shown by Mordecai.
[Esther 3]
Haman plots to annihilate the Jews
1 After these events King Artaxerxes promoted Haman son of
Hammedatha, a Bougean, advancing him and granting him precedence

82

ESTHER 83

over all the king's Friends. 2 So all who were at court used to do
obeisance to Haman, for so the king had commanded to be done.
Mordecai, however, did not do obeisance. 3 Then the king's courtiers
said to Mordecai, "Mordecai, why do you disobey the king's
command?" 4 Day after day they spoke to him, but he would not listen
to them. Then they informed Haman that Mordecai was resisting the
king's command. Mordecai had told them that he was a Jew. 5 So
when Haman learned that Mordecai was not doing obeisance to him,
he became furiously angry, 6 and plotted to destroy all the Jews under
Artaxerxes' rule.
7 In the twelfth year of King Artaxerxes Haman came to a decision by
casting lots, taking the days and the months one by one, to fix on one
day to destroy the whole race of Mordecai. The lot fell on the
fourteenth day of the month of Adar.
8 Then Haman said to King Artaxerxes, "There is a certain nation
scattered among the other nations in all your kingdom; their laws are
different from those of every other nation, and they do not keep the
laws of the king. It is not expedient for the king to tolerate them. 9 If it
pleases the king, let it be decreed that they are to be destroyed, and I
will pay ten thousand talents of silver into the king's treasury." 10 So
the king took off his signet ring and gave it to Haman to seal the
decree that was to be written against the Jews. 11 The king told
Haman, "Keep the money, and do whatever you want with that
nation."
12 So on the thirteenth day of the first month the king's secretaries
were summoned, and in accordance with Haman's instructions they
wrote in the name of King Artaxerxes to the magistrates and the
governors in every province from India to Ethiopia. There were one
hundred twenty-seven provinces in all, and the governors were
addressed each in his own language. 13 Instructions were sent by
couriers throughout all the empire of Artaxerxes to destroy the Jewish
people on a given day of the twelfth month, which is Adar, and to
plunder their goods.

83

ESTHER 84

ADDITION B
[Esther 13]
The text of the king's letter authorizing the slaughter of the Jews
1 This is a copy of the letter: "The Great King, Artaxerxes, writes the
following to the governors of the hundred twenty-seven provinces
from India to Ethiopia and to the officials under them:
2 "Having become ruler of many nations and master of the whole
world (not elated with presumption of authority but always acting
reasonably and with kindness), I have determined to settle the lives of
my subjects in lasting tranquility and, in order to make my kingdom
peaceable and open to travel throughout all its extent, to restore the
peace desired by all people.
3 "When I asked my counselors how this might be accomplished,
Haman — who excels among us in sound judgment, and is
distinguished for his unchanging goodwill and steadfast fidelity, and
has attained the second place in the kingdom — 4 pointed out to us
that among all the nations in the world there is scattered a certain
hostile people, who have laws contrary to those of every nation and
continually disregard the ordinances of kings, so that the unifying of
the kingdom that we honorably intend cannot be brought about. 5 We
understand that this people, and it alone, stands constantly in
opposition to every nation, perversely following a strange manner of
life and laws, and is ill-disposed to our government, doing all the harm
they can so that our kingdom may not attain stability.
6 "Therefore we have decreed that those indicated to you in the letters
written by Haman, who is in charge of affairs and is our second father,
shall all — wives and children included — be utterly destroyed by the
swords of their enemies, without pity or restraint, on the fourteenth
day of the twelfth month, Adar, of this present year, 7 so that those
who have long been hostile and remain so may in a single day go
down in violence to Hades, and leave our government completely
secure and untroubled hereafter."

84

ESTHER 85

END OF ADDITION B
[Esther 3]
Haman and the kind celebrate the publication of the decree
14 Copies of the document were posted in every province, and all the
nations were ordered to be prepared for that day. 15 The matter was
expedited also in Susa. And while the king and Haman caroused
together, the city of Susa was thrown into confusion.
[Esther 4]
Mordecai persuades Queen Esther to risk her life and save her people
1 When Mordecai learned of all that had been done, he tore his
clothes, put on sackcloth, and sprinkled himself with ashes; then he
rushed through the street of the city, shouting loudly: "An innocent
nation is being destroyed!" 2 He got as far as the king's gate, and there
he stopped, because no one was allowed to enter the courtyard
clothed in sackcloth and ashes. 3 And in every province where the
king's proclamation had been posted there was a loud cry of mourning
and lamentation among the Jews, and they put on sackcloth and ashes.
4 When the queen's maids and eunuchs came and told her, she was
deeply troubled by what she heard had happened, and sent some
clothes to Mordecai to put on instead of sackcloth; but he would not
consent. 5 Then Esther summoned Hachratheus, the eunuch who
attended her, and ordered him to get accurate information for her
from Mordecai.
7 So Mordecai told him what had happened and how Haman had
promised to pay ten thousand talents into the royal treasury to bring
about the destruction of the Jews. 8 He also gave him a copy of what
had been posted in Susa for their destruction, to show to Esther; and
he told him to charge her to go in to the king and plead for his favor in
behalf of the people. "Remember," he said, "the days when you were
an ordinary person, being brought up under my care — for Haman,
who stands next to the king, has spoken against us and demands our
death. Call upon the Lord; then speak to the king in our behalf, and
save us from death."

85

ESTHER 86

9 Hachratheus went in and told Esther all these things. 10 And she said
to him, "Go to Mordecai and say, 11 'All nations of the empire know
that if any man or woman goes to the king inside the inner court
without being called, there is no escape for that person. Only the one
to whom the king stretches out the golden scepter is safe — and it is
now thirty days since I was called to go to the king.'"
12 When Hachratheus delivered her entire message to Mordecai, 13
Mordecai told him to go back and say to her, "Esther, do not say to
yourself that you alone among all the Jews will escape alive. 14 For if
you keep quiet at such a time as this, help and protection will come to
the Jews from another quarter, but you and your father's family will
perish. Yet, who knows whether it was not for such a time as this that
you were made queen?" 15 Then Esther gave the messenger this
answer to take back to Mordecai: 16 "Go and gather all the Jews who
are in Susa and fast on my behalf; for three days and nights do not eat
or drink, and my maids and I will also go without food. After that I will
go to the king, contrary to the law, even if I must die." 17 So Mordecai
went away and did what Esther had told him to do.
ADDITION C
[Esther 13]
The prayers of Mordecai and Esther
8 Then Mordecai prayed to the Lord, calling to remembrance all the
works of the Lord.
9 He said, "O Lord, Lord, you rule as King over all things, for the
universe is in your power and there is no one who can oppose you
when it is your will to save Israel, 10 for you have made heaven and
earth and every wonderful thing under heaven. 11 You are Lord of all,
and there is no one who can resist you, the Lord. 12 You know all
things; you know, O Lord, that it was not in insolence or pride or for
any love of glory that I did this, and refused to bow down to this proud
Haman; 13 for I would have been willing to kiss the soles of his feet to
save Israel! 14 But I did this so that I might not set human glory above
the glory of God, and I will not bow down to anyone but you, who are
my Lord; and I will not do these things in pride. 15 And now, O Lord

86

ESTHER 87

God and King, God of Abraham, spare your people; for the eyes of our
foes are upon us to annihilate us, and they desire to destroy the
inheritance that has been yours from the beginning. 16 Do not neglect
your portion, which you redeemed for yourself out of the land of
Egypt. 17 Hear my prayer, and have mercy upon your inheritance; turn
our mourning into feasting that we may live and sing praise to your
name, O Lord; do not destroy the lips of those who praise you."
18 And all Israel cried out mightily, for their death was before their
eyes.
[Esther 14]
Esther humbly petitions God
1 Then Queen Esther, seized with deadly anxiety, fled to the Lord. 2 She
took off her splendid apparel and put on the garments of distress and
mourning, and instead of costly perfumes she covered her head with
ashes and dung, and she utterly humbled her body; every part that she
loved to adorn she covered with her tangled hair. 3 She prayed to the
Lord God of Israel, and said: "O my Lord, you only are our king; help
me, who am alone and have no helper but you, 4 for my danger is in
my hand. 5 Ever since I was born I have heard in the tribe of my family
that you, O Lord, took Israel out of all the nations, and our ancestors
from among all their forebears, for an everlasting inheritance, and that
you did for them all that you promised. 6 And now we have sinned
before you, and you have handed us over to our enemies 7 because we
glorified their gods. You are righteous, O Lord! 8 And now they are
not satisfied that we are in bitter slavery, but they have covenanted
with their idols 9 to abolish what your mouth has ordained, and to
destroy your inheritance, to stop the mouths of those who praise you
and to quench your altar and the glory of your house, 10 to open the
mouths of the nations for the praise of vain idols, and to magnify
forever a mortal king.
11 "O Lord, do not surrender your scepter to what has no being; and do
not let them laugh at our downfall; but turn their plan against them,
and make an example of him who began this against us. 12 Remember,
O Lord; make yourself known in this time of our affliction, and give me

87

ESTHER 88

courage, O King of the gods and Master of all dominion! 13 Put
eloquent speech in my mouth before the lion, and turn his heart to
hate the man who is fighting against us, so that there may be an end
of him and those who agree with him. 14 But save us by your hand, and
help me, who am alone and have no helper but you, O Lord. 15 You
have knowledge of all things, and you know that I hate the splendor of
the wicked and abhor the bed of the uncircumcised and of any alien. 16
You know my necessity — that I abhor the sign of my proud position,
which is upon my head on days when I appear in public. I abhor it like
a filthy rag, and I do not wear it on the days when I am at leisure. 17
And your servant has not eaten at Haman's table, and I have not
honored the king's feast or drunk the wine of libations. 18 Your
servant has had no joy since the day that I was brought here until now,
except in you, O Lord God of Abraham. 19 O God, whose might is over
all, hear the voice of the despairing, and save us from the hands of
evildoers. And save me from my fear!"
END OF ADDITION C
ADDITION D
[Esther 15]
Esther approaches the king
1 On the third day, when she ended her prayer, she took off the
garments in which she had worshiped, and arrayed herself in splendid
attire. 2 Then, majestically adorned, after invoking the aid of the allseeing God and Savior, she took two maids with her; 3 on one she
leaned gently for support, 4 while the other followed, carrying her
train. 5 She was radiant with perfect beauty, and she looked happy, as
if beloved, but her heart was frozen with fear. 6 When she had gone
through all the doors, she stood before the king. He was seated on his
royal throne, clothed in the full array of his majesty, all covered with
gold and precious stones. He was most terrifying.
7 Lifting his face, flushed with splendor, he looked at her in fierce
anger. The queen faltered, and turned pale and faint, and collapsed on
the head of the maid who went in front of her. 8 Then God changed

88

ESTHER 89

the spirit of the king to gentleness, and in alarm he sprang from his
throne and took her in his arms until she came to herself. He
comforted her with soothing words, and said to her, 9 "What is it,
Esther? I am your husband. Take courage; 10 You shall not die, for our
law applies only to our subjects. Come near."
11 Then he raised the golden scepter and touched her neck with it; 12
he embraced her, and said, "Speak to me." 13 She said to him, "I saw
you, my lord, like an angel of God, and my heart was shaken with fear
at your glory. 14 For you are wonderful, my lord, and your countenance
is full of grace." 15 And while she was speaking, she fainted and fell. 16
Then the king was agitated, and all his servants tried to comfort her.
END OF ADDITION D
[Esther 5]
Esther invites the king and Haman to dinner
3 The king said to her, "What do you wish, Esther? What is your
request? It shall be given you, even to half of my kingdom." 4 And
Esther said, "Today is a special day for me. If it pleases the king, let him
and Haman come to the dinner that I shall prepare today." 5 Then the
king said, "Bring Haman quickly, so that we may do as Esther desires."
So they both came to the dinner that Esther had spoken about. 6 While
they were drinking wine, the king said to Esther, "What is it, Queen
Esther? It shall be granted you." 7 She said, "My petition and request
is: 8 if I have found favor in the sight of the king, let the king and
Haman come to the dinner that I shall prepare them, and tomorrow I
will do as I have done today."
Haman's happiness is spoiled
9 So Haman went out from the king joyful and glad of heart. But when
he saw Mordecai the Jew in the courtyard, he was filled with anger. 10
Nevertheless, he went home and summoned his friends and his wife
Zosara. 11 And he told them about his riches and the honor that the
king had bestowed on him, and how he had advanced him to be the
first in the kingdom. 12 And Haman said, "The queen did not invite

89

ESTHER 90

anyone to the dinner with the king except me; and I am invited again
tomorrow. 13 But these things give me no pleasure as long as I see
Mordecai the Jew in the courtyard." 14 His wife Zosara and his friends
said to him, "Let a gallows be made, fifty cubits high, and in the
morning tell the king to have Mordecai hanged on it. Then, go merrily
with the king to the dinner." This advice pleased Haman, and so the
gallows was prepared.
[Esther 6]
Mordecai's triumph
1 That night the Lord took sleep from the king, so he gave orders to his
secretary to bring the book of daily records, and to read to him. 2 He
found the words written about Mordecai, how he had told the king
about the two royal eunuchs who were on guard and sought to lay
hands on King Artaxerxes. 3 The king said, "What honor or dignity did
we bestow on Mordecai?" The king's servants said, "You have not
done anything for him." 4 While the king was inquiring about the
goodwill shown by Mordecai, Haman was in the courtyard. The king
asked, "Who is in the courtyard?" Now Haman had come to speak to
the king about hanging Mordecai on the gallows that he had
prepared. 5 The servants of the king answered, "Haman is standing in
the courtyard." And the king said, "Summon him." 6 Then the king
said to Haman, "What shall I do for the person whom I wish to honor?"
And Haman said to himself, "Whom would the king wish to honor
more than me?" 7 So he said to the king, "For a person whom the king
wishes to honor, 8 let the king's servants bring out the fine linen robe
that the king has worn, and the horse on which the king rides, 9 and
let both be given to one of the king's honored Friends, and let him
robe the person whom the king loves and mount him on the horse,
and let it be proclaimed through the open square of the city, saying,
'Thus shall it be done to everyone whom the king honors.'" 10 Then the
king said to Haman, "You have made an excellent suggestion! Do just
as you have said for Mordecai the Jew, who is on duty in the courtyard.
And let nothing be omitted from what you have proposed." 11 So
Haman got the robe and the horse; he put the robe on Mordecai and
made him ride through the open square of the city, proclaiming, "Thus
shall it be done to everyone whom the king wishes to honor." 12 Then

90

ESTHER 91

Mordecai returned to the courtyard, and Haman hurried back to his
house, mourning and with his head covered. 13 Haman told his wife
Zosara and his friends what had befallen him. His friends and his wife
said to him, "If Mordecai is of the Jewish people, and you have begun
to be humiliated before him, you will surely fall. You will not be able
to defend yourself, because the living God is with him."
Esther's second banquet and Haman's fall
14 While they were still talking, the eunuchs arrived and hurriedly
brought Haman to the banquet that Esther had prepared. [Esther 7] 1
So the king and Haman went in to drink with the queen. 2 And the
second day, as they were drinking wine, the king said, "What is it,
Queen Esther? What is your petition and what is your request? It shall
be granted to you, even to half of my kingdom." 3 She answered and
said, "If I have found favor with the king, let my life be granted me at
my petition, and my people at my request. 4 For we have been sold, I
and my people, to be destroyed, plundered, and made slaves — we and
our children — male and female slaves. This has come to my
knowledge. Our antagonist brings shame on the king's court." 5 Then
the king said, "Who is the person that would dare to do this thing?" 6
Esther said, "Our enemy is this evil man Haman!" At this, Haman was
terrified in the presence of the king and queen.
7 The king rose from the banquet and went into the garden, and
Haman began to beg for his life from the queen, for he saw that he
was in serious trouble. 8 When the king returned from the garden,
Haman had thrown himself on the couch, pleading with the queen.
The king said, "Will he dare even assault my wife in my own house?"
Haman, when he heard, turned away his face. 9 Then Bugathan, one of
the eunuchs, said to the king, "Look, Haman has even prepared a
gallows for Mordecai, who gave information of concern to the king; it
is standing at Haman's house, a gallows fifty cubits high." So the king
said, "Let Haman be hanged on that." 10 So Haman was hanged on the
gallows he had prepared for Mordecai. With that the anger of the king
abated.

91

ESTHER 92

[Esther 8]
The king shows favor to Esther, Mordecai, and the Jews
1 On that very day King Artaxerxes granted to Esther all the property of
the persecutor Haman. Mordecai was summoned by the king, for
Esther had told the king that he was related to her. 2 The king took the
ring that had been taken from Haman, and gave it to Mordecai; and
Esther set Mordecai over everything that had been Haman's.
3 Then she spoke once again to the king and, falling at his feet, she
asked him to avert all the evil that Haman had planned against the
Jews. 4 The king extended his golden scepter to Esther, and she rose
and stood before the king. 5 Esther said, "If it pleases you, and if I have
found favor, let an order be sent rescinding the letters that Haman
wrote and sent to destroy the Jews in your kingdom. 6 How can I look
on the ruin of my people? How can I be safe if my ancestral nation is
destroyed?" 7 The king said to Esther, "Now that I have granted all of
Haman's property to you and have hanged him on a tree because he
acted against the Jews, what else do you request? 8 Write in my name
what you think best and seal it with my ring; for whatever is written at
the king's command and sealed with my ring cannot be contravened."
9 The secretaries were summoned on the twenty-third day of the first
month, that is, Nisan, in the same year; and all that he commanded
with respect to the Jews was given in writing to the administrators and
governors of the provinces from India to Ethiopia, one hundred
twenty-seven provinces, to each province in its own language. 10 The
edict was written with the king's authority and sealed with his ring,
and sent out by couriers. 11 He ordered the Jews in every city to observe
their own laws, to defend themselves, and to act as they wished
against their opponents and enemies 12 on a certain day, the
thirteenth of the twelfth month, which is Adar, throughout all the
kingdom of Artaxerxes.

92

ESTHER 93

ADDITION E
[Esther 16]
The king's second letter denounces Haman, praises Mordecai and
Esther, and directs his subjects to help the Jews
1 The following is a copy of this letter:
"The Great King, Artaxerxes, to the governors of the provinces from
India to Ethiopia, one hundred twenty-seven provinces, and to those
who are loyal to our government, greetings.
2 "Many people, the more they are honored with the most generous
kindness of their benefactors, the more proud do they become, 3 and
not only seek to injure our subjects, but in their inability to stand
prosperity, they even undertake to scheme against their own
benefactors. 4 They not only take away thankfulness from others, but,
carried away by the boasts of those who know nothing of goodness,
they even assume that they will escape the evil-hating justice of God,
who always sees everything. 5 And often many of those who are set in
places of authority have been made in part responsible for the
shedding of innocent blood, and have been involved in irremediable
calamities, by the persuasion of friends who have been entrusted with
the administration of public affairs, 6 when these persons by the false
trickery of their evil natures beguile the sincere goodwill of their
sovereigns.
7 "What has been wickedly accomplished through the pestilent
behavior of those who exercise authority unworthily can be seen, not
so much from the more ancient records that we hand on, as from
investigation of matters close at hand. 8 In the future we will take care
to render our kingdom quiet and peaceable for all, 9 by changing our
methods and always judging what comes before our eyes with more
equitable consideration. 10 For Haman son of Hammedatha, a
Macedonian (really an alien to the Persian blood, and quite devoid of
our kindliness), having become our guest, 11 enjoyed so fully the
goodwill that we have for every nation that he was called our father
and was continually bowed down to by all as the person second to the

93

ESTHER 94

royal throne. 12 But, unable to restrain his arrogance, he undertook to
deprive us of our kingdom and our life, 13 and with intricate craft and
deceit asked for the destruction of Mordecai, our savior and perpetual
benefactor, and of Esther, the blameless partner of our kingdom,
together with their whole nation. 14 He thought that by these methods
he would catch us undefended and would transfer the kingdom of the
Persians to the Macedonians.
15 "But we find that the Jews, who were consigned to annihilation by
this thrice-accursed man, are not evildoers, but are governed by most
righteous laws 16 and are children of the living God, most high, most
mighty, who has directed the kingdom both for us and for our
ancestors in the most excellent order.
17 "You will therefore do well not to put in execution the letters sent
by Haman son of Hammedatha, 18 since he, the one who did these
things, has been hanged at the gate of Susa with all his household —
for God, who rules over all things, has speedily inflicted on him the
punishment that he deserved.
19 "Therefore post a copy of this letter publicly in every place, and
permit the Jews to live under their own laws. 20 And give them
reinforcements, so that on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month,
Adar, on that very day, they may defend themselves against those who
attack them at the time of oppression. 21 For God, who rules over all
things, has made this day to be a joy for his chosen people instead of a
day of destruction for them.
22 "Therefore you shall observe this with all good cheer as a notable
day among your commemorative festivals, 23 so that both now and
hereafter it may represent deliverance for you and the loyal Persians,
but that it may be a reminder of destruction for those who plot against
us.
24 "Every city and country, without exception, that does not act
accordingly shall be destroyed in wrath with spear and fire. It shall be
made not only impassable for human beings, but also most hateful to
wild animals and birds for all time.

94

ESTHER 95

END OF ADDITION E
[Esther 8]
Dispatch and posting of the king's decree
13 "Let copies of the decree be posted conspicuously in all the
kingdom, and let all the Jews be ready on that day to fight against
their enemies."
14 So the messengers on horseback set out with all speed to perform
what the king had commanded; and the decree was published also in
Susa. 15 Mordecai went out dressed in the royal robe and wearing a
gold crown and a turban of purple linen. The people in Susa rejoiced
on seeing him. 16 And the Jews had light and gladness 17 in every city
and province wherever the decree was published; wherever the
proclamation was made, the Jews had joy and gladness, a banquet and
a holiday. And many of the Gentiles were circumcised and became Jews
out of fear of the Jews.
[Esther 9]
The Jews triumph over their enemies
1 Now on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is Adar, the
decree written by the king arrived. 2 On that same day the enemies of
the Jews perished; no one resisted, because they feared them. 3 The
chief provincial governors, the princes, and the royal secretaries were
paying honor to the Jews, because fear of Mordecai weighed upon
them. 4 The king's decree required that Mordecai's name be held in
honor throughout the kingdom. 6 Now in the city of Susa the Jews
killed five hundred people, 7 including Pharsannestain, Delphon,
Phasga, 8 Pharadatha, Barea, Sarbacha, 9 Marmasima, Aruphaeus,
Arsaeus, Zabutheus, 10 the ten sons of Haman son of Hammedatha, the
Bougean, the enemy of the Jews — and they indulged themselves in
plunder.
11 That very day the number of those killed in Susa was reported to the
king. 12 The king said to Esther, "In Susa, the capital, the Jews have
destroyed five hundred people. What do you suppose they have done

95

ESTHER 96

in the surrounding countryside? Whatever more you ask will be done
for you." 13 And Esther said to the king, "Let the Jews be allowed to do
the same tomorrow. Also, hang up the bodies of Haman's ten sons." 14
So he permitted this to be done, and handed over to the Jews of the
city the bodies of Haman's sons to hang up. 15 The Jews who were in
Susa gathered on the fourteenth and killed three hundred people, but
took no plunder.
16 Now the other Jews in the kingdom gathered to defend themselves,
and got relief from their enemies. They destroyed fifteen thousand of
them, but did not engage in plunder. 17 On the fourteenth day they
rested and made that same day a day of rest, celebrating it with joy
and gladness. 18 The Jews who were in Susa, the capital, came together
also on the fourteenth, but did not rest. They celebrated the fifteenth
with joy and gladness. 19 On this account then the Jews who are
scattered around the country outside Susa keep the fourteenth of Adar
as a joyful holiday, and send presents of food to one another, while
those who live in the large cities keep the fifteenth day of Adar as their
joyful holiday, also sending presents to one another.
The inauguration of the feast of Purim
20 Mordecai recorded these things in a book, and sent it to the Jews in
the kingdom of Artaxerxes both near and far, 21 telling them that they
should keep the fourteenth and fifteenth days of Adar, 22 for on these
days the Jews got relief from their enemies. The whole month (namely,
Adar), in which their condition had been changed from sorrow into
gladness and from a time of distress to a holiday, was to be celebrated
as a time for feasting and gladness and for sending presents of food to
their friends and to the poor.
23 So the Jews accepted what Mordecai had written to them 24 — how
Haman son of Hammedatha, the Macedonian, fought against them,
how he made a decree and cast lots to destroy them, 25 and how he
went in to the king, telling him to hang Mordecai; but the wicked plot
he had devised against the Jews came back upon himself, and he and
his sons were hanged. 26 Therefore these days were called "Purim,"
because of the lots (for in their language this is the word that means

96

ESTHER 97

"lots"). And so, because of what was written in this letter, and because
of what they had experienced in this affair and what had befallen
them, Mordecai established this festival, 27 and the Jews took upon
themselves, upon their descendants, and upon all who would join
them, to observe it without fail. These days of Purim should be a
memorial and kept from generation to generation, in every city,
family, and country. 28 These days of Purim were to be observed for all
time, and the commemoration of them was never to cease among their
descendants.
29 Then Queen Esther daughter of Aminadab along with Mordecai the
Jew wrote down what they had done, and gave full authority to the
letter about Purim. 30 Letters were sent to all the Jews, to the one
hundred twenty-seven provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, in
words of peace and truth. 31 And Mordecai and Queen Esther
established this decision on their own responsibility, pledging their
own well-being to the plan. 32 Esther established it by a decree
forever, and it was written for a memorial.
[Esther 10]
The greatness of Ahasuerus and Mordecai
1 The king levied a tax upon his kingdom both by land and sea. 2 And
as for his power and bravery, and the wealth and glory of his kingdom,
they were recorded in the annals of the kings of the Persians and the
Medes. 3 Mordecai acted with authority on behalf of King Artaxerxes
and was great in the kingdom, as well as honored by the Jews. His way
of life was such as to make him beloved to his whole nation.
ADDITION F
Epilogue: Mordecai's dream explained
4 And Mordecai said, "These things have come from God; 5 for I
remember the dream that I had concerning these matters, and none of
them has failed to be fulfilled. 6 There was the little spring that
became a river, and there was light and sun and abundant water — the
river is Esther, whom the king married and made queen. 7 The two
dragons are Haman and myself. 8 The nations are those that gathered

97

ESTHER 98

to destroy the name of the Jews. 9 And my nation, this is Israel, who
cried out to God and was saved. The Lord has saved his people; the
Lord has rescued us from all these evils; God has done great signs and
wonders, wonders that have never happened among the nations. 10
For this purpose he made two lots, one for the people of God and one
for all the nations, 11 and these two lots came to the hour and moment
and day of decision before God and among all the nations. 12 And God
remembered his people and vindicated his inheritance. 13 So they will
observe these days in the month of Adar, on the fourteenth and
fifteenth of that month, with an assembly and joy and gladness before
God, from generation to generation forever among his people Israel."
[Esther 11]
The Colophon to Greek Esther
1 In the fourth year of the reign of Ptolemy and Cleopatra, Dositheus,
who said that he was a priest and a Levite, and his son Ptolemy
brought to Egypt the preceding Letter about Purim, which they said
was authentic and had been translated by Lysimachus son of Ptolemy,
one of the residents of Jerusalem.
END OF ADDITION F

98

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 99

THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON
Introduction
The Wisdom of Solomon was written as a message of encouragement
and exhortation for Jews living somewhere in the Diaspora (the Jewish
communities outside the land of Israel) during the Greco-Roman era.
Immersed in a cosmopolitan, pagan culture, one that generally viewed
Judaism with suspicion if not contempt, many Jews felt hard-pressed to
remain loyal to the basic principles and practices of their faith. This
book simultaneously affirms the basis of that faith and critiques those
who oppose it, in the interests of promoting adherence to Jewish
traditions in changing, difficult circumstances.
Although the author claims to be King Solomon (with parts of ch 9
based on his prayer for wisdom in 1 Kings 3.6-9), this ascription has
been recognized as a literary fiction since ancient times. Instead, the
author is an anonymous Hellenistic Jew writing sometime in the late
first century BCE or early first century CE. The book's bitter polemic
against Egyptian religion (see, for instance, ch 12) suggests Alexandria
as a location, and anti-Jewish uprisings in that city may provide part of
the background for the author's reflections.
Composed in Greek, this book is among the most Hellenized works of
the Apocrypha; that is, it reflects extensive interaction with Greek
literary and philosophical conventions (see, for example, the use of the
standard list of cardinal virtues in 8.7). The author's intention,
however, is not to promote the achievements of Greek culture, but to
appropriate them, so as to prove the excellence of Judaism in
categories relevant to his readers' multicultural environment. As for its
literary genre, many modern critics describe the Wisdom of Solomon as
a form of didactic exhortation that demonstrates the superiority of a
particular way of life or school of philosophy (in this case, Judaism)
over its competitors and detractors. (This is technically called
99

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 100

"protreptic discourse.") So, for example, while the author can describe
wisdom as an emanation of divine power that pervades the entire
world, he contends that it comes to most perfect expression in God's
revelation to Israel, and depicts it in terms familiar from the
personified Wisdom (Greek, "Sophia") of biblical texts like Proverbs 8,
Job 28, Sirach 24, and Baruch 3-4. Above all, the author is concerned to
portray wisdom as the guiding force of divine providence, saving
righteous Israelites and punishing their wicked adversaries. In
conjunction with this aim, the book also asserts the significance of
Jewish faith in terms of the ultimate benefits it confers. Thus
persecutors, sinners, and idolaters face divine retribution in the
afterlife, while the faithful will "live forever" (5.15). This emphasis on
immortality represents one of the book's distinctive features, as well as
something of a new development in Jewish thought (see 3.4n).
The book consists of three major sections. The first, chs 1-6, contrasts
the lives of the just and the wicked, dramatizing the eschatological
destinies of the two groups. The sections begins and ends with
exhortation to seek wisdom and righteousness (1.1-15; 6.1-25). The next
section, chs 7-10, celebrates the figure of divine Sophia. The author's
persona as Solomon emerges most clearly here, as the king describes
wisdom and his pursuit of her. The third section, chs 11-19, adopts the
approach of historical comparison, presenting an elaborate system of
contrasts based largely on Exodus 7-14. A series of digressions in 11.1715.19 explains why God's judgment manifested itself differently in
dealing with the Egyptians and the Israelites. This adaptation of the
Exodus story is meant to complement the arguments of the first two
sections, providing biblical examples of the righteous and the
unrighteous, and demonstrating how the power of divine wisdom
operates in human history.
This book is included among the deuterocanonical books of the Roman
Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches, but is considered one of the
Apocrypha by the Protestant churches.

100

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 101

[Wisdom of Solomon 1]
A discourse contrasting the righteous and the wicked; Prologue
1 Love righteousness, you rulers of the earth,
think of the Lord in goodness
and seek him with sincerity of heart;
2 because he is found by those who do not put him to the test,
and manifests himself to those who do not distrust him.
3 For perverse thoughts separate people from God,
and when his power is tested, it exposes the foolish;
4 because wisdom will not enter a deceitful soul,
or dwell in a body enslaved to sin.
5 For a holy and disciplined spirit will flee from deceit,
and will leave foolish thoughts behind,
and will be ashamed at the approach of unrighteousness.
6 For wisdom is a kindly spirit,
but will not free blasphemers from the guilt of their words;
because God is witness of their inmost feelings,
and a true observer of their hearts, and a hearer of their tongues.
7 Because the spirit of the Lord has filled the world,
and that which holds all things together knows what is said,
8 therefore those who utter unrighteous things will not escape notice,
and justice, when it punishes, will not pass them by.
9 For inquiry will be made into the counsels of the ungodly,
and a report of their words will come to the Lord,
to convict them of their lawless deeds;
10 because a jealous ear hears all things,
and the sound of grumbling does not go unheard.
11 Beware then of useless grumbling,
and keep your tongue from slander;
because no secret word is without result,
and a lying mouth destroys the soul.
12 Do not invite death by the error of your life,
or bring on destruction by the works of your hands;
13 because God did not make death,
and he does not delight in the death of the living.

101

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 102

14 For he created all things so that they might exist;
the generative forces of the world are wholesome,
and there is no destructive poison in them,
and the dominion of Hades is not on earth.
15 For righteousness is immortal.
The deluded reasoning of the ungodly
16 But the ungodly by their words and deeds summoned death;
considering him a friend, they pined away
and made a covenant with him,
because they are fit to belong to his company.
[Wisdom of Solomon 2]
1 For they reasoned unsoundly, saying to themselves,
"Short and sorrowful is our life,
and there is no remedy when a life comes to its end,
and no one has been known to return from Hades.
2 For we were born by mere chance,
and hereafter we shall be as though we had never been,
for the breath in our nostrils is smoke,
and reason is a spark kindled by the beating of our hearts;
3 when it is extinguished, the body will turn to ashes,
and the spirit will dissolve like empty air.
4 Our name will be forgotten in time,
and no one will remember our works;
our life will pass away like the traces of a cloud,
and be scattered like mist
that is chased by the rays of the sun
and overcome by its heat.
5 For our allotted time is the passing of a shadow,
and there is no return from our death,
because it is sealed up and no one turns back.
6 "Come, therefore, let us enjoy the good things that exist,
and make use of the creation to the full as in youth.

102

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 103

7 Let us take our fill of costly wine and perfumes,
and let no flower of spring pass us by.
8 Let us crown ourselves with rosebuds before they wither.
9 Let none of us fail to share in our revelry;
everywhere let us leave signs of enjoyment,
because this is our portion, and this our lot.
10 Let us oppress the righteous poor man;
let us not spare the widow
or regard the gray hairs of the aged.
11 But let our might be our law of right,
for what is weak proves itself to be useless."
12 "Let us lie in wait for the righteous man,
because he is inconvenient to us and opposes our actions;
he reproaches us for sins against the law,
and accuses us of sins against our training.
13 He professes to have knowledge of God,
and calls himself a child of the Lord.
14 He became to us a reproof of our thoughts;
15 the very sight of him is a burden to us,
because his manner of life is unlike that of others,
and his ways are strange.
16 We are considered by him as something base,
and he avoids our ways as unclean;
he calls the last end of the righteous happy,
and boasts that God is his father.
17 Let us see if his words are true,
and let us test what will happen at the end of his life;
18 for if the righteous man is God's child, he will help him,
and will deliver him from the hand of his adversaries.
19 Let us test him with insult and torture,
so that we may find out how gentle he is,
and make trial of his forbearance.
20 Let us condemn him to a shameful death,
for, according to what he says, he will be protected."
21 Thus they reasoned, but they were led astray,
for their wickedness blinded them,

103

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 104

22 and they did not know the secret purposes of God,
nor hoped for the wages of holiness,
nor discerned the prize for blameless souls;
23 for God created us for incorruption,
and made us in the image of his own eternity,
24 but through the devil's envy death entered the world,
and those who belong to his company experience it.
[Wisdom of Solomon 3]
The reward of the righteous
1 But the souls of the righteous are in the hand of God,
and no torment will ever touch them.
2 In the eyes of the foolish they seemed to have died,
and their departure was thought to be a disaster,
3 and their going from us to be their destruction;
but they are at peace.
4 For though in the sight of others they were punished,
their hope is full of immortality.
5 Having been disciplined a little, they will receive great good,
because God tested them and found them worthy of himself;
6 like gold in the furnace he tried them,
and like a sacrificial burnt offering he accepted them.
7 In the time of their visitation they will shine forth,
and will run like sparks through the stubble.
8 They will govern nations and rule over peoples,
and the Lord will reign over them forever.
9 Those who trust in him will understand truth,
and the faithful will abide with him in love,
because grace and mercy are upon his holy ones,
and he watches over his elect.
Rewards and punishments
10 But the ungodly will be punished as their reasoning deserves,
those who disregarded the righteous
and rebelled against the Lord;

104

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 105

11 for those who despise wisdom and instruction are miserable.
Their hope is vain, their labors are unprofitable,
and their works are useless.
12 Their wives are foolish, and their children evil;
13 their offspring are accursed.
For blessed is the barren woman who is undefiled,
who has not entered into a sinful union;
she will have fruit when God examines souls.
14 Blessed also is the eunuch whose hands have done no lawless deed,
and who has not devised wicked things against the Lord;
for special favor will be shown him for his faithfulness,
and a place of great delight in the temple of the Lord.
15 For the fruit of good labors is renowned,
and the root of understanding does not fail.
16 But children of adulterers will not come to maturity,
and the offspring of an unlawful union will perish.
17 Even if they live long they will be held of no account,
and finally their old age will be without honor.
18 If they die young, they will have no hope
and no consolation on the day of judgment.
19 For the end of an unrighteous generation is grievous.
[Wisdom of Solomon 4]
1 Better than this is childlessness with virtue,
for in the memory of virtue is immortality,
because it is known both by God and by mortals.
2 When it is present, people imitate it,
and they long for it when it has gone;
throughout all time it marches, crowned in triumph,
victor in the contest for prizes that are undefiled.
3 But the prolific brood of the ungodly will be of no use,
and none of their illegitimate seedlings will strike a deep root
or take a firm hold.
4 For even if they put forth boughs for a while,
standing insecurely they will be shaken by the wind,
and by the violence of the winds they will be uprooted.

105

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 106

5 The branches will be broken off before they come to maturity,
and their fruit will be useless,
not ripe enough to eat, and good for nothing.
6 For children born of unlawful unions
are witnesses of evil against their parents when God
examines them.
The blessedness of the righteous despite early death
7 But the righteous, though they die early, will be at rest.
8 For old age is not honored for length of time,
or measured by number of years;
9 but understanding is gray hair for anyone,
and a blameless life is ripe old age.
10 There were some who pleased God and were loved by him,
and while living among sinners were taken up.
11 They were caught up so that evil might not change their
understanding
or guile deceive their souls.
12 For the fascination of wickedness obscures what is good,
and roving desire perverts the innocent mind.
13 Being perfected in a short time, they fulfilled long years;
14 for their souls were pleasing to the Lord,
therefore he took them quickly from the midst of wickedness.
15 Yet the peoples saw and did not understand,
or take such a thing to heart,
that God's grace and mercy are with his elect,
and that he watches over his holy ones.
16 The righteous who have died will condemn the ungodly who are
living, and youth that is quickly perfected will condemn the
prolonged old age of the unrighteous.
17 For they will see the end of the wise,
and will not understand what the Lord purposed for them,
and for what he kept them safe.

106

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 107

18 The unrighteous will see, and will have contempt for them,
but the Lord will laugh them to scorn.
After this they will become dishonored corpses,
and an outrage among the dead forever;
19 because he will dash them speechless to the ground,
and shake them from the foundations;
they will be left utterly dry and barren,
and they will suffer anguish,
and the memory of them will perish.
The final judgment
20 They will come with dread when their sins are reckoned up,
and their lawless deeds will convict them to their face.
[Wisdom of Solomon 5]
1 Then the righteous will stand with great confidence
in the presence of those who have oppressed them
and those who make light of their labors.
2 When the unrighteous see them, they will be shaken with dreadful
fear, and they will be amazed at the unexpected salvation of
the righteous.
3 They will speak to one another in repentance,
and in anguish of spirit they will groan, and say,
4 "These are persons whom we once held in derision
and made a byword of reproach — fools that we were!
We thought that their lives were madness
and that their end was without honor.
5 Why have they been numbered among the children of God?
And why is their lot among the saints?
6 So it was we who strayed from the way of truth,
and the light of righteousness did not shine on us,
and the sun did not rise upon us.

107

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 108

7 We took our fill of the paths of lawlessness and destruction,
and we journeyed through trackless deserts,
but the way of the Lord we have not known.
8 What has our arrogance profited us?
And what good has our boasted wealth brought us?
9 "All those things have vanished like a shadow,
and like a rumor that passes by;
10 like a ship that sails through the billowy water,
and when it has passed no trace can be found,
no track of its keel in the waves;
11 or as, when a bird flies through the air,
no evidence of its passage is found;
the light air, lashed by the beat of its pinions
and pierced by the force of its rushing flight,
is traversed by the movement of its wings,
and afterward no sign of its coming is found there;
12 or as, when an arrow is shot at a target,
the air, thus divided, comes together at once,
so that no one knows its pathway.
13 So we also, as soon as we were born, ceased to be,
and we had no sign of virtue to show,
but were consumed in our wickedness."
14 Because the hope of the ungodly is like thistledown carried by
the wind, and like a light frost driven away by a storm;
it is dispersed like smoke before the wind,
and it passes like the remembrance of a guest who stays
but a day.
15 But the righteous live forever,
and their reward is with the Lord;
the Most High takes care of them.
16 Therefore they will receive a glorious crown
and a beautiful diadem from the hand of the Lord,
because with his right hand he will cover them,
and with his arm he will shield them.

108

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 109

17 The Lord will take his zeal as his whole armor,
and will arm all creation to repel his enemies;
18 he will put on righteousness as a breastplate,
and wear impartial justice as a helmet;
19 he will take holiness as an invincible shield,
20 and sharpen stern wrath for a sword,
and creation will join with him to fight against his frenzied foes.
21 Shafts of lightning will fly with true aim,
and will leap from the clouds to the target, as from a welldrawn bow,
22 and hailstones full of wrath will be hurled as from a catapult;
the water of the sea will rage against them,
and rivers will relentlessly overwhelm them;
23 a mighty wind will rise against them,
and like a tempest it will winnow them away.
Lawlessness will lay waste the whole earth,
and evildoing will overturn the thrones of rulers.
[Wisdom of Solomon 6]
Exhortation to seek wisdom
1 Listen therefore, O kings, and understand;
learn, O judges of the ends of the earth.
2 Give ear, you that rule over multitudes,
and boast of many nations.
3 For your dominion was given you from the Lord,
and your sovereignty from the Most High;
he will search out your works and inquire into your plans.
4 Because as servants of his kingdom you did not rule rightly,
or keep the law,
or walk according to the purpose of God,
5 he will come upon you terribly and swiftly,
because severe judgment falls on those in high places.
6 For the lowliest may be pardoned in mercy,
but the mighty will be mightily tested.

109

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 110

7 For the Lord of all will not stand in awe of anyone,
or show deference to greatness;
because he himself made both small and great,
and he takes thought for all alike.
8 But a strict inquiry is in store for the mighty.
9 To you then, O monarchs, my words are directed,
so that you may learn wisdom and not transgress.
10 For they will be made holy who observe holy things in holiness,
and those who have been taught them will find a defense.
11 Therefore set your desire on my words;
long for them, and you will be instructed.
12 Wisdom is radiant and unfading,
and she is easily discerned by those who love her,
and is found by those who seek her.
13 She hastens to make herself known to those who desire her.
14 One who rises early to seek her will have no difficulty,
for she will be found sitting at the gate.
15 To fix one's thought on her is perfect understanding,
and one who is vigilant on her account will soon be free
from care,
16 because she goes about seeking those worthy of her,
and she graciously appears to them in their paths,
and meets them in every thought.
17 The beginning of wisdom is the most sincere desire for instruction,
and concern for instruction is love of her,
18 and love of her is the keeping of her laws,
and giving heed to her laws is assurance of immortality,
19 and immortality brings one near to God;
20 so the desire for wisdom leads to a kingdom.
21 Therefore if you delight in thrones and scepters, O monarchs
over the peoples, honor wisdom, so that you may reign forever.

110

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 111

22 I will tell you what wisdom is and how she came to be,
and I will hide no secrets from you,
but I will trace her course from the beginning of creation,
and make knowledge of her clear,
and I will not pass by the truth;
23 nor will I travel in the company of sickly envy,
for envy does not associate with wisdom.
24 The multitude of the wise is the salvation of the world,
and a sensible king is the stability of any people.
25 Therefore be instructed by my words, and you will profit.
[Wisdom of Solomon 7]
King Solomon and the quest for wisdom; Solomon's Speech
1 I also am mortal, like everyone else,
a descendant of the first-formed child of earth;
and in the womb of a mother I was molded into flesh,
2 within the period of ten months, compacted with blood,
from the seed of a man and the pleasure of marriage.
3 And when I was born, I began to breathe the common air,
and fell upon the kindred earth;
my first sound was a cry, as is true of all.
4 I was nursed with care in swaddling cloths.
5 For no king has had a different beginning of existence;
6 there is for all one entrance into life, and one way out.
7 Therefore I prayed, and understanding was given me;
I called on God, and the spirit of wisdom came to me.
8 I preferred her to scepters and thrones,
and I accounted wealth as nothing in comparison with her.
9 Neither did I liken to her any priceless gem,
because all gold is but a little sand in her sight,
and silver will be accounted as clay before her.
10 I loved her more than health and beauty,
and I chose to have her rather than light,
because her radiance never ceases.
11 All good things came to me along with her,
and in her hands uncounted wealth.

111

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 112

12 I rejoiced in them all, because wisdom leads them;
but I did not know that she was their mother.
13 I learned without guile and I impart without grudging;
I do not hide her wealth,
14 for it is an unfailing treasure for mortals;
those who get it obtain friendship with God,
commended for the gifts that come from instruction.
15 May God grant me to speak with judgment,
and to have thoughts worthy of what I have received;
for he is the guide even of wisdom
and the corrector of the wise.
16 For both we and our words are in his hand,
as are all understanding and skill in crafts.
17 For it is he who gave me unerring knowledge of what exists,
to know the structure of the world and the activity of the
elements;
18 the beginning and end and middle of times,
the alternations of the solstices and the changes of the seasons,
19 the cycles of the year and the constellations of the stars,
20 the natures of animals and the tempers of wild animals,
the powers of spirits and the thoughts of human beings,
the varieties of plants and the virtues of roots;
21 I learned both what is secret and what is manifest,
22 for wisdom, the fashioner of all things, taught me.
The divine essence and activity of wisdom
There is in her a spirit that is intelligent, holy,
unique, manifold, subtle,
mobile, clear, unpolluted,
distinct, invulnerable, loving the good, keen,
irresistible, 23 beneficent, humane,
steadfast, sure, free from anxiety,
all-powerful, overseeing all,
and penetrating through all spirits
that are intelligent, pure, and altogether subtle.

112

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 113

24 For wisdom is more mobile than any motion;
because of her pureness she pervades and penetrates all things.
25 For she is a breath of the power of God,
and a pure emanation of the glory of the Almighty;
therefore nothing defiled gains entrance into her.
26 For she is a reflection of eternal light,
a spotless mirror of the working of God,
and an image of his goodness.
27 Although she is but one, she can do all things,
and while remaining in herself, she renews all things;
in every generation she passes into holy souls
and makes them friends of God, and prophets;
28 for God loves nothing so much as the person who lives with wisdom.
29 She is more beautiful than the sun,
and excels every constellation of the stars.
Compared with the light she is found to be superior,
30 for it is succeeded by the night,
but against wisdom evil does not prevail.
[Wisdom of Solomon 8]
1 She reaches mightily from one end of the earth to the other,
and she orders all things well.
The many benefits of a relationship with wisdom
2 I loved her and sought her from my youth;
I desired to take her for my bride,
and became enamored of her beauty.
3 She glorifies her noble birth by living with God,
and the Lord of all loves her.
4 For she is an initiate in the knowledge of God,
and an associate in his works.
5 If riches are a desirable possession in life,
what is richer than wisdom, the active cause of all things?
6 And if understanding is effective,
who more than she is fashioner of what exists?

113

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 114

7 And if anyone loves righteousness,
her labors are virtues;
for she teaches self-control and prudence,
justice and courage;
nothing in life is more profitable for mortals than these.
8 And if anyone longs for wide experience,
she knows the things of old, and infers the things to come;
she understands turns of speech and the solutions of riddles;
she has foreknowledge of signs and wonders
and of the outcome of seasons and times.
9 Therefore I determined to take her to live with me,
knowing that she would give me good counsel
and encouragement in cares and grief.
10 Because of her I shall have glory among the multitudes
and honor in the presence of the elders, though I am young.
11 I shall be found keen in judgment,
and in the sight of rulers I shall be admired.
12 When I am silent they will wait for me,
and when I speak they will give heed;
if I speak at greater length,
they will put their hands on their mouths.
13 Because of her I shall have immortality,
and leave an everlasting remembrance to those who come
after me.
14 I shall govern peoples,
and nations will be subject to me;
15 dread monarchs will be afraid of me when they hear of me;
among the people I shall show myself capable, and courageous
in war.
16 When I enter my house, I shall find rest with her;
for companionship with her has no bitterness,
and life with her has no pain, but gladness and joy.
17 When I considered these things inwardly,
and pondered in my heart
that in kinship with wisdom there is immortality,

114

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 115

18 and in friendship with her, pure delight,
and in the labors of her hands, unfailing wealth,
and in the experience of her company, understanding,
and renown in sharing her words,
I went about seeking how to get her for myself.
19 As a child I was naturally gifted,
and a good soul fell to my lot;
20 or rather, being good, I entered an undefiled body.
Solomon's prayer for wisdom
21 But I perceived that I would not possess wisdom unless God gave
her to me — and it was a mark of insight to know whose gift
she was — so I appealed to the Lord and implored him,
and with my whole heart I said:
[Wisdom of Solomon 9]
1 "O God of my ancestors and Lord of mercy,
who have made all things by your word,
2 and by your wisdom have formed humankind
to have dominion over the creatures you have made,
3 and rule the world in holiness and righteousness,
and pronounce judgment in uprightness of soul,
4 give me the wisdom that sits by your throne,
and do not reject me from among your servants.
5 For I am your servant the son of your serving girl,
a man who is weak and short-lived,
with little understanding of judgment and laws;
6 for even one who is perfect among human beings
will be regarded as nothing without the wisdom that
comes from you.
7 You have chosen me to be king of your people
and to be judge over your sons and daughters.
8 You have given command to build a temple on your holy mountain,
and an altar in the city of your habitation,
a copy of the holy tent that you prepared from the beginning.

115

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 116

9 With you is wisdom, she who knows your works
and was present when you made the world;
she understands what is pleasing in your sight
and what is right according to your commandments.
10 Send her forth from the holy heavens,
and from the throne of your glory send her,
that she may labor at my side,
and that I may learn what is pleasing to you.
11 For she knows and understands all things,
and she will guide me wisely in my actions
and guard me with her glory.
12 Then my works will be acceptable,
and I shall judge your people justly,
and shall be worthy of the throne of my father.
13 For who can learn the counsel of God?
Or who can discern what the Lord wills?
14 For the reasoning of mortals is worthless,
and our designs are likely to fail;
15 for a perishable body weighs down the soul,
and this earthy tent burdens the thoughtful mind.
16 We can hardly guess at what is on earth,
and what is at hand we find with labor;
but who has traced out what is in the heavens?
17 Who has learned your counsel,
unless you have given wisdom
and sent your holy spirit from on high?
18 And thus the paths of those on earth were set right,
and people were taught what pleases you,
and were saved by wisdom."
[Wisdom of Solomon 10]
Historical illustrations of wisdom's saving and punitive power
1 Wisdom protected the first-formed father of the world, when
he alone had been created; she delivered him from his
transgression,

116

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 117

2 and gave him strength to rule all things.
3 But when an unrighteous man departed from her in his anger,
he perished because in rage he killed his brother.
4 When the earth was flooded because of him, wisdom again saved it,
steering the righteous man by a paltry piece of wood.
5 Wisdom also, when the nations in wicked agreement had been put to
confusion, recognized the righteous man and preserved him
blameless before God, and kept him strong in the face of his
compassion for his child.
6 Wisdom rescued a righteous man when the ungodly were perishing;
he escaped the fire that descended on the Five Cities.
7 Evidence of their wickedness still remains:
a continually smoking wasteland,
plants bearing fruit that does not ripen,
and a pillar of salt standing as a monument to an
unbelieving soul.
8 For because they passed wisdom by,
they not only were hindered from recognizing the good,
but also left for humankind a reminder of their folly,
so that their failures could never go unnoticed.
9 Wisdom rescued from troubles those who served her.
10 When a righteous man fled from his brother's wrath,
she guided him on straight paths;
she showed him the kingdom of God,
and gave him knowledge of holy things;
she prospered him in his labors,
and increased the fruit of his toil.
11 When his oppressors were covetous,
she stood by him and made him rich.
12 She protected him from his enemies,
and kept him safe from those who lay in wait for him;
in his arduous contest she gave him the victory,
so that he might learn that godliness is more powerful
than anything else.

117

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 118

13 When a righteous man was sold, wisdom did not desert him,
but delivered him from sin.
She descended with him into the dungeon,
14 and when he was in prison she did not leave him,
until she brought him the scepter of a kingdom
and authority over his masters.
Those who accused him she showed to be false,
and she gave him everlasting honor.
15 A holy people and blameless race
wisdom delivered from a nation of oppressors.
16 She entered the soul of a servant of the Lord,
and withstood dread kings with wonders and signs.
17 She gave to holy people the reward of their labors;
she guided them along a marvelous way,
and became a shelter to them by day,
and a starry flame through the night.
18 She brought them over the Red Sea,
and led them through deep waters;
19 but she drowned their enemies,
and cast them up from the depth of the sea.
20 Therefore the righteous plundered the ungodly;
they sang hymns, O Lord, to your holy name,
and praised with one accord your defending hand;
21 for wisdom opened the mouths of those who were mute,
and made the tongues of infants speak clearly.
[Wisdom of Solomon 11]
A historical meditation contrasting God's dealings with the Israelites
and the Egyptians; the first contrast
1 Wisdom prospered their works by the hand of a holy prophet.
2 They journeyed through an uninhabited wilderness,
and pitched their tents in untrodden places.
3 They withstood their enemies and fought off their foes.
4 When they were thirsty, they called upon you,
and water was given them out of flinty rock,
and from hard stone a remedy for their thirst.

118

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 119

5 For through the very things by which their enemies were punished,
they themselves received benefit in their need.
6 Instead of the fountain of an ever-flowing river,
stirred up and defiled with blood
7 in rebuke for the decree to kill the infants,
you gave them abundant water unexpectedly,
8 showing by their thirst at that time
how you punished their enemies.
9 For when they were tried, though they were being disciplined
in mercy,they learned how the ungodly were tormented when
judged in wrath.
10 For you tested them as a parent does in warning,
but you examined the ungodly as a stern king does in
condemnation.
11 Whether absent or present, they were equally distressed,
12 for a twofold grief possessed them,
and a groaning at the memory of what had occurred.
13 For when they heard that through their own punishments
the righteous had received benefit, they perceived it was the
LORD's doing.
14 For though they had mockingly rejected him who long before had
been cast out and exposed, at the end of the events they
marveled at him, when they felt thirst in a different way from
the righteous.
15 In return for their foolish and wicked thoughts,
which led them astray to worship irrational serpents and
worthless animals, you sent upon them a multitude of irrational
creatures to punish them,
16 so that they might learn that one is punished by the very things by
which one sins.
A series of digressions; God exercises power and mercy in judgment
17 For your all-powerful hand,
which created the world out of formless matter,
did not lack the means to send upon them a multitude of bears,
or bold lions,

119

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 120

18 or newly-created unknown beasts full of rage,
or such as breathe out fiery breath,
or belch forth a thick pall of smoke,
or flash terrible sparks from their eyes;
19 not only could the harm they did destroy people,
but the mere sight of them could kill by fright.
20 Even apart from these, people could fall at a single breath
when pursued by justice
and scattered by the breath of your power.
But you have arranged all things by measure and number and
weight.
21 For it is always in your power to show great strength,
and who can withstand the might of your arm?
22 Because the whole world before you is like a speck that tips the
scales, and like a drop of morning dew that falls on the ground.
23 But you are merciful to all, for you can do all things,
and you overlook people's sins, so that they may repent.
24 For you love all things that exist,
and detest none of the things that you have made,
for you would not have made anything if you had hated it.
25 How would anything have endured if you had not willed it?
Or how would anything not called forth by you have been
preserved?
26 You spare all things, for they are yours, O Lord, you who love the
living.
[Wisdom of Solomon 12]
Divine righteousness and forbearance
1 For your immortal spirit is in all things.
2 Therefore you correct little by little those who trespass,
and you remind and warn them of the things through which
they sin, so that they may be freed from wickedness and put
their trust in you, O Lord.

120

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 121

3 Those who lived long ago in your holy land
4 you hated for their detestable practices,
their works of sorcery and unholy rites,
5 their merciless slaughter of children,
and their sacrificial feasting on human flesh and blood.
These initiates from the midst of a heathen cult,
6 these parents who murder helpless lives,
you willed to destroy by the hands of our ancestors,
7 so that the land most precious of all to you
might receive a worthy colony of the servants of God.
8 But even these you spared, since they were but mortals,
and sent wasps as forerunners of your army
to destroy them little by little,
9 though you were not unable to give the ungodly into the hands of
the righteous in battle, or to destroy them at one blow by dread
wild animals or your stern word.
10 But judging them little by little you gave them an opportunity to
repent,
though you were not unaware that their origin was evil
and their wickedness inborn,
and that their way of thinking would never change.
11 For they were an accursed race from the beginning,
and it was not through fear of anyone that you left them
unpunished for their sins.
12 For who will say, "What have you done?"
or will resist your judgment?
Who will accuse you for the destruction of nations that you
made?
Or who will come before you to plead as an advocate for the
unrighteous?
13 For neither is there any god besides you, whose care is for all people,
to whom you should prove that you have not judged unjustly;
14 nor can any king or monarch confront you about those whom you
have punished.
15 You are righteous and you rule all things righteously,
deeming it alien to your power
to condemn anyone who does not deserve to be punished.

121

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 122

16 For your strength is the source of righteousness,
and your sovereignty over all causes you to spare all.
17 For you show your strength when people doubt the completeness of
your power,
and you rebuke any insolence among those who know it.
18 Although you are sovereign in strength, you judge with mildness,
and with great forbearance you govern us;
for you have power to act whenever you choose.
19 Through such works you have taught your people
that the righteous must be kind,
and you have filled your children with good hope,
because you give repentance for sins.
20 For if you punished with such great care and indulgence
the enemies of your servants and those deserving of death,
granting them time and opportunity to give up their wickedness,
21 with what strictness you have judged your children,
to whose ancestors you gave oaths and covenants full of good
promises!
22 So while chastening us you scourge our enemies ten thousand times
more, so that, when we judge, we may meditate upon your
goodness, and when we are judged, we may expect mercy.
23 Therefore those who lived unrighteously, in a life of folly,
you tormented through their own abominations.
24 For they went far astray on the paths of error,
accepting as gods those animals that even their enemies despised;
they were deceived like foolish infants.
25 Therefore, as though to children who cannot reason,
you sent your judgment to mock them.
26 But those who have not heeded the warning of mild rebukes
will experience the deserved judgment of God.
27 For when in their suffering they became incensed
at those creatures that they had thought to be gods, being
punished by means of them, they saw and recognized as the
true God the one whom they had before refused to know.
Therefore the utmost condemnation came upon them.

122

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 123

[Wisdom of Solomon 13]
The folly of false worship; critique of nature worship
1 For all people who were ignorant of God were foolish by nature;
and they were unable from the good things that are seen to
know the one who exists,
nor did they recognize the artisan while paying heed to his
works;
2 but they supposed that either fire or wind or swift air,
or the circle of the stars, or turbulent water,
or the luminaries of heaven were the gods that rule the world.
3 If through delight in the beauty of these things people assumed them
to be gods,
let them know how much better than these is their Lord,
for the author of beauty created them.
4 And if people were amazed at their power and working,
let them perceive from them
how much more powerful is the one who formed them.
5 For from the greatness and beauty of created things
comes a corresponding perception of their Creator.
6 Yet these people are little to be blamed,
for perhaps they go astray
while seeking God and desiring to find him.
7 For while they live among his works, they keep searching,
and they trust in what they see, because the things that are
seen are beautiful.
8 Yet again, not even they are to be excused;
9 for if they had the power to know so much
that they could investigate the world,
how did they fail to find sooner the Lord of these things?
Polemic against idolatry
10 But miserable, with their hopes set on dead things, are those
who give the name "gods" to the works of human hands,
gold and silver fashioned with skill,
and likenesses of animals,
or a useless stone, the work of an ancient hand.

123

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 124

11 A skilled woodcutter may saw down a tree easy to handle
and skillfully strip off all its bark,
and then with pleasing workmanship
make a useful vessel that serves life's needs,
12 and burn the cast-off pieces of his work
to prepare his food, and eat his fill.
13 But a cast-off piece from among them, useful for nothing,
a stick crooked and full of knots,
he takes and carves with care in his leisure,
and shapes it with skill gained in idleness;
he forms it in the likeness of a human being,
14 or makes it like some worthless animal,
giving it a coat of red paint and coloring its surface red
and covering every blemish in it with paint;
15 then he makes a suitable niche for it,
and sets it in the wall, and fastens it there with iron.
16 He takes thought for it, so that it may not fall,
because he knows that it cannot help itself,
for it is only an image and has need of help.
17 When he prays about possessions and his marriage and children,
he is not ashamed to address a lifeless thing.
18 For health he appeals to a thing that is weak;
for life he prays to a thing that is dead;
for aid he entreats a thing that is utterly inexperienced;
for a prosperous journey, a thing that cannot take a step;
19 for money-making and work and success with his hands
he asks strength of a thing whose hands have no strength.
[Wisdom of Solomon 14]
1 Again, one preparing to sail and about to voyage over raging waves
calls upon a piece of wood more fragile than the ship that carries
him.
2 For it was desire for gain that planned that vessel,
and wisdom was the artisan who built it;
3 but it is your providence, O Father, that steers its course,
because you have given it a path in the sea,
and a safe way through the waves,

124

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 125

4 showing that you can save from every danger,
so that even a person who lacks skill may put to sea.
5 It is your will that works of your wisdom should not be without
effect; therefore people trust their lives even to the smallest
piece of wood, and passing through the billows on a raft they
come safely to land.
6 For even in the beginning, when arrogant giants were perishing,
the hope of the world took refuge on a raft,
and guided by your hand left to the world the seed of a new
generation.
7 For blessed is the wood by which righteousness comes.
8 But the idol made with hands is accursed, and so is the one who
made it — he for having made it, and the perishable thing
because it was named a god.
9 For equally hateful to God are the ungodly and their ungodliness;
10 for what was done will be punished together with the one who
did it.
11 Therefore there will be a visitation also upon the heathen idols,
because, though part of what God created, they became an
abomination, snares for human souls and a trap for the feet of
the foolish.
Idols are the invention of human vanity
12 For the idea of making idols was the beginning of fornication,
and the invention of them was the corruption of life;
13 for they did not exist from the beginning,
nor will they last forever.
14 For through human vanity they entered the world,
and therefore their speedy end has been planned.
15 For a father, consumed with grief at an untimely bereavement,
made an image of his child, who had been suddenly taken from
him; he now honored as a god what was once a dead human
being, and handed on to his dependents secret rites and
initiations.

125

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 126

16 Then the ungodly custom, grown strong with time, was kept as a
law, and at the command of monarchs carved images were
worshiped.
17 When people could not honor monarchs in their presence, since they
lived at a distance, they imagined their appearance far away,
and made a visible image of the king whom they honored,
so that by their zeal they might flatter the absent one as though
present.
18 Then the ambition of the artisan impelled
even those who did not know the king to intensify their worship.
19 For he, perhaps wishing to please his ruler,
skillfully forced the likeness to take more beautiful form,
20 and the multitude, attracted by the charm of his work,
now regarded as an object of worship the one whom shortly
before they had honored as a human being.
21 And this became a hidden trap for humankind,
because people, in bondage to misfortune or to royal authority,
bestowed on objects of stone or wood the name that ought not
to be shared.
The repercussions of idolatry
22 Then it was not enough for them to err about the knowledge of
God, but though living in great strife due to ignorance,
they call such great evils peace.
23 For whether they kill children in their initiations, or celebrate secret
mysteries, or hold frenzied revels with strange customs,
24 they no longer keep either their lives or their marriages pure,
but they either treacherously kill one another, or grieve one
another by adultery,
25 and all is a raging riot of blood and murder, theft and deceit,
corruption, faithlessness, tumult, perjury,
26 confusion over what is good, forgetfulness of favors,
defiling of souls, sexual perversion,
disorder in marriages, adultery, and debauchery.
27 For the worship of idols not to be named
is the beginning and cause and end of every evil.

126

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 127

28 For their worshipers either rave in exultation,
or prophesy lies, or live unrighteously, or readily commit perjury;
29 for because they trust in lifeless idols
they swear wicked oaths and expect to suffer no harm.
30 But just penalties will overtake them on two counts:
because they thought wrongly about God in devoting themselves
to idols, and because in deceit they swore unrighteously through
contempt for holiness.
31 For it is not the power of the things by which people swear,
but the just penalty for those who sin,
that always pursues the transgression of the unrighteous.
[Wisdom of Solomon 15]
The benefits of true worship
1 But you, our God, are kind and true,
patient, and ruling all things in mercy.
2 For even if we sin we are yours, knowing your power;
but we will not sin, because we know that you acknowledge
us as yours.
3 For to know you is complete righteousness,
and to know your power is the root of immortality.
4 For neither has the evil intent of human art misled us,
nor the fruitless toil of painters,
a figure stained with varied colors,
5 whose appearance arouses yearning in fools,
so that they desire the lifeless form of a dead image.
6 Lovers of evil things and fit for such objects of hope
are those who either make or desire or worship them.

127

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 128

The fabrication of idols
7 A potter kneads the soft earth
and laboriously molds each vessel for our service,
fashioning out of the same clay
both the vessels that serve clean uses
and those for contrary uses, making all alike;
but which shall be the use of each of them
the worker in clay decides.
8 With misspent toil, these workers form a futile god from the same
clay — these mortals who were made of earth a short time
before and after a little while go to the earth from which all
mortals are taken, when the time comes to return the souls that
were borrowed.
9 But the workers are not concerned that mortals are destined to die
or that their life is brief,
but they compete with workers in gold and silver,
and imitate workers in copper;
and they count it a glorious thing to mold counterfeit gods.
10 Their heart is ashes, their hope is cheaper than dirt,
and their lives are of less worth than clay,
11 because they failed to know the one who formed them
and inspired them with active souls
and breathed a living spirit into them.
12 But they considered our existence an idle game,
and life a festival held for profit,
for they say one must get money however one can, even by
base means.
13 For these persons, more than all others, know that they sin
when they make from earthy matter fragile vessels and
carved images.
14 But most foolish, and more miserable than an infant,
are all the enemies who oppressed your people.

128

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 129

15 For they thought that all their heathen idols were gods,
though these have neither the use of their eyes to see with,
nor nostrils with which to draw breath,
nor ears with which to hear,
nor fingers to feel with,
and their feet are of no use for walking.
16 For a human being made them,
and one whose spirit is borrowed formed them;
for none can form gods that are like themselves.
17 People are mortal, and what they make with lawless hands is dead;
for they are better than the objects they worship,
since they have life, but the idols never had.
18 Moreover, they worship even the most hateful animals,
which are worse than all others when judged by their lack of
intelligence;
19 and even as animals they are not so beautiful in appearance that
one would desire them, but they have escaped both the praise of
God and his blessing.
[Wisdom of Solomon 16]
The second contrast
1 Therefore those people were deservedly punished through such
creatures, and were tormented by a multitude of animals.
2 Instead of this punishment you showed kindness to your people,
and you prepared quails to eat,
a delicacy to satisfy the desire of appetite;
3 in order that those people, when they desired food,
might lose the least remnant of appetite
because of the odious creatures sent to them,
while your people, after suffering want a short time,
might partake of delicacies.
4 For it was necessary that upon those oppressors inescapable want
should come, while to these others it was merely shown how
their enemies were being tormented.

129

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 130

The third contrast
5 For when the terrible rage of wild animals came upon your people
and they were being destroyed by the bites of writhing serpents,
your wrath did not continue to the end;
6 they were troubled for a little while as a warning,
and received a symbol of deliverance to remind them of your
law's command.
7 For the one who turned toward it was saved, not by the thing that
was beheld, but by you, the Savior of all.
8 And by this also you convinced our enemies
that it is you who deliver from every evil.
9 For they were killed by the bites of locusts and flies,
and no healing was found for them,
because they deserved to be punished by such things.
10 But your children were not conquered even by the fangs of
venomous serpents, for your mercy came to their help and healed
them.
11 To remind them of your oracles they were bitten,
and then were quickly delivered,
so that they would not fall into deep forgetfulness
and become unresponsive to your kindness.
12 For neither herb nor poultice cured them,
but it was your word, O Lord, that heals all people.
13 For you have power over life and death;
you lead mortals down to the gates of Hades and back again.
14 A person in wickedness kills another,
but cannot bring back the departed spirit,
or set free the imprisoned soul.
The fourth contrast
15 To escape from your hand is impossible;
16 for the ungodly, refusing to know you,
were flogged by the strength of your arm,
pursued by unusual rains and hail and relentless storms,
and utterly consumed by fire.

130

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 131

17 For — most incredible of all — in water, which quenches all things,
the fire had still greater effect,
for the universe defends the righteous.
18 At one time the flame was restrained,
so that it might not consume the creatures sent against the
ungodly, but that seeing this they might know
that they were being pursued by the judgment of God;
19 and at another time even in the midst of water it burned more
intensely than fire, to destroy the crops of the unrighteous land.
20 Instead of these things you gave your people food of angels,
and without their toil you supplied them from heaven with bread
ready to eat, providing every pleasure and suited to every taste.
21 For your sustenance manifested your sweetness toward your
children; and the bread, ministering to the desire of the one who
took it, was changed to suit everyone's liking.
22 Snow and ice withstood fire without melting,
so that they might know that the crops of their enemies
were being destroyed by the fire that blazed in the hail
and flashed in the showers of rain;
23 whereas the fire, in order that the righteous might be fed,
even forgot its native power.
24 For creation, serving you who made it,
exerts itself to punish the unrighteous,
and in kindness relaxes on behalf of those who trust in you.
25 Therefore at that time also, changed into all forms,
it served your all-nourishing bounty,
according to the desire of those who had need,
26 so that your children, whom you loved, O Lord, might learn
that it is not the production of crops that feeds humankind
but that your word sustains those who trust in you.
27 For what was not destroyed by fire
was melted when simply warmed by a fleeting ray of the sun,
28 to make it known that one must rise before the sun to give you
thanks, and must pray to you at the dawning of the light;
29 for the hope of an ungrateful person will melt like wintry frost,
and flow away like waste water.

131

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 132

[Wisdom of Solomon 17]
The fifth contrast
1 Great are your judgments and hard to describe;
therefore uninstructed souls have gone astray.
2 For when lawless people supposed that they held the holy nation in
their power, they themselves lay as captives of darkness and
prisoners of long night, shut in under their roofs, exiles from
eternal providence.
3 For thinking that in their secret sins they were unobserved
behind a dark curtain of forgetfulness,
they were scattered, terribly alarmed,
and appalled by specters.
4 For not even the inner chamber that held them protected them from
fear, but terrifying sounds rang out around them,
and dismal phantoms with gloomy faces appeared.
5 And no power of fire was able to give light,
nor did the brilliant flames of the stars
avail to illumine that hateful night.
6 Nothing was shining through to them
except a dreadful, self-kindled fire,
and in terror they deemed the things that they saw
to be worse than that unseen appearance.
7 The delusions of their magic art lay humbled,
and their boasted wisdom was scornfully rebuked.
8 For those who promised to drive off the fears and disorders of a sick
soul were sick themselves with ridiculous fear.
9 For even if nothing disturbing frightened them,
yet, scared by the passing of wild animals and the hissing of
snakes
10 they perished in trembling fear,
refusing to look even at the air, though it nowhere could be
avoided.
11 For wickedness is a cowardly thing, condemned by its own testimony;
distressed by conscience, it has always exaggerated the
difficulties.

132

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 133

12 For fear is nothing but a giving up of the helps that come from
reason;
13 and hope, defeated by this inward weakness,
prefers ignorance of what causes the torment.
14 But throughout the night, which was really powerless
and which came upon them from the recesses of powerless
Hades, they all slept the same sleep,
15 and now were driven by monstrous specters,
and now were paralyzed by their souls' surrender;
for sudden and unexpected fear overwhelmed them.
16 And whoever was there fell down,
and thus was kept shut up in a prison not made of iron;
17 for whether they were farmers or shepherds
or workers who toiled in the wilderness,
they were seized, and endured the inescapable fate;
for with one chain of darkness they all were bound.
18 Whether there came a whistling wind,
or a melodious sound of birds in wide-spreading branches,
or the rhythm of violently rushing water,
19 or the harsh crash of rocks hurled down,
or the unseen running of leaping animals,
or the sound of the most savage roaring beasts,
or an echo thrown back from a hollow of the mountains,
it paralyzed them with terror.
20 For the whole world was illumined with brilliant light,
and went about its work unhindered,
21 while over those people alone heavy night was spread,
an image of the darkness that was destined to receive them;
but still heavier than darkness were they to themselves.
[Wisdom of Solomon 18]
1 But for your holy ones there was very great light.
Their enemies heard their voices but did not see their forms,
and counted them happy for not having suffered,
2 and were thankful that your holy ones, though previously wronged,
were doing them no injury; and they begged their pardon for
having been at variance with them.

133

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 134

3 Therefore you provided a flaming pillar of fire
as a guide for your people's unknown journey,
and a harmless sun for their glorious wandering.
4 For their enemies deserved to be deprived of light and imprisoned in
darkness, those who had kept your children imprisoned,
through whom the imperishable light of the law was to be given
to the world.
The sixth contrast
5 When they had resolved to kill the infants of your holy ones,
and one child had been abandoned and rescued,
you in punishment took away a multitude of their children;
and you destroyed them all together by a mighty flood.
6 That night was made known beforehand to our ancestors,
so that they might rejoice in sure knowledge of the oaths in
which they trusted.
7 The deliverance of the righteous and the destruction of their enemies
were expected by your people.
8 For by the same means by which you punished our enemies
you called us to yourself and glorified us.
9 For in secret the holy children of good people offered sacrifices,
and with one accord agreed to the divine law,
so that the saints would share alike the same things,
both blessings and dangers;
and already they were singing the praises of the ancestors.
10 But the discordant cry of their enemies echoed back,
and their piteous lament for their children was spread abroad.
11 The slave was punished with the same penalty as the master,
and the commoner suffered the same loss as the king;
12 and they all together, by the one form of death,
had corpses too many to count.
For the living were not sufficient even to bury them,
since in one instant their most valued children had been
destroyed.
13 For though they had disbelieved everything because of their magic
arts, yet, when their firstborn were destroyed, they
acknowledged your people to be God's child.

134

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 135

14 For while gentle silence enveloped all things,
and night in its swift course was now half gone,
15 your all-powerful word leaped from heaven, from the royal throne,
into the midst of the land that was doomed, a stern warrior
16 carrying the sharp sword of your authentic command,
and stood and filled all things with death,
and touched heaven while standing on the earth.
17 Then at once apparitions in dreadful dreams greatly troubled them,
and unexpected fears assailed them;
18 and one here and another there, hurled down half dead,
made known why they were dying;
19 for the dreams that disturbed them forewarned them of this,
so that they might not perish without knowing why they
suffered.
20 The experience of death touched also the righteous,
and a plague came upon the multitude in the desert,
but the wrath did not long continue.
21 For a blameless man was quick to act as their champion;
he brought forward the shield of his ministry,
prayer and propitiation by incense;
he withstood the anger and put an end to the disaster,
showing that he was your servant.
22 He conquered the wrath not by strength of body,
not by force of arms,
but by his word he subdued the avenger,
appealing to the oaths and covenants given to our ancestors.
23 For when the dead had already fallen on one another in heaps,
he intervened and held back the wrath,
and cut off its way to the living.
24 For on his long robe the whole world was depicted,
and the glories of the ancestors were engraved on the four rows
of stones, and your majesty was on the diadem upon his head.
25 To these the destroyer yielded, these he feared;
for merely to test the wrath was enough.

135

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 136

[Wisdom of Solomon 19]
The seventh contrast
1 But the ungodly were assailed to the end by pitiless anger,
for God knew in advance even their future actions:
2 how, though they themselves had permitted your people to depart
and hastily sent them out,
they would change their minds and pursue them.
3 For while they were still engaged in mourning,
and were lamenting at the graves of their dead,
they reached another foolish decision,
and pursued as fugitives those whom they had begged and
compelled to leave.
4 For the fate they deserved drew them on to this end,
and made them forget what had happened,
in order that they might fill up the punishment that their
torments still lacked,
5 and that your people might experience an incredible journey,
but they themselves might meet a strange death.
6 For the whole creation in its nature was fashioned anew,
complying with your commands,
so that your children might be kept unharmed.
7 The cloud was seen overshadowing the camp,
and dry land emerging where water had stood before,
an unhindered way out of the Red Sea,
and a grassy plain out of the raging waves,
8 where those protected by your hand passed through as one nation,
after gazing on marvelous wonders.
9 For they ranged like horses,
and leaped like lambs,
praising you, O Lord, who delivered them.
10 For they still recalled the events of their sojourn,
how instead of producing animals the earth brought forth gnats,
and instead of fish the river spewed out vast numbers of frogs.
11 Afterward they saw also a new kind of birds,
when desire led them to ask for luxurious food;

136

WISDOM OF SOLOMON 137

12 for, to give them relief, quails came up from the sea.
13 The punishments did not come upon the sinners
without prior signs in the violence of thunder,
for they justly suffered because of their wicked acts;
for they practiced a more bitter hatred of strangers.
14 Others had refused to receive strangers when they came to them,
but these made slaves of guests who were their benefactors.
15 And not only so — but, while punishment of some sort will come
upon the former for having received strangers with hostility,
16 the latter, having first received them with festal celebrations,
afterward afflicted with terrible sufferings
those who had already shared the same rights.
17 They were stricken also with loss of sight —
just as were those at the door of the righteous man —
when, surrounded by yawning darkness,
all of them tried to find the way through their own doors.
18 For the elements changed places with one another,
as on a harp the notes vary the nature of the rhythm,
while each note remains the same.
This may be clearly inferred from the sight of what took place.
19 For land animals were transformed into water creatures,
and creatures that swim moved over to the land.
20 Fire even in water retained its normal power,
and water forgot its fire-quenching nature.
21 Flames, on the contrary, failed to consume
the flesh of perishable creatures that walked among them,
nor did they melt the crystalline, quick-melting kind of
heavenly food.
The concluding doxology
22 For in everything, O Lord, you have exalted and glorified your
people, and you have not neglected to help them at all times
and in all places.

137

SIRACH 138

SIRACH
(Ecclesiasticus, or the Wisdom of Jesus Son of Sirach)
Introduction
The names by which this book is known reflect something of its origin
and history. Sirach is the name of the author, Jesus son of Eleazar son
of Sirach (50.27), in Hebrew, Yeshua be El-azar ben Sira. Although the
book was highly regarded in rabbinic literature and even cited in the
Talmud, it did not achieve canonical status. The early Christian church,
however, did consider it canonical. Although originally it was titled
"The Wisdom of Jesus son of Sirach" in Greek and Old Latin
manuscripts, many manuscripts of the Latin Vulgate referred to it as
"Ecclesiasticus," that is, "the Church's book." The Protestant reformers,
in keeping with their practice of conforming the Christian Old
Testament to the book deemed canonical in the Hebrew scriptures,
relegated it to the Apocrypha.
Because the book was not canonical in Judaism, the original Hebrew
text was lost to the western world from about 400 to 1900 CE; the
book survived in Greek, Latin, Syriac, and other translations. Since
about 1900 CE fragmentary copies of the Hebrew, dating from
antiquity to the Middle Ages, have been discovered in various places:
Qumran, Masada, and the Geniza (i.e., storage room) of a medieval
Cairo synagogue. In this way two-thirds of the Hebrew text has been
recovered. The translation here is one of a critically established text,
using both Hebrew and other witnesses to the original. The reader will
occasionally find a slightly different verse numbering from that in
traditional renderings, since the NRSV follows the numbering of the
critical text edited by J. Ziegler.
Ben Sira composed his work in Jerusalem sometime before 180 BCE (see
his description in 50.1-24 of Simon II, high priest from 219-196). Thus he
wrote before the persecution of the Jews by Antiochus IV Epiphanes
138

SIRACH 139

and the ensuing Maccabean revolt (168-164 BCE). Sometime after 132
BCE (see the Prologue) his grandson translated the original Hebrew
into Greek. The grandson rightly stresses Ben Sira's profound
knowledge of Hebrew traditions (designated in the Prologue as "the
Law and the Prophets and the other books" — already the threefold
division of the Hebrew Bible was in formation).
Like the book of Proverbs, Sirach stresses characteristic wisdom
teachings: prudent speech, wealth and poverty, honesty, diligence,
choice of friends, sin and death, retribution, and wisdom itself. Unlike
Proverbs 10ff., individual proverbs are not set apart, but are
incorporated into smooth-flowing poems of some length (often 22
lines in accordance with the number of letters of the Hebrew
alphabet). The doctrine is surprisingly traditional, almost as if Job and
Ecclesiastes had never been written. Ben Sira is not unaware of the
problem of suffering (2.1-6; 11.14; 40.1-10), but he firmly believes in the
justice of divine retribution. God will reward all according to their
deserts (15.11-16.23). There is no intimation of a future life with God in
the Hebrew text as one begins to find in some Jewish literature of the
Hellenistic age (e.g., 2 Macc 7.9; Wis 5.15-16); rather, all go to Sheol, the
traditional abode of the dead (14.12-19; 38.16-23). This is the usual view
of the Hebrew Bible, where immortality is understood only in terms of
one's progeny and good name (44.13-15).
The earlier biblical wisdom literature lacks reference to Israel's sacred
history and covenantal traditions. Sirach, in contrast, reprises biblical
history in the "Hymn in Honor of Our Ancestors" (chs 44-49), and
clearly identifies the figure of Wisdom with the Torah or law (24.23).
Unlike earlier wisdom writings, Sirach is immersed in the environment
of Jerusalem Temple worship and sacrifice (35.1-12; 50.1-24).
Nevertheless, the book belongs definitely to the genre of wisdom
literature, with its stress on the lessons of experience and on the "fear
of the Lord" (1.11-30; 25.10-11; 40.25-27).
Ben Sira describes his profession as a "scribe," or scholar of the sacred
writings (39.1-11) and invites students to his school (51.23). The work's
original addresses were young men preparing for leading adult roles in
the Jewish community. This is evident in many aspects of the book,

139

SIRACH 140

including its treatment of women. The vivid portrayal of Wisdom as a
sublime woman, sometimes with erotic overtones (e.g., 14.20-27; 15.2;
and especially the Hebrew version of 51.13.30), seem particularly
designed to capture the imagination of Ben Sira's young male students.
Ben Sira's teachings about actual women are androcentric at best, as in
his advice concerning marriage (26.13-18; 36.26-31); at times he
expresses an untempered misogyny (e.g., 42.13-14).
Sirach's teachings are not arranged in a logical sequence. Reading
straight through the book from beginning to end, therefore is not
necessarily the best approach. Good places to start reading Sirach are
the two pivotal poems on personified Wisdom (1.1-30; 24.1-34; each
introduces a major collection of instructional material) and the hymn
of praise to Israel's ancestors (44.1-49.16).
The book consists of three major blocks of teaching: 1.1-23.27; 24.1-42.14;
and 42.15-50.24) In its current form these are preceded by the Prologue
and followed by concluding comments and additions (50.25-51.30).
Each of the first two collections begin with a poem of praise of
Wisdom (1.1-30; 24.1-34); the third collection consists entirely of hymns
of praise, of the creator (42.15-43.33), of Israel's ancestors (44.1-49.16),
and of the high priest Simon (50.1-24).

Sirach
THE PROLOGUE
Many great teachings have been given to us through the Law and the
Prophets and the others that followed them, and for these we should
praise Israel for instruction and wisdom. Now, those who read the
scriptures must not only themselves understand them, but must also as
lovers of learning be able through the spoken and written word to
help the outsiders. So my grandfather Jesus, who had devoted himself
especially to the reading of the Law and the Prophets and the other
books of our ancestors, and had acquired considerable proficiency in

140

SIRACH 141

them, was himself also led to write something pertaining to instruction
and wisdom, so that by becoming familiar also with his book those
who love learning might make even greater progress in living
according to the law.
You are invited therefore to read it with goodwill and attention, and
to be indulgent in cases where, despite our diligent labor in
translating, we may seem to have rendered some phrases imperfectly.
For what was originally expressed in Hebrew does not have exactly the
same sense when translated into another language. Not only this book,
but even the Law itself, the Prophecies, and the rest of the books differ
not a little when read in the original.
When I came to Egypt in the thirty-eighth year of the reign of
Euergetes and stayed for some time, I found opportunity for no little
instruction. It seemed highly necessary that I should myself devote
some diligence and labor to the translation of this book. During that
time I have applied my skill day and night to complete and publish the
book for those living abroad who wished to gain learning and are
disposed to live according to the law.
[Sirach 1]
Wisdom, God's unfathomable gift
1 All wisdom is from the Lord,
and with him it remains forever.
2 The sand of the sea, the drops of rain,
and the days of eternity — who can count them?
3 The height of heaven, the breadth of the earth,
the abyss, and wisdom — who can search them out?
4 Wisdom was created before all other things,
and prudent understanding from eternity.
5 The source of wisdom is God's word in the highest heaven,
and her ways are the eternal commandments.
6 The root of wisdom — to whom has it been revealed?
Her subtleties — who knows them?

141

SIRACH 142

7 The knowledge of wisdom — to whom was it manifested?
And her abundant experience — who has understood it?
8 There is but one who is wise, greatly to be feared,
seated upon his throne — the Lord.
9 It is he who created her;
he saw her and took her measure;
he poured her out upon all his works,
10 upon all the living according to his gift;
he lavished her upon those who love him.
Love of the Lord is glorious wisdom; to those whom he
appears he apportions her, that they may see him.
Wisdom as fear of the Lord
11 The fear of the Lord is glory and exultation,
and gladness and a crown of rejoicing.
12 The fear of the Lord delights the heart,
and gives gladness and joy and long life.
The fear of the Lord is a gift from the Lord;
also for love he makes firm paths.
13 Those who fear the Lord will have a happy end;
on the day of their death they will be blessed.
14 To fear the Lord is the beginning of wisdom;
she is created with the faithful in the womb.
15 She made among human beings an eternal foundation,
and among their descendants she will abide faithfully.
16 To fear the Lord is fullness of wisdom;
she inebriates mortals with her fruits;
17 she fills their whole house with desirable goods,
and their storehouses with her produce.
18 The fear of the Lord is the crown of wisdom,
making peace and perfect health to flourish.
Both are gifts of God for peace;
glory opens out for those who love him.
He saw her and took her measure.

142

SIRACH 143

19 She rained down knowledge and discerning comprehension,
and she heightened the glory of those who held her fast.
20 To fear the Lord is the root of wisdom,
and her branches are long life.
21 The fear of the Lord drives away sins;
and where it abides, it will turn away all anger.
22 Unjust anger cannot be justified,
for anger tips the scale to one's ruin.
23 Those who are patient stay calm until the right moment,
and then cheerfulness comes back to them.
24 They hold back their words until the right moment;
then the lips of many tell of their good sense.
25 In the treasuries of wisdom are wise sayings,
but godliness is an abomination to a sinner.
26 If you desire wisdom, keep the commandments,
and the Lord will lavish her upon you.
27 For the fear of the Lord is wisdom and discipline,
fidelity and humility are his delight.
28 Do not disobey the fear of the Lord;
do not approach him with a divided mind.
29 Do not be a hypocrite before others,
and keep watch over your lips.
30 Do not exalt yourself, or you may fall
and bring dishonor upon yourself.
The Lord will reveal your secrets
and overthrow you before the whole congregation,
because you did not come in the fear of the Lord,
and your heart was full of deceit.

143

SIRACH 144

[Sirach 2]
Trust in God
1 My child, when you come to serve the Lord,
prepare yourself for testing.
2 Set your heart right and be steadfast,
and do not be impetuous in time of calamity.
3 Cling to him and do not depart,
so that your last days may be prosperous.
4 Accept whatever befalls you,
and in times of humiliation be patient.
5 For gold is tested in the fire,
and those found acceptable, in the furnace of humiliation.
In sickness and poverty put your trust in him.
6 Trust in him, and he will help you;
make your ways straight, and hope in him.
7 You who fear the Lord, wait for his mercy;
do not stray, or else you may fall.
8 You who fear the Lord, trust in him,
and your reward will not be lost.
9 You who fear the Lord, hope for good things,
for lasting joy and mercy. For his reward is
an everlasting gift with joy.
10 Consider the generations of old and see:
has anyone trusted in the Lord and been disappointed?
Or has anyone persevered in the fear of the Lord and
been forsaken?
Or has anyone called upon him and been neglected?
11 For the Lord is compassionate and merciful;
he forgives sins and saves in time of distress.
12 Woe to timid hearts and to slack hands,
and to the sinner who walks a double path!
13 Woe to the fainthearted who have no trust!
Therefore they will have no shelter.
14 Woe to you who have lost your nerve!
What will you do when the LORD's reckoning comes?

144

SIRACH 145

15 Those who fear the Lord do not disobey his words,
and those who love him keep his ways.
16 Those who fear the Lord seek to please him,
and those who love him are filled with his law.
17 Those who fear the Lord prepare their hearts,
and humble themselves before him.
18 Let us fall into the hands of the Lord,
but not into the hands of mortals;
for equal to his majesty is his mercy,
and equal to his name are his works.
[Sirach 3]
Honor of parents
1 Listen to me your father, O children;
act accordingly, that you may be kept in safety.
2 For the Lord honors a father above his children,
and he confirms a mother's right over her children.
3 Those who honor their father atone for sins,
4 and those who respect their mother are like those who lay
up treasure.
5 Those who honor their father will have joy in their own children,
and when they pray they will be heard.
6 Those who respect their father will have long life,
and those who honor their mother obey the Lord;
7 Those who fear the Lord honor their father;
they will serve their parents as their masters.
8 Honor your father by word and deed,
that his blessing may come upon you.
9 For a father's blessing strengthens the houses of the children,
but a mother's curse uproots their foundations.
10 Do not glorify yourself by dishonoring your father,
for your father's dishonor is no glory to you.
11 The glory of one's father is one's own glory,
and it is a disgrace for children not to respect their mother.

145

SIRACH 146

12 My child, help your father in his old age,
and do not grieve him as long as he lives;
13 even if his mind fails, be patient with him;
because you have all your faculties do not despise him.
14 For kindness to a father will not be forgotten,
and will be credited to you against your sins;
15 in the day of your distress it will be remembered in your favor;
like frost in fair weather, your sins will melt away.
16 Whoever forsakes a father is like a blasphemer,
and whoever angers a mother is cursed by the Lord.
Humility
17 My child, perform your tasks with humility;
then you will be loved by those whom God accepts.
18 The greater you are, the more you must humble yourself;
so you will find favor in the sight of the Lord.
19 Many are lofty and renowned,
but to the humble he reveals his secrets.
20 For great is the might of the Lord;
but by the humble he is glorified.
21 Neither seek what is too difficult for you,
nor investigate what is beyond your power.
22 Reflect upon what you have been commanded,
for what is hidden is not your concern.
23 Do not meddle in matters that are beyond you,
for more than you can understand has been shown you.
24 For their conceit has led many astray,
and wrong opinion has impaired their judgment.
Stubbornness
25 Without eyes there is no light;
without knowledge there is no wisdom.
26 A stubborn mind will fare badly at the end,
and whoever loves danger will perish in it.
27 A stubborn mind will be burdened by troubles,
and the sinner adds sin to sins.

146

SIRACH 147

28 When calamity befalls the proud, there is no healing,
for an evil plant has taken root in him.
29 The mind of the intelligent appreciates proverbs,
and an attentive ear is the desire of the wise.
Care for the Poor
30 As water extinguishes a blazing fire,
so almsgiving atones for sin.
31 Those who repay favors give thought to the future;
when they fall they will find support.
[Sirach 4]
1 My child, do not cheat the poor of their living,
and do not keep needy eyes waiting.
2 Do not grieve the hungry,
or anger one in need.
3 Do not add to the troubles of the desperate,
or delay giving to the needy.
4 Do not reject a suppliant in distress,
or turn your face away from the poor.
5 Do not avert your eye from the needy,
and give no one reason to curse you;
6 for if in bitterness of soul some should curse you,
their Creator will hear their prayer.
7 Endear yourself to the congregation;
bow your head low to the great.
8 Give a hearing to the poor,
and return their greeting politely.
9 Rescue the oppressed from the oppressor;
and do not be hesitant in giving a verdict.
10 Be a father to orphans,
and be like a husband to their mother;
you will then be like a son of the Most High,
and he will love you more than does your mother.

147

SIRACH 148

Wisdom's rewards and trials
11 Wisdom teaches her children
and gives help to those who seek her.
12 Whoever loves her loves life,
and those who seek her from early morning are filled with joy.
13 Whoever holds her fast inherits glory,
and the Lord blesses the place she enters.
14 Those who serve her minister to the Holy One;
the Lord loves those who love her.
15 Those who obey her will judge the nations,
and all who listen to her will live secure.
16 If they remain faithful, they will inherit her;
their descendants will also obtain her.
17 For at first she will walk with them on tortuous paths;
she will bring fear and dread upon them,
and will torment them by her discipline
until she trusts them,
and she will test them with her ordinances.
18 Then she will come straight back to them again and gladden them,
and will reveal her secrets to them.
19 If they go astray she will forsake them,
and hand them over to their ruin.
On reticence, true and false
20 Watch for the opportune time, and beware of evil,
and do not be ashamed to be yourself.
21 For there is a shame that leads to sin,
and there is a shame that is glory and favor.
22 Do not show partiality, to your own harm,
or deference, to your downfall.
23 Do not refrain from speaking at the proper moment,
and do not hide your wisdom.
24 For wisdom becomes known through speech,
and education through the words of the tongue.
25 Never speak against the truth,
but be ashamed of your ignorance.

148

SIRACH 149

26 Do not be ashamed to confess your sins,
and do not try to stop the current of a river.
27 Do not subject yourself to a fool,
or show partiality to a ruler.
28 Fight to the death for truth,
and the Lord God will fight for you.
29 Do not be reckless in your speech,
or sluggish and remiss in your deeds.
30 Do not be like a lion in your home,
or suspicious of your servants.
31 Do not let your hand be stretched out to receive
and closed when it is time to give.
[Sirach 5]
Against presumption; false reliance on wealth
1 Do not rely on your wealth,
or say, "I have enough."
2 Do not follow your inclination and strength
in pursuing the desires of your heart.
3 Do not say, "Who can have power over me?"
for the Lord will surely punish you.
4 Do not say, "I sinned, yet what has happened to me?"
for the Lord is slow to anger.
5 Do not be so confident of forgiveness
that you add sin to sin.
6 Do not say, "His mercy is great,
he will forgive the multitude of my sins,"
for both mercy and wrath are with him,
and his anger will rest on sinners.
7 Do not delay to turn back to the Lord,
and do not postpone it from day to day;
for suddenly the wrath of the Lord will come upon you,
and at the time of punishment you will perish.
8 Do not depend on dishonest wealth,
for it will not benefit you on the day of calamity.

149

SIRACH 150

Honesty and self-control
9 Do not winnow in every wind,
or follow every path, so it is with the double-tongued sinner.
10 Stand firm for what you know,
and let your speech be consistent.
11 Be quick to hear,
but deliberate in answering.
12 If you know what to say, answer your neighbor;
but if not, put your hand over your mouth.
13 Honor and dishonor come from speaking,
and the tongue of mortals may be their downfall.
14 Do not be called double-tongued
and do not lay traps with your tongue;
for shame comes to the thief,
and severe condemnation to the double-tongued.
15 In great and small matters cause no harm,
[Sirach 6]
1 and do not become an enemy instead of a friend;
for a bad name incurs shame and reproach;
so it is with the double-tongued sinner.
2 Do not fall into the grip of passion,
or you may be torn apart as by a bull.
3 Your leaves will be devoured and your fruit destroyed,
and you will be left like a withered tree.
4 Evil passion destroys those who have it,
and makes them the laughingstock of their enemies.
True and false friendship
5 Pleasant speech multiplies friends,
and a gracious tongue multiplies courtesies.
6 Let those who are friendly with you be many,
but let your advisers be one in a thousand.

150

SIRACH 151

7 When you gain friends, gain them through testing,
and do not trust them hastily.
8 For there are friends who are such when it suits them,
but they will not stand by you in time of trouble.
9 And there are friends who change into enemies,
and tell of the quarrel to your disgrace.
10 And there are friends who sit at your table,
but they will not stand by you in time of trouble.
11 When you are prosperous, they become your second self,
and lord it over your servants;
12 but if you are brought low, they turn against you,
and hide themselves from you.
13 Keep away from your enemies,
and be on guard with your friends.
14 Faithful friends are a sturdy shelter:
whoever finds one has found a treasure.
15 Faithful friends are beyond price;
no amount can balance their worth.
16 Faithful friends are life-saving medicine;
and those who fear the Lord will find them.
17 Those who fear the Lord direct their friendship aright,
for as they are, so are their neighbors also.
Wisdom's discipline
18 My child, from your youth choose discipline,
and when you have gray hair you will still find wisdom.
19 Come to her like one who plows and sows,
and wait for her good harvest.
For when you cultivate her you will toil but little,
and soon you will eat of her produce.
20 She seems very harsh to the undisciplined;
fools cannot remain with her.
21 She will be like a heavy stone to test them,
and they will not delay in casting her aside.
22 For wisdom is like her name;
she is not readily perceived by many.

151

SIRACH 152

23 Listen, my child, and accept my judgment;
do not reject my counsel.
24 Put your feet into her fetters,
and your neck into her collar.
25 Bend your shoulders and carry her,
and do not fret under her bonds.
26 Come to her with all your soul,
and keep her ways with all your might.
27 Search out and seek, and she will become known to you;
and when you get hold of her, do not let her go.
28 For at last you will find the rest she gives,
and she will be changed into joy for you.
29 Then her fetters will become for you a strong defense,
and her collar a glorious robe.
30 Her yoke is a golden ornament,
and her bonds a purple cord.
31 You will wear her like a glorious robe,
and put her on like a splendid crown.
32 If you are willing, my child, you can be disciplined,
and if you apply yourself you will become clever.
33 If you love to listen you will gain knowledge,
and if you pay attention you will become wise.
34 Stand in the company of the elders.
Who is wise? Attach yourself to such a one.
35 Be ready to listen to every godly discourse,
and let no wise proverbs escape you.
36 If you see an intelligent person, rise early to visit him;
let your foot wear out his doorstep.
37 Reflect on the statutes of the Lord,
and meditate at all times on his commandments.
It is he who will give insight to your mind,
and your desire for wisdom will be granted.

152

SIRACH 153

[Sirach 7]
Ethical conduct
1 Do no evil, and evil will never overtake you.
2 Stay away from wrong, and it will turn away from you.
3 Do not sow in the furrows of injustice,
and you will not reap a sevenfold crop.
4 Do not seek from the Lord high office,
or the seat of honor from the king.
5 Do not assert your righteousness before the Lord,
or display your wisdom before the king.
6 Do not seek to become a judge,
or you may be unable to root out injustice;
you may be partial to the powerful,
and so mar your integrity.
7 Commit no offense against the public,
and do not disgrace yourself among the people.
8 Do not commit a sin twice;
not even for one will you go unpunished.
9 Do not say, "He will consider the great number of my gifts,
and when I make an offering to the Most High God, he will
accept it."
10 Do not grow weary when you pray;
do not neglect to give alms.
11 Do not ridicule a person who is embittered in spirit,
for there is One who humbles and exalts.
12 Do not devise a lie against your brother,
or do the same to a friend.
13 Refuse to utter any lie,
for it is a habit that results in no good.
14 Do not babble in the assembly of the elders,
and do not repeat yourself when you pray.
15 Do not hate hard labor
or farm work, which was created by the Most High.

153

SIRACH 154

16 Do not enroll in the ranks of sinners;
remember that retribution does not delay.
17 Humble yourself to the utmost,
for the punishment of the ungodly is fire and worms.
Authority in the household
18 Do not exchange a friend for money,
or a real brother for the gold of Ophir.
19 Do not dismiss a wise and good wife,
for her charm is worth more than gold.
20 Do not abuse slaves who work faithfully,
or hired laborers who devote themselves to their task.
21 Let your soul love intelligent slaves;
do not withhold from them their freedom.
22 Do you have cattle? Look after them;
if they are profitable to you, keep them.
23 Do you have children? Discipline them,
and make them obedient from their youth.
24 Do you have daughters? Be concerned for their chastity,
and do not show yourself too indulgent with them.
25 Give a daughter in marriage, and you complete a great task;
but give her to a sensible man.
26 Do you have a wife who pleases you? Do not divorce her;
but do not trust yourself to one whom you detest.
27 With all your heart honor your father,
and do not forget the birth pangs of your mother.
28 Remember that it was of your parents you were born;
how can you repay what they have given to you?
Obligations to priests and to the poor
29 With all your soul fear the Lord,
and revere his priests.
30 With all your might love your Maker,
and do not neglect his ministers.

154

SIRACH 155

31 Fear the Lord and honor the priest,
and give him his portion, as you have been commanded:
the first fruits, the guilt offering, the gift of the shoulders,
the sacrifice of sanctification, and the first fruits of the
holy things.
32 Stretch out your hand to the poor,
so that your blessing may be complete.
33 Give graciously to all the living;
do not withhold kindness even from the dead.
34 Do not avoid those who weep,
but mourn with those who mourn.
35 Do not hesitate to visit the sick,
because for such deeds you will be loved.
36 In all you do, remember the end of your life,
and then you will never sin.
[Sirach 8]
Caution in relationships
1 Do not contend with the powerful,
or you may fall into their hands.
2 Do not quarrel with the rich,
in case their resources outweigh yours;
for gold has ruined many,
and has perverted the minds of kings.
3 Do not argue with the loud of mouth,
and do not heap wood on their fire.
4 Do not make fun of one who is ill-bred,
or your ancestors may be insulted.
5 Do not reproach one who is turning away from sin;
remember that we all deserve punishment.
6 Do not disdain one who is old,
for some of us are also growing old.
7 Do not rejoice over anyone's death;
remember that we must all die.

155

SIRACH 156

8 Do not slight the discourse of the sages,
but busy yourself with their maxims;
because from them you will learn discipline
and how to serve princes.
9 Do not ignore the discourse of the aged,
for they themselves learned from their parents;
from them you learn how to understand
and to give an answer when the need arises.
10 Do not kindle the coals of sinners,
or you may be burned in their flaming fire.
11 Do not let the insolent bring you to your feet,
or they may lie in ambush against your words.
12 Do not lend to one who is stronger than you;
but if you do lend anything, count it as a loss.
13 Do not give surety beyond your means;
but if you give surety, be prepared to pay.
14 Do not go to law against a judge,
for the decision will favor him because of his standing.
15 Do not go traveling with the reckless,
or they will be burdensome to you;
for they will act as they please,
and through their folly you will perish with them.
16 Do not pick a fight with the quick-tempered,
and do not journey with them through lonely country,
because bloodshed means nothing to them,
and where no help is at hand, they will strike you down.
17 Do not consult with fools,
for they cannot keep a secret.
18 In the presence of strangers do nothing that is to be kept secret,
for you do not know what they will divulge.
19 Do not reveal your thoughts to anyone,
or you may drive away your happiness.

156

SIRACH 157

[Sirach 9]
Warnings about women
1 Do not be jealous of the wife of your bosom,
or you will teach her an evil lesson to your own hurt.
2 Do not give yourself to a woman
and let her trample down your strength.
3 Do not go near a loose woman,
or you will fall into her snares.
4 Do not dally with a singing girl,
or you will be caught by her tricks.
5 Do not look intently at a virgin,
or you may stumble and incur penalties for her.
6 Do not give yourself to prostitutes,
or you may lose your inheritance.
7 Do not look around in the streets of a city,
or wander about in its deserted sections.
8 Turn away your eyes from a shapely woman,
and do not gaze at beauty belonging to another;
many have been seduced by a woman's beauty,
and by it passion is kindled like a fire.
9 Never dine with another man's wife,
or revel with her at wine;
or your heart may turn aside to her,
and in blood you may be plunged into destruction.
Friends and associates
10 Do not abandon old friends,
for new ones cannot equal them.
A new friend is like new wine;
when it has aged, you can drink it with pleasure.
11 Do not envy the success of sinners,
for you do not know what their end will be like.
12 Do not delight in what pleases the ungodly;
remember that they will not be held guiltless all their lives.

157

SIRACH 158

13 Keep far from those who have power to kill,
and you will not be haunted by the fear of death.
But if you approach them, make no misstep,
or they may rob you of your life.
Know that you are stepping among snares,
and that you are walking on the city battlements.
14 As much as you can, aim to know your neighbors,
and consult with the wise.
15 Let your conversation be with intelligent people,
and let all your discussion be about the law of the Most High.
16 Let the righteous be your dinner companions,
and let your glory be in the fear of the Lord.
Concerning Rulers
17 A work is praised for the skill of the artisan;
so a people's leader is proved wise by his words.
18 The loud of mouth are feared in their city,
and the one who is reckless in speech is hated.
[Sirach 10]
1 A wise magistrate educates his people,
and the rule of an intelligent person is well ordered.
2 As the people's judge is, so are his officials;
as the ruler of the city is, so are all its inhabitants.
3 An undisciplined king ruins his people,
but a city becomes fit to live in through the understanding
of its rulers.
4 The government of the earth is in the hand of the Lord,
and over it he will raise up the right leader for the time.
5 Human success is in the hand of the Lord,
and it is he who confers honor upon the lawgiver.

158

SIRACH 159

Concerning arrogance and pride
6 Do not get angry with your neighbor for every injury,
and do not resort to acts of insolence.
7 Arrogance is hateful to the Lord and to mortals,
and injustice is outrageous to both.
8 Sovereignty passes from nation to nation
on account of injustice and insolence and wealth.
9 How can dust and ashes be proud?
Even in life the human body decays.
Nothing is more wicked than one who loves money,
for such a person puts his own soul up for sale.
10 A long illness baffles the physician;
the king of today will die tomorrow.
11 For when one is dead
he inherits maggots and vermin and worms.
12 The beginning of human pride is to forsake the Lord;
the heart has withdrawn from its Maker.
13 For the beginning of pride is sin,
and the one who clings to it pours out abominations.
Therefore the Lord brings upon them unheard-of calamities,
and destroys them completely.
14 The Lord overthrows the thrones of rulers,
and enthrones the lowly in their place.
15 The Lord plucks up the roots of the nations,
and plants the humble in their place.
16 The Lord lays waste the lands of the nations,
and destroys them to the foundations of the earth.
17 He removes some of them and destroys them,
and erases the memory of them from the earth.
18 Pride was not created for human beings,
or violent anger for those born of women.

159

SIRACH 160

True honor is compatible with humility
19 Whose offspring are worthy of honor?
Human offspring.
Whose offspring are worthy of honor?
Those who fear the Lord.
Whose offspring are unworthy of honor?
Human offspring.
Whose offspring are unworthy of honor?
Those who break the commandments.
20 Among family members their leader is worthy of honor,
but those who fear the Lord are worthy of honor in his eyes.
21 The fear of the Lord is the beginning of acceptance;
obduracy and pride are the beginning of rejection.
22 The rich, and the eminent, and the poor —
their glory is the fear of the Lord.
23 It is not right to despise one who is intelligent but poor,
and it is not proper to honor one who is sinful.
24 The prince and the judge and the ruler are honored,
but none of them is greater than the one who fears the Lord.
25 Free citizens will serve a wise servant,
and an intelligent person will not complain.
26 Do not make a display of your wisdom when you do your work,
and do not boast when you are in need.
27 Better is the worker who has goods in plenty
than the boaster who lacks bread.
28 My child, honor yourself with humility,
and give yourself the esteem you deserve.
29 Who will acquit those who condemn themselves?
And who will honor those who dishonor themselves?
30 The poor are honored for their knowledge,
while the rich are honored for their wealth.
31 One who is honored in poverty, how much more in wealth!
And one dishonored in wealth, how much more in poverty!

160

SIRACH 161

[Sirach 11]
1 The wisdom of the humble lifts their heads high,
and seats them among the great.
2 Do not praise individuals for their good looks,
or loathe anyone because of appearance alone.
3 The bee is small among flying creatures,
but what it produces is the best of sweet things.
4 Do not boast about wearing fine clothes,
and do not exalt yourself when you are honored;
for the works of the Lord are wonderful,
and his works are concealed from humankind.
5 Many kings have had to sit on the ground,
but one who was never thought of has worn a crown.
6 Many rulers have been utterly disgraced,
and the honored have been handed over to others.
Against hasty and rash actions
7 Do not find fault before you investigate;
examine first, and then criticize.
8 Do not answer before you listen,
and do not interrupt when another is speaking.
9 Do not argue about a matter that does not concern you,
and do not sit with sinners when they judge a case.
Do not strive for material security
10 My child, do not busy yourself with many matters;
if you multiply activities, you will not be held blameless.
If you pursue, you will not overtake,
and by fleeing you will not escape.
11 There are those who work and struggle and hurry,
but are so much the more in want.
12 There are others who are slow and need help,
who lack strength and abound in poverty;
but the eyes of the Lord look kindly upon them;
he lifts them out of their lowly condition

161

SIRACH 162

13 and raises up their heads
to the amazement of the many.
14 Good things and bad, life and death,
poverty and wealth, come from the Lord.
15 Wisdom, understanding, and knowledge of the law come from the
Lord; affection and the ways of good works come from him.
16 Error and darkness were created with sinners;
evil grows old with those who take pride in malice.
17 The LORD's gift remains with the devout,
and his favor brings lasting success.
18 One becomes rich through diligence and self-denial,
and the reward allotted to him is this:
19 when he says, "I have found rest,
and now I shall feast on my goods!"
he does not know how long it will be
until he leaves them to others and dies.
Retribution
20 Stand by your agreement and attend to it,
and grow old in your work.
21 Do not wonder at the works of a sinner,
but trust in the Lord and keep at your job;
for it is easy in the sight of the Lord
to make the poor rich suddenly, in an instant.
22 The blessing of the Lord is the reward of the pious,
and quickly God causes his blessing to flourish.
23 Do not say, "What do I need,
and what further benefit can be mine?"
24 Do not say, "I have enough,
and what harm can come to me now?"
25 In the day of prosperity, adversity is forgotten,
and in the day of adversity, prosperity is not remembered.
26 For it is easy for the Lord on the day of death
to reward individuals according to their conduct.
27 An hour's misery makes one forget past delights,
and at the close of one's life one's deeds are revealed.

162

SIRACH 163

28 Call no one happy before his death;
by how he ends, a person becomes known.
Choosing companions
29 Do not invite everyone into your home,
for many are the tricks of the crafty.
30 Like a decoy partridge in a cage, so is the mind of the proud,
and like spies they observe your weakness;
31 for they lie in wait, turning good into evil,
and to worthy actions they attach blame.
32 From a spark many coals are kindled,
and a sinner lies in wait to shed blood.
33 Beware of scoundrels, for they devise evil,
and they may ruin your reputation forever.
34 Receive strangers into your home and they will stir up trouble
for you, and will make you a stranger to your own family.
[Sirach 12]
1 If you do good, know to whom you do it,
and you will be thanked for your good deeds.
2 Do good to the devout, and you will be repaid —
if not by them, certainly by the Most High.
3 No good comes to one who persists in evil
or to one who does not give alms.
4 Give to the devout, but do not help the sinner.
5
Do good to the humble, but do not give to the ungodly;
hold back their bread, and do not give it to them,
for by means of it they might subdue you;
then you will receive twice as much evil
for all the good you have done to them.
6 For the Most High also hates sinners
and will inflict punishment on the ungodly,
and he is keeping them for the day of their punishment.
7 Give to the one who is good, but do not help the sinner.
8 A friend is not known in prosperity,
nor is an enemy hidden in adversity.

163

SIRACH 164

9 One's enemies are friendly when one prospers,
but in adversity even one's friend disappears.
10 Never trust your enemy,
for like corrosion in copper, so is his wickedness.
11 Even if he humbles himself and walks bowed down,
take care to be on your guard against him.
Be to him like one who polishes a mirror,
to be sure it does not become completely tarnished.
12 Do not put him next to you,
or he may overthrow you and take your place.
Do not let him sit at your right hand,
or else he may try to take your own seat,
and at last you will realize the truth of my words,
and be stung by what I have said.
13 Who pities a snake charmer when he is bitten,
or all those who go near wild animals?
14 So no one pities a person who associates with a sinner
and becomes involved in the other's sins.
15 He stands by you for a while,
but if you falter, he will not be there.
16 An enemy speaks sweetly with his lips,
but in his heart he plans to throw you into a pit;
an enemy may have tears in his eyes,
but if he finds an opportunity he will never have enough of
your blood.
17 If evil comes upon you, you will find him there ahead of you;
pretending to help, he will trip you up.
18 Then he will shake his head, and clap his hands,
and whisper much, and show his true face.
[Sirach 13]
Warnings about associates
1 Whoever touches pitch gets dirty,
and whoever associates with a proud person becomes like him.

164

SIRACH 165

2 Do not lift a weight too heavy for you,
or associate with one mightier and richer than you.
How can the clay pot associate with the iron kettle?
The pot will strike against it and be smashed.
3 A rich person does wrong, and even adds insults;
a poor person suffers wrong, and must add apologies.
4 A rich person will exploit you if you can be of use to him,
but if you are in need he will abandon you.
5 If you own something, he will live with you;
he will drain your resources without a qualm.
6 When he needs you he will deceive you,
and will smile at you and encourage you;
he will speak to you kindly and say, "What do you need?"
7 He will embarrass you with his delicacies,
until he has drained you two or three times,
and finally he will laugh at you.
Should he see you afterwards, he will pass you by
and shake his head at you.
8 Take care not to be led astray
and humiliated when you are enjoying yourself.
9 When an influential person invites you, be reserved,
and he will invite you more insistently.
10 Do not be forward, or you may be rebuffed;
do not stand aloof, or you will be forgotten.
11 Do not try to treat him as an equal,
or trust his lengthy conversations;
for he will test you by prolonged talk,
and while he smiles he will be examining you.
12 Cruel are those who do not keep your secrets;
they will not spare you harm or imprisonment.
13 Be on your guard and very careful,
for you are walking about with your own downfall.
14 When you hear these things in your sleep, wake up!
During all your life love the Lord, and call on him for
your salvation.

165

SIRACH 166

Rich and poor
15 Every creature loves its like,
and every person the neighbor.
16 All living beings associate with their own kind,
and people stick close to those like themselves.
17 What does a wolf have in common with a lamb?
No more has a sinner with the devout.
18 What peace is there between a hyena and a dog?
And what peace between the rich and the poor?
19 Wild asses in the wilderness are the prey of lions;
likewise the poor are feeding grounds for the rich.
20 Humility is an abomination to the proud;
likewise the poor are an abomination to the rich.
21 When the rich person totters, he is supported by friends,
but when the humble falls, he is pushed away even by friends.
22 If the rich person slips, many come to the rescue;
he speaks unseemly words, but they justify him.
If the humble person slips, they even criticize him;
he talks sense, but is not given a hearing.
23 The rich person speaks and all are silent;
they extol to the clouds what he says.
The poor person speaks and they say, "Who is this fellow?"
And should he stumble, they even push him down.
Wealth and conscience
24 Riches are good if they are free from sin;
poverty is evil only in the opinion of the ungodly.
25 The heart changes the countenance,
either for good or for evil, and a glad heart
makes a cheerful countenance.
26 The sign of a happy heart is a cheerful face,
but to devise proverbs requires painful thinking.

166

SIRACH 167

[Sirach 14]
1 Happy are those who do not blunder with their lips,
and need not suffer remorse for sin.
2 Happy are those whose hearts do not condemn them,
and who have not given up their hope.
The proper use of wealth
3 Riches are inappropriate for a small-minded person;
and of what use is wealth to a miser?
4 What he denies himself he collects for others;
and others will live in luxury on his goods.
5 If one is mean to himself, to whom will he be generous?
He will not enjoy his own riches.
6 No one is worse than one who is grudging to himself;
this is the punishment for his meanness.
7 If ever he does good, it is by mistake;
and in the end he reveals his meanness.
8 The miser is an evil person;
he turns away and disregards people.
9 The eye of the greedy person is not satisfied with his share;
greedy injustice withers the soul.
10 A miser begrudges bread,
and it is lacking at his table.
11 My child, treat yourself well, according to your means,
and present worthy offerings to the Lord.
12 Remember that death does not tarry,
and the decree of Hades has not been shown to you.
13 Do good to friends before you die,
and reach out and give to them as much as you can.
14 Do not deprive yourself of a day's enjoyment;
do not let your share of desired good pass by you.
15 Will you not leave the fruit of your labors to another,
and what you acquired by toil to be divided by lot?
16 Give, and take, and indulge yourself,
because in Hades one cannot look for luxury.

167

SIRACH 168

17 All living beings become old like a garment,
for the decree from of old is, "You must die!"
18 Like abundant leaves on a spreading tree
that sheds some and puts forth others,
so are the generations of flesh and blood:
one dies and another is born.
19 Every work decays and ceases to exist,
and the one who made it will pass away with it.
The search for Wisdom and her blessings
20 Happy is the person who meditates on wisdom
and reasons intelligently,
21 who reflects in his heart on her ways
and ponders her secrets,
22 pursuing her like a hunter,
and lying in wait on her paths;
23 who peers through her windows
and listens at her doors;
24 who camps near her house
and fastens his tent peg to her walls;
25 who pitches his tent near her,
and so occupies an excellent lodging place;
26 who places his children under her shelter,
and lodges under her boughs;
27 who is sheltered by her from the heat,
and dwells in the midst of her glory.
[Sirach 15]
1 Whoever fears the Lord will do this,
and whoever holds to the law will obtain wisdom.
2 She will come to meet him like a mother,
and like a young bride she will welcome him.
3 She will feed him with the bread of learning,
and give him the water of wisdom to drink.
4 He will lean on her and not fall,
and he will rely on her and not be put to shame.

168

SIRACH 169

5 She will exalt him above his neighbors,
and will open his mouth in the midst of the assembly.
6 He will find gladness and a crown of rejoicing,
and will inherit an everlasting name.
7 The foolish will not obtain her,
and sinners will not see her.
8 She is far from arrogance,
and liars will never think of her.
9 Praise is unseemly on the lips of a sinner,
for it has not been sent from the Lord.
10 For in wisdom must praise be uttered,
and the Lord will make it prosper.
Human responsibility
11 Do not say, "It was the LORD's doing that I fell away";
for he does not do what he hates.
12 Do not say, "It was he who led me astray";
for he has no need of the sinful.
13 The Lord hates all abominations;
such things are not loved by those who fear him.
14 It was he who created humankind in the beginning,
and he left them in the power of their own free choice.
15 If you choose, you can keep the commandments,
and to act faithfully is a matter of your own choice.
16 He has placed before you fire and water;
stretch out your hand for whichever you choose.
17 Before each person are life and death,
and whichever one chooses will be given.
18 For great is the wisdom of the Lord;
he is mighty in power and sees everything;
19 his eyes are on those who fear him,
and he knows every human action.
20 He has not commanded anyone to be wicked,
and he has not given anyone permission to sin.

169

SIRACH 170

[Sirach 16]
The certainty of punishment for sin
1 Do not desire a multitude of worthless children,
and do not rejoice in ungodly offspring.
2 If they multiply, do not rejoice in them,
unless the fear of the Lord is in them.
3 Do not trust in their survival, or rely on their numbers;
for one can be better than a thousand,
and to die childless is better than to have ungodly children.
For you will groan in untimely mourning,
and will know of their sudden end.
4 For through one intelligent person a city can be filled with people,
but through a clan of outlaws it becomes desolate.
5 Many such things my eye has seen,
and my ear has heard things more striking than these.
6 In an assembly of sinners a fire is kindled,
and in a disobedient nation wrath blazes up.
7 He did not forgive the ancient giants
who revolted in their might.
8 He did not spare the neighbors of Lot,
whom he loathed on account of their arrogance.
9 He showed no pity on the doomed nation,
on those dispossessed because of their sins
(All these things he did to the hard-hearted nations,
and by the multitude of his holy ones he was not appeased),
10 or on the six hundred thousand foot soldiers
who assembled in their stubbornness. Chastising, showing mercy,
striking, healing, the Lord persisted in mercy and discipline.
11 Even if there were only one stiff-necked person,
it would be a wonder if he remained unpunished.
For mercy and wrath are with the Lord;
he is mighty to forgive — but he also pours out wrath.
12 Great as is his mercy, so also is his chastisement;
he judges a person according to his or her deeds.
13 The sinner will not escape with plunder,
and the patience of the godly will not be frustrated.

170

SIRACH 171

14 He makes room for every act of mercy;
everyone receives in accordance with his or her deeds.
15 The Lord hardened Pharaoh so that he did not recognize him,
in order that his works might be known under heaven.
16 His mercy is manifest to the whole of creation, and he divided
his light and darkness with a plumb line.
17 Do not say, "I am hidden from the Lord,
and who from on high has me in mind?
Among so many people I am unknown,
for what am I in a boundless creation?
18 Lo, heaven and the highest heaven,
the abyss and the earth, tremble at his visitation!
The whole world past and present is in his will.
19 The very mountains and the foundations of the earth
quiver and quake when he looks upon them.
20 But no human mind can grasp this,
and who can comprehend his ways?
21 Like a tempest that no one can see,
so most of his works are concealed.
22 Who is to announce his acts of justice?
Or who can await them? For his decree is far off."
(If I sin, no eye can see me, and if I am disloyal all
in secret, who is to know?)
23 Such are the thoughts of one devoid of understanding;
a senseless and misguided person thinks foolishly.
God's own wisdom in creation
24 Listen to me, my child, and acquire knowledge,
and pay close attention to my words.
25 I will impart discipline precisely
and declare knowledge accurately.
26 When the Lord created his works from the beginning,
and, in making them, determined their boundaries,

171

SIRACH 172

27 he arranged his works in an eternal order,
and their dominion for all generations.
They neither hunger nor grow weary,
and they do not abandon their tasks.
28 They do not crowd one another,
and they never disobey his word.
29 Then the Lord looked upon the earth,
and filled it with his good things.
30 With all kinds of living beings he covered its surface,
and into it they must return.
[Sirach 17]
1 The Lord created human beings out of earth,
and makes them return to it again.
2 He gave them a fixed number of days,
but granted them authority over everything on the earth.
3 He endowed them with strength like his own,
and made them in his own image.
4 He put the fear of them in all living beings,
and gave them dominion over beasts and birds.
5 They obtained the use of the five faculties of the Lord;
as sixth he distributed to them the gift of the mind, and
as seventh, reason, the interpreter of one's faculties.
6 Discretion and tongue and eyes,
ears and a mind for thinking he gave them.
7 He filled them with knowledge and understanding,
and showed them good and evil.
8 He put the fear of him into their hearts
to show them the majesty of his works.
10 And they will praise his holy name,
9 to proclaim the grandeur of his works.
11 He bestowed knowledge upon them,
and allotted to them the law of life,
so that they may know that they who are alive now are mortal.
12 He established with them an eternal covenant,
and revealed to them his decrees.

172

SIRACH 173

13 Their eyes saw his glorious majesty,
and their ears heard the glory of his voice.
14 He said to them, "Beware of all evil."
And he gave commandment to each of them concerning
the neighbor.
The divine judge
15 Their ways are always known to him;
they will not be hid from his eyes.
16 Their ways from youth tend toward evil,
and they are unable to make for themselves hearts
of flesh in place of their stony hearts.
17 For in division of the nations of the whole earth,
he appointed a ruler for every nation,
but Israel is the LORD's own portion,
18 whom being his firstborn, he brings up with discipline,
and allotting to him the light of his love,
he does not neglect them.
19 All their works are as clear as the sun before him,
and his eyes are ever upon their ways.
20 Their iniquities are not hidden from him,
and all their sins are before the Lord.
21 But the Lord, who is gracious and knows how they are formed,
has neither left them nor abandoned them, but has spared them.
22 One's almsgiving is like a signet ring with the Lord,
and he will keep a person's kindness like the apple of his eye,
apportioning repentance to his sons and daughters.
23 Afterward he will rise up and repay them,
and he will bring their recompense on their heads.
24 Yet to those who repent he grants a return,
and he encourages those who are losing hope.

173

SIRACH 174

A call to repentance
25 Turn back to the Lord and forsake your sins;
pray in his presence and lessen your offense.
26 Return to the Most High and turn away from iniquity,
and hate intensely what he abhors,
for he will lead you out of darkness to the light of health.
27 Who will sing praises to the Most High in Hades
in place of the living who give thanks?
28 From the dead, as from one who does not exist, thanksgiving
has ceased; those who are alive and well sing the LORD's praises.
29 How great is the mercy of the Lord,
and his forgiveness for those who return to him!
30 For not everything is within human capability,
since human beings are not immortal.
31 What is brighter than the sun? Yet it can be eclipsed.
So flesh and blood devise evil.
32 He marshals the host of the height of heaven;
but all human beings are dust and ashes.
[Sirach 18]
In praise of God's majesty and mercy
1 He who lives forever created the whole universe;
2 the Lord alone is just, and there is no other beside him;
3 he steers the world with the span of his hand, and all things
obey his will; for he is the king of all things by his power,
separating among them the holy things from the profane.
4 To none has he given power to proclaim his works;
and who can search out his mighty deeds?
5 Who can measure his majestic power?
And who can fully recount his mercies?
6 It is not possible to diminish or increase them,
nor is it possible to fathom the wonders of the Lord.
7 When human beings have finished, they are just beginning,
and when they stop, they are still perplexed.

174

SIRACH 175

8 What are human beings, and of what use are they?
What is good in them, and what is evil?
9 The number of days in their life is great if they reach one
hundred years, but the death of each one is beyond
the calculation of all.
10 Like a drop of water from the sea and a grain of sand,
so are a few years among the days of eternity.
11 That is why the Lord is patient with them
and pours out his mercy upon them.
12 He sees and recognizes that their end is miserable;
therefore he grants them forgiveness all the more.
13 The compassion of human beings is for their neighbors,
but the compassion of the Lord is for every living thing.
He rebukes and trains and teaches them,
and turns them back, as a shepherd his flock.
14 He has compassion on those who accept his discipline
and who are eager for his precepts.
Advice for living
15 My child, do not mix reproach with your good deeds,
or spoil your gift by harsh words.
16 Does not the dew give relief from the scorching heat?
So a word is better than a gift.
17 Indeed, does not a word surpass a good gift?
Both are to be found in a gracious person.
18 A fool is ungracious and abusive,
and the gift of a grudging giver makes the eyes dim.
19 Before you speak, learn;
and before you fall ill, take care of your health.
20 Before judgment comes, examine yourself;
and at the time of scrutiny you will find forgiveness.
21 Before falling ill, humble yourself;
and when you have sinned, repent.
22 Let nothing hinder you from paying a vow promptly,
and do not wait until death to be released from it.

175

SIRACH 176

23 Before making a vow, prepare yourself;
do not be like one who puts the Lord to the test.
24 Think of his wrath on the day of death,
and of the moment of vengeance when he turns away his face.
25 In the time of plenty think of the time of hunger;
in days of wealth think of poverty and need.
26 From morning to evening conditions change;
all things move swiftly before the Lord.
27 One who is wise is cautious in everything;
when sin is all around, one guards against wrongdoing.
28 Every intelligent person knows wisdom,
and praises the one who finds her.
29 Those who are skilled in words become wise themselves,
and pour forth apt proverbs.
Better is confidene in the one Lord than clinging with a
dead heart to a dead one.
SELF-CONTROL
30 Do not follow your base desires,
but restrain your appetites.
31 If you allow your soul to take pleasure in base desire,
it will make you the laughingstock of your enemies.
32 Do not revel in great luxury,
or you may become impoverished by its expense.
33 Do not become a beggar by feasting with borrowed money,
when you have nothing in your purse, for you will be plotting
against your own life.
[Sirach 19]
1 The one who does this [alcoholism] will not become rich;
one who despises small things will fail little by little.
2 Wine and women lead intelligent men astray,
and the man who consorts with prostitutes is reckless.
3 Decay and worms will take possession of him,
and the reckless person will be snatched away.

176

SIRACH 177

4 One who trusts others too quickly has a shallow mind,
and one who sins does wrong to himself.
5 One who rejoices in wickedness will be condemned,
but one who withstands pleasures crowns his life.
6 One who controls the tongue will live without strife,
and one who hates gossip has less evil.
7 Never repeat a conversation,
and you will lose nothing at all.
8 With friend or foe do not report it,
and unless it would be a sin for you, do not reveal it;
9 for someone may have heard you and watched you,
and in time will hate you.
10 Have you heard something? Let it die with you.
Be brave, it will not make you burst!
11 Having heard something, the fool suffers birth pangs
like a woman in labor with a child.
12 Like an arrow stuck in a person's thigh,
so is gossip inside a fool.
13 Question a friend; perhaps he did not do it;
or if he did, so that he may not do it again.
14 Question a neighbor; perhaps he did not say it;
or if he said it, so that he may not repeat it.
15 Question a friend, for often it is slander;
so do not believe everything you hear.
16 A person may make a slip without intending it.
Who has not sinned with his tongue?
17 Question your neighbor before you threaten him;
and let the law of the Most High take its course,
and do not be angry.
18 The fear of the Lord is the beginning of acceptance,
and wisdom obtains his love.
19 The knowledge of the LORD's commandments is life-giving
discipline; and those who do what is pleasing to him enjoy
the fruit of the tree of immortality.

177

SIRACH 178

Wisdom and cleverness contrasted
20 The whole of wisdom is fear of the Lord,
and in all wisdom there is the fulfillment of the law,
and the knowledge of his omnipotence.
21 When a slaves says to his master, "I will not act as you wish,"
even if later he does it, he angers the one who supports him.
22 The knowledge of wickedness is not wisdom,
nor is there prudence in the counsel of sinners.
23 There is a cleverness that is detestable,
and there is a fool who merely lacks wisdom.
24 Better are the God-fearing who lack understanding
than the highly intelligent who transgress the law.
25 There is a cleverness that is exact but unjust,
and there are people who abuse favors to gain a verdict.
26 There is the villain bowed down in mourning,
but inwardly he is full of deceit.
27 He hides his face and pretends not to hear,
but when no one notices, he will take advantage of you.
28 Even if lack of strength keeps him from sinning,
he will nevertheless do evil when he finds the opportunity.
29 A person is known by his appearance,
and a sensible person is known when first met, face to face.
30 A person's attire and hearty laughter,
and the way he walks, show what he is.
[Sirach 20]
Speech and silence
1 There is a rebuke that is untimely,
and there is the person who is wise enough to keep silent.
2 How much better it is to rebuke than to fume!
3 And the one who admits his fault will be kept from failure.
4 Like a eunuch lusting to violate a girl
is the person who does right under compulsion.
5 Some people keep silent and are thought to be wise,
while others are detested for being talkative.

178

SIRACH 179

6 Some people keep silent because they have nothing to say,
while others keep silent because they know when to speak.
7 The wise remain silent until the right moment,
but a boasting fool misses the right moment.
8 Whoever talks too much is detested,
and whoever pretends to authority is hated.
How good it is to show repentance when you are reproved,
for so you will escape deliberate sin!
Paradoxical appearances
9 There may be good fortune for a person in adversity,
and a windfall may result in a loss.
10 There is the gift that profits you nothing,
and the gift to be paid back double.
11 There are losses for the sake of glory,
and there are some who have raised their heads from
humble circumstances.
12 Some buy much for little,
but pay for it seven times over.
13 The wise make themselves beloved by only few words,
but the courtesies of fools are wasted.
14 A fool's gift will profit you nothing, so it is with
the envious who give under compulsion,
for he looks for recompense sevenfold.
15 He gives little and upbraids much;
he opens his mouth like a town crier.
Today he lends and tomorrow he asks it back;
such a one is hateful to God and humans.
16 The fool says, "I have no friends,
and I get no thanks for my good deeds.
Those who eat my bread are evil-tongued."
17 How many will ridicule him, and how often,
for he has not honestly received what he has, and
what he does not have is unimportant to him!

179

SIRACH 180

Inappropriate speech
18 A slip on the pavement is better than a slip of the tongue;
the downfall of the wicked will occur just as speedily.
19 A coarse person is like an inappropriate story,
continually on the lips of the ignorant.
20 A proverb from a fool's lips will be rejected,
for he does not tell it at the proper time.
Shameful circumstances
21 One may be prevented from sinning by poverty;
so when he rests he feels no remorse.
22 One may lose his life through shame,
or lose it because of human respect.
23 Another out of shame makes promises to a friend,
and so makes an enemy for nothing.
24 A lie is an ugly blot on a person;
it is continually on the lips of the ignorant.
25 A thief is preferable to a habitual liar,
but the lot of both is ruin.
26 A liar's way leads to disgrace,
and his shame is ever with him.
PROVERBIAL SAYINGS
Wise counsel
27 The wise person advances himself by his words,
and one who is sensible pleases the great.
28 Those who cultivate the soil heap up their harvest,
and those who please the great atone for injustice.
29 Favors and gifts blind the eyes of the wise;
like a muzzle on the mouth they stop reproofs.
30 Hidden wisdom and unseen treasure,
of what value is either?
31 Better are those who hide their folly
than those who hide their wisdom.

180

SIRACH 181

32 Unwearied endurance in seeking the Lord is better than
a masterless charioteer of one's own life.
[Sirach 21]
Warnings against sin
1 Have you sinned, my child? Do so no more,
but ask forgiveness for your past sins.
2 Flee from sin as from a snake;
for if you approach sin, it will bite you.
Its teeth are lion's teeth,
and can destroy human lives.
3 All lawlessness is like a two-edged sword;
there is no healing for the wound it inflicts.
4 Panic and insolence will waste away riches;
thus the house of the proud will be laid waste.
5 The prayer of the poor goes from their lips to the ears of God,
and his judgment comes speedily.
6 Those who hate reproof walk in the sinner's steps,
but those who fear the Lord repent in their heart.
7 The mighty in speech are widely known;
when they slip, the sensible person knows it.
8 Whoever builds his house with other people's money
is like one who gathers stones for his burial mound.
9 An assembly of the wicked is like a bundle of tow,
and their end is a blazing fire.
10 The way of sinners is paved with smooth stones,
but at its end is the pit of Hades.
A series of contrasts between the wise and fools
11 Whoever keeps the law controls his thoughts,
and the fulfillment of the fear of the Lord is wisdom.
12 The one who is not clever cannot be taught,
but there is a cleverness that increases bitterness.

181

SIRACH 182

13 The knowledge of the wise will increase like a flood,
and their counsel like a life-giving spring.
14 The mind of a fool is like a broken jar;
it can hold no knowledge.
15 When an intelligent person hears a wise saying,
he praises it and adds to it;
when a fool hears it, he laughs at it
and throws it behind his back.
16 A fool's chatter is like a burden on a journey,
but delight is found in the speech of the intelligent.
17 The utterance of a sensible person is sought in the assembly,
and they ponder his words in their minds.
18 Like a house in ruins is wisdom to a fool,
and to the ignorant, knowledge is talk that has no meaning.
19 To a senseless person education is fetters on his feet,
and like manacles on his right hand.
20 A fool raises his voice when he laughs,
but the wise smile quietly.
21 To the sensible person education is like a golden ornament,
and like a bracelet on the right arm.
22 The foot of a fool rushes into a house,
but an experienced person waits respectfully outside.
23 A boor peers into the house from the door,
but a cultivated person remains outside.
24 It is ill-mannered for a person to listen at a door;
the discreet would be grieved by the disgrace.
25 The lips of babblers speak of what is not their concern,
but the words of the prudent are weighed in the balance.
26 The mind of fools is in their mouth,
but the mouth of the wise is in their mind.
27 When an ungodly person curses an adversary,
he curses himself.
28 A whisperer degrades himself
and is hated in his neighborhood.

182

SIRACH 183

[Sirach 22]
On laziness
1 The idler is like a filthy stone,
and every one hisses at his disgrace.
2 The idler is like the filth of dunghills;
anyone that picks it up will shake it off his hand.
On children
3 It is a disgrace to be the father of an undisciplined son,
and the birth of a daughter is a loss.
4 A sensible daughter obtains a husband of her own,
but one who acts shamefully is a grief to her father.
5 An impudent daughter disgraces father and husband,
and is despised by both.
6 Like music in time of mourning is ill-timed conversation,
but a thrashing and discipline are at all times wisdom.
7 Children who are brought up in a good life, conceal the
lowly birth of their parents.
8 Children who are disdainfully and boorishly haughty stain
the nobility of their kindred.
On fools
9 Whoever teaches a fool is like one who glues potsherds together,
or who rouses a sleeper from deep slumber.
10 Whoever tells a story to a fool tells it to a drowsy man;
and at the end he will say, "What is it?"
11 Weep for the dead, for he has left the light behind;
and weep for the fool, for he has left intelligence behind.
Weep less bitterly for the dead, for he is at rest;
but the life of the fool is worse than death.
12 Mourning for the dead lasts seven days,
but for the foolish or the ungodly it lasts all the days of
their lives.

183

SIRACH 184

13 Do not talk much with a senseless person
or visit an unintelligent person.
For being without sense he will despise everything about you.
Stay clear of him, or you may have trouble,
and be spattered when he shakes himself off.
Avoid him and you will find rest,
and you will never be wearied by his lack of sense.
14 What is heavier than lead?
And what is its name except "Fool"?
15 Sand, salt, and a piece of iron
are easier to bear than a stupid person.
16 A wooden beam firmly bonded into a building
is not loosened by an earthquake;
so the mind firmly resolved after due reflection
will not be afraid in a crisis.
17 A mind settled on an intelligent thought
is like stucco decoration that makes a wall smooth.
18 Fences set on a high place
will not stand firm against the wind;
so a timid mind with a fool's resolve
will not stand firm against any fear.
Preserving friendship
19 One who pricks the eye brings tears,
and one who pricks the heart makes clear its feelings.
20 One who throws a stone at birds scares them away,
and one who reviles a friend destroys a friendship.
21 Even if you draw your sword against a friend,
do not despair, for there is a way back.
22 If you open your mouth against your friend,
do not worry, for reconciliation is possible.
But as for reviling, arrogance, disclosure of secrets,
or a treacherous blow — in these cases any friend
will take to flight.

184

SIRACH 185

23 Gain the trust of your neighbor in his poverty,
so that you may rejoice with him in his prosperity.
Stand by him in time of distress,
so that you may share with him in his inheritance.
For one should not always despise restricted circumstances,
or admire a rich person who is stupid.
24 The vapor and smoke of the furnace precede the fire;
so insults precede bloodshed.
25 I am not ashamed to shelter a friend,
and I will not hide from him.
26 But if harm should come to me because of him,
whoever hears of it will beware of him.
A prayer for self-control
27 Who will set a guard over my mouth,
and an effective seal upon my lips,
so that I may not fall because of them,
and my tongue may not destroy me?
[Sirach 23]
1 O Lord, Father and Master of my life,
do not abandon me to their designs,
and do not let me fall because of them!
2 Who will set whips over my thoughts,
and the discipline of wisdom over my mind,
so as not to spare me in my errors,
and not overlook my sins?
3 Otherwise my mistakes may be multiplied,
and my sins may abound,
and I may fall before my adversaries,
and my enemy may rejoice over me.
From them the hope of your mercy is remote.
4 O Lord, Father and God of my life,
do not give me haughty eyes,
5 and remove evil desire from me.

185

SIRACH 186

6 Let neither gluttony nor lust overcome me,
and do not give me over to shameless passion.
DISCIPLINE OF THE TONGUE
Sinful speech
7 Listen, my children, to instruction concerning the mouth;
the one who observes it will never be caught.
8 Sinners are overtaken through their lips;
by them the reviler and the arrogant are tripped up.
9 Do not accustom your mouth to oaths,
nor habitually utter the name of the Holy One;
10 for as a servant who is constantly under scrutiny
will not lack bruises,
so also the person who always swears and utters the Name
will never be cleansed from sin.
11 The one who swears many oaths is full of iniquity,
and the scourge will not leave his house.
If he swears in error, his sin remains on him,
and if he disregards it, he sins doubly;
if he swears a false oath, he will not be justified,
for his house will be filled with calamities.
12 There is a manner of speaking comparable to death;
may it never be found in the inheritance of Jacob!
Such conduct will be far from the godly,
and they will not wallow in sins.
13 Do not accustom your mouth to coarse, foul language,
for it involves sinful speech.
14 Remember your father and mother
when you sit among the great,
or you may forget yourself in their presence,
and behave like a fool through bad habit;
then you will wish that you had never been born,
and you will curse the day of your birth.
15 Those who are accustomed to using abusive language
will never become disciplined as long as they live.

186

SIRACH 187

Sexual misconduct
16 Two kinds of individuals multiply sins,
and a third incurs wrath.
Hot passion that blazes like a fire
will not be quenched until it burns itself out;
one who commits fornication with his near of kin
will never cease until the fire burns him up.
17 To a fornicator all bread is sweet;
he will never weary until he dies.
18 The one who sins against his marriage bed
says to himself, "Who can see me?
Darkness surrounds me, the walls hide me,
and no one sees me. Why should I worry?
The Most High will not remember sins."
19 His fear is confined to human eyes
and he does not realize that the eyes of the Lord
are ten thousand times brighter than the sun;
they look upon every aspect of human behavior
and see into hidden corners.
20 Before the universe was created, it was known to him,
and so it is since its completion.
21 This man will be punished in the streets of the city,
and where he least suspects it, he will be seized.
22 So it is with a woman who leaves her husband
and presents him with an heir by another man.
23 For first of all, she has disobeyed the law of the Most High;
second, she has committed an offense against her husband;
and third, through her fornication she has committed adultery
and brought forth children by another man.
24 She herself will be brought before the assembly,
and her punishment will extend to her children.
25 Her children will not take root,
and her branches will not bear fruit.
26 She will leave behind an accursed memory
and her disgrace will never be blotted out.

187

SIRACH 188

27 Those who survive her will recognize
that nothing is better than the fear of the Lord,
and nothing sweeter than to heed the commandments of the Lord.
28 It is a great honor to follow God,
and to be received by him is long life.
THE PRAISE OF WISDOM
[Sirach 24]
Praise of Wisdom
1 Wisdom praises herself,
and tells of her glory in the midst of her people.
2 In the assembly of the Most High she opens her mouth,
and in the presence of his hosts she tells of her glory:
3 "I came forth from the mouth of the Most High,
and covered the earth like a mist.
4 I dwelt in the highest heavens,
and my throne was in a pillar of cloud.
5 Alone I compassed the vault of heaven
and traversed the depths of the abyss.
6 Over waves of the sea, over all the earth,
and over every people and nation I have held sway.
7 Among all these I sought a resting place;
in whose territory should I abide?
8 "Then the Creator of all things gave me a command,
and my Creator chose the place for my tent.
He said, 'Make your dwelling in Jacob,
and in Israel receive your inheritance.'
9 Before the ages, in the beginning, he created me,
and for all the ages I shall not cease to be.
10 In the holy tent I ministered before him,
and so I was established in Zion.
11 Thus in the beloved city he gave me a resting place,
and in Jerusalem was my domain.
12 I took root in an honored people,
in the portion of the Lord, his heritage.

188

SIRACH 189

13 "I grew tall like a cedar in Lebanon,
and like a cypress on the heights of Hermon.
14 I grew tall like a palm tree in En-gedi,
and like rosebushes in Jericho;
like a fair olive tree in the field,
and like a plane tree beside water I grew tall.
15 Like cassia and camel's thorn I gave forth perfume,
and like choice myrrh I spread my fragrance,
like galbanum, onycha, and stacte,
and like the odor of incense in the tent.
16 Like a terebinth I spread out my branches,
and my branches are glorious and graceful.
17 Like the vine I bud forth delights,
and my blossoms become glorious and abundant fruit.
18 I am the mother of beautiful love, of fear, of knowledge,
and of holy hope; being eternal, I am given to all my children,
to those who are named by him.
19 "Come to me, you who desire me,
and eat your fill of my fruits.
20 For the memory of me is sweeter than honey,
and the possession of me sweeter than the honeycomb.
21 Those who eat of me will hunger for more,
and those who drink of me will thirst for more.
22 Whoever obeys me will not be put to shame,
and those who work with me will not sin."
23 All this is the book of the covenant of the Most High God,
the law that Moses commanded us
as an inheritance for the congregations of Jacob.
24 "Do not cease to be strong in the Lord, cling to him so that he
may strengthen you; the Lord Almighty alone is God, and besides
him there is no savior."
25 It overflows, like the Pishon, with wisdom,
and like the Tigris at the time of the first fruits.
26 It runs over, like the Euphrates, with understanding,
and like the Jordan at harvest time.
27 It pours forth instruction like the Nile,
like the Gihon at the time of vintage.

189

SIRACH 190

28 The first man did not know wisdom fully,
nor will the last one fathom her.
29 For her thoughts are more abundant than the sea,
and her counsel deeper than the great abyss.
30 As for me, I was like a canal from a river,
like a water channel into a garden.
31 I said, "I will water my garden
and drench my flower-beds."
And lo, my canal became a river,
and my river a sea.
32 I will again make instruction shine forth like the dawn,
and I will make it clear from far away.
33 I will again pour out teaching like prophecy,
and leave it to all future generations.
34 Observe that I have not labored for myself alone,
but for all who seek wisdom.
[Sirach 25]
Numerical sayings
1 I take pleasure in three things,
and they are beautiful in the sight of God and of mortals:
agreement among brothers and sisters, friendship
among neighbors, and a wife and a husband who
live in harmony.
2 I hate three kinds of people,
and I loathe their manner of life:
a pauper who boasts, a rich person who lies,
and an old fool who commits adultery.
Wisdom and maturity
3 If you gathered nothing in your youth,
how can you find anything in your old age?
4 How attractive is sound judgment in the gray-haired,
and for the aged to possess good counsel!

190

SIRACH 191

5 How attractive is wisdom in the aged,
and understanding and counsel in the venerable!
6 Rich experience is the crown of the aged,
and their boast is the fear of the Lord.
A numerical saying of ten blessings
7 I can think of nine whom I would call blessed,
and a tenth my tongue proclaims:
a man who can rejoice in his children;
a man who lives to see the downfall of his foes.
8 Happy the man who lives with a sensible wife,
and the one who does not plow with ox and ass together.
Happy is the one who does not sin with the tongue,
and the one who has not served an inferior.
9 Happy is the one who finds a friend,
and the one who speaks to attentive listeners.
10 How great is the one who finds wisdom!
But none is superior to the one who fears the Lord.
11 Fear of the Lord surpasses everything;
to whom can we compare the one who has it?
12 The fear of the Lord is the beginning of love for him,
and faith is the beginning of clinging to him.
Woeful women and bad wives
13 Any wound, but not a wound of the heart!
Any wickedness, but not the wickedness of a woman!
14 Any suffering, but not suffering from those who hate!
And any vengeance, but not the vengeance of enemies!
15 There is no venom worse than a snake's venom,
and no anger worse than a woman's wrath.
16 I would rather live with a lion and a dragon
than live with an evil woman.
17 A woman's wickedness changes her appearance,
and darkens her face like that of a bear.

191

SIRACH 192

18 Her husband sits among the neighbors,
and he cannot help sighing bitterly.
19 Any iniquity is small compared to a woman's iniquity;
may a sinner's lot befall her!
20 A sandy ascent for the feet of the aged —
such is a garrulous wife to a quiet husband.
21 Do not be ensnared by a woman's beauty,
and do not desire a woman for her possessions.
22 There is wrath and impudence and great disgrace
when a wife supports her husband.
23 Dejected mind, gloomy face,
and wounded heart come from an evil wife.
Drooping hands and weak knees
come from the wife who does not make her husband happy.
24 From a woman sin had its beginning,
and because of her we all die.
25 Allow no outlet to water,
and no boldness of speech to an evil wife.
26 If she does not go as you direct,
separate her from yourself.
[Sirach 26]
The good wife
1 Happy is the husband of a good wife;
the number of his days will be doubled.
2 A loyal wife brings joy to her husband,
and he will complete his years in peace.
3 A good wife is a great blessing;
she will be granted among the blessings of the man who
fears the Lord.
4 Whether rich or poor, his heart is content,
and at all times his face is cheerful.

192

SIRACH 193

More objectionable women
5 Of three things my heart is frightened,
and of a fourth I am in great fear:
Slander in the city, the gathering of a mob,
and false accusation — all these are worse than death.
6 But it is heartache and sorrow when a wife is jealous of a rival,
and a tongue-lashing makes it known to all.
7 A bad wife is a chafing yoke;
taking hold of her is like grasping a scorpion.
8 A drunken wife arouses great anger;
she cannot hide her shame.
9 The haughty stare betrays an unchaste wife;
her eyelids give her away.
10 Keep strict watch over a headstrong daughter,
or else, when she finds liberty, she will make use of it.
11 Be on guard against her impudent eye,
and do not be surprised if she sins against you.
12 As a thirsty traveler opens his mouth
and drinks from any water near him,
so she will sit in front of every tent peg
and open her quiver to the arrow.
Praise of the good wife
13 A wife's charm delights her husband,
and her skill puts flesh on his bones.
14 A silent wife is a gift from the Lord,
and nothing is so precious as her self-discipline.
15 A modest wife adds charm to charm,
and no scales can weigh the value of her chastity.
16 Like the sun rising in the heights of the Lord,
so is the beauty of a good wife in her well-ordered home.
17 Like the shining lamp on the holy lampstand,
so is a beautiful face on a stately figure.
18 Like golden pillars on silver bases,
so are shapely legs and steadfast feet.

193

SIRACH 194

Other ancient authorities add verses 19–27:
Further teaching concerning women
19 My child, keep sound the bloom of your youth,
and do not give your strength to strangers.
20 Seek a fertile field within the whole plain,
and sow it with your own seed, trusting in your fine stock.
21 So your offspring will prosper,
and, having confidence in their good descent, will grow great.
22 A prostitute is regarded as spittle,
and a married woman as a tower of death to her lovers.
23 A godless wife is given as a portion to a lawless man,
but a pious wife is given to the man who fears the Lord.
24 A shameless woman constantly acts disgracefully,
but a modest daughter will even be embarrassed before
her husband.
25 A headstrong wife is regarded as a dog,
but one who has a sense of shame will fear the Lord.
26 A wife honoring her husband will seem wise to all,
but if she dishonors him in her pride she will be known to
all as ungodly.
Happy is the husband of a good wife;
for the number of his years will be doubled.
27 A loud-voiced and garrulous wife is like a trumpet sounding
the charge, and every person like this lives in the anarchy of war.
Tests of character
28 At two things my heart is grieved,
and because of a third anger comes over me:
a warrior in want through poverty,
intelligent men who are treated contemptuously,
and a man who turns back from righteousness to sin —
the Lord will prepare him for the sword!
29 A merchant can hardly keep from wrongdoing,
nor is a tradesman innocent of sin.

194

SIRACH 195

[Sirach 27]
1 Many have committed sin for gain,
and those who seek to get rich will avert their eyes.
2 As a stake is driven firmly into a fissure between stones,
so sin is wedged in between selling and buying.
3 If a person is not steadfast in the fear of the Lord,
his house will be quickly overthrown.
4 When a sieve is shaken, the refuse appears;
so do a person's faults when he speaks.
5 The kiln tests the potter's vessels;
so the test of a person is in his conversation.
6 Its fruit discloses the cultivation of a tree;
so a person's speech discloses the cultivation of his mind.
7 Do not praise anyone before he speaks,
for this is the way people are tested.
8 If you pursue justice, you will attain it
and wear it like a glorious robe.
9 Birds roost with their own kind,
so honesty comes home to those who practice it.
10 A lion lies in wait for prey;
so does sin for evildoers.
11 The conversation of the godly is always wise,
but the fool changes like the moon.
12 Among stupid people limit your time,
but among thoughtful people linger on.
13 The talk of fools is offensive,
and their laughter is wantonly sinful.
14 Their cursing and swearing make one's hair stand on end,
and their quarrels make others stop their ears.
15 The strife of the proud leads to bloodshed,
and their abuse is grievous to hear.

195

SIRACH 196

Damaged relationships
16 Whoever betrays secrets destroys confidence,
and will never find a congenial friend.
17 Love your friend and keep faith with him;
but if you betray his secrets, do not follow after him.
18 For as a person destroys his enemy,
so you have destroyed the friendship of your neighbor.
19 And as you allow a bird to escape from your hand,
so you have let your neighbor go, and will not catch him again.
20 Do not go after him, for he is too far off,
and has escaped like a gazelle from a snare.
21 For a wound may be bandaged,
and there is reconciliation after abuse,
but whoever has betrayed secrets is without hope.
22 Whoever winks the eye plots mischief,
and those who know him will keep their distance.
23 In your presence his mouth is all sweetness,
and he admires your words;
but later he will twist his speech
and with your own words he will trip you up.
24 I have hated many things, but him above all;
even the Lord hates him.
25 Whoever throws a stone straight up throws it on his own head,
and a treacherous blow opens up many wounds.
26 Whoever digs a pit will fall into it,
and whoever sets a snare will be caught in it.
27 If a person does evil, it will roll back upon him,
and he will not know where it came from.
28 Mockery and abuse issue from the proud,
but vengeance lies in wait for them like a lion.
29 Those who rejoice in the fall of the godly will be caught in a snare,
and pain will consume them before their death.
30 Anger and wrath, these also are abominations,
yet a sinner holds on to them.

196

SIRACH 197

[Sirach 28]
1 The vengeful will face the LORD's vengeance,
for he keeps a strict account of their sins.
2 Forgive your neighbor the wrong he has done,
and then your sins will be pardoned when you pray.
3 Does anyone harbor anger against another,
and expect healing from the Lord?
4 If one has no mercy toward another like himself,
can he then seek pardon for his own sins?
5 If a mere mortal harbors wrath,
who will make an atoning sacrifice for his sins?
6 Remember the end of your life, and set enmity aside;
remember corruption and death, and be true to
the commandments.
7 Remember the commandments, and do not be angry with
your neighbor; remember the covenant of the Most High,
and overlook faults.
8 Refrain from strife, and your sins will be fewer;
for the hot-tempered kindle strife,
9 and the sinner disrupts friendships
and sows discord among those who are at peace.
10 In proportion to the fuel, so will the fire burn,
and in proportion to the obstinacy, so will strife increase;
in proportion to a person's strength will be his anger,
and in proportion to his wealth he will increase his wrath.
11 A hasty quarrel kindles a fire,
and a hasty dispute sheds blood.
12 If you blow on a spark, it will glow;
if you spit on it, it will be put out;
yet both come out of your mouth.
13 Curse the gossips and the double-tongued,
for they destroy the peace of many.

197

SIRACH 198

14 Slander has shaken many,
and scattered them from nation to nation;
it has destroyed strong cities,
and overturned the houses of the great.
15 Slander has driven virtuous women from their homes,
and deprived them of the fruit of their toil.
16 Those who pay heed to slander will not find rest,
nor will they settle down in peace.
17 The blow of a whip raises a welt,
but a blow of the tongue crushes the bones.
18 Many have fallen by the edge of the sword,
but not as many as have fallen because of the tongue.
19 Happy is the one who is protected from it,
who has not been exposed to its anger,
who has not borne its yoke,
and has not been bound with its fetters.
20 For its yoke is a yoke of iron,
and its fetters are fetters of bronze;
21 its death is an evil death,
and Hades is preferable to it.
22 It has no power over the godly;
they will not be burned in its flame.
23 Those who forsake the Lord will fall into its power;
it will burn among them and will not be put out.
It will be sent out against them like a lion;
like a leopard it will mangle them.
24a As you fence in your property with thorns,
25b so make a door and a bolt for your mouth.
24b As you lock up your silver and gold,
25a so make balances and scales for your words.
26 Take care not to err with your tongue,
and fall victim to one lying in wait.

198

SIRACH 199

[Sirach 29]
Loans, alms, surety
1 The merciful lend to their neighbors;
by holding out a helping hand they keep the commandments.
2 Lend to your neighbor in his time of need;
repay your neighbor when a loan falls due.
3 Keep your promise and be honest with him,
and on every occasion you will find what you need.
4 Many regard a loan as a windfall,
and cause trouble to those who help them.
5 One kisses another's hands until he gets a loan,
and is deferential in speaking of his neighbor's money;
but at the time for repayment he delays,
and pays back with empty promises,
and finds fault with the time.
6 If he can pay, his creditor will hardly get back half,
and will regard that as a windfall.
If he cannot pay, the borrower has robbed the other of his
money, and he has needlessly made him an enemy;
he will repay him with curses and reproaches,
and instead of glory will repay him with dishonor.
7 Many refuse to lend, not because of meanness,
but from fear of being defrauded needlessly.
8 Nevertheless, be patient with someone in humble circumstances,
and do not keep him waiting for your alms.
9 Help the poor for the commandment's sake,
and in their need do not send them away empty-handed.
10 Lose your silver for the sake of a brother or a friend,
and do not let it rust under a stone and be lost.
11 Lay up your treasure according to the commandments of the
Most High, and it will profit you more than gold.
12 Store up almsgiving in your treasury,
and it will rescue you from every disaster;
13 better than a stout shield and a sturdy spear,
it will fight for you against the enemy.

199

SIRACH 200

14 A good person will be surety for his neighbor,
but the one who has lost all sense of shame will fail him.
15 Do not forget the kindness of your guarantor,
for he has given his life for you.
16 A sinner wastes the property of his guarantor,
17 and the ungrateful person abandons his rescuer.
18 Being surety has ruined many who were prosperous,
and has tossed them about like waves of the sea;
it has driven the influential into exile,
and they have wandered among foreign nations.
19 The sinner comes to grief through surety;
his pursuit of gain involves him in lawsuits.
20 Assist your neighbor to the best of your ability,
but be careful not to fall yourself.
Frugality
21 The necessities of life are water, bread, and clothing,
and also a house to assure privacy.
22 Better is the life of the poor under their own crude roof
than sumptuous food in the house of others.
23 Be content with little or much,
and you will hear no reproach for being a guest.
24 It is a miserable life to go from house to house;
as a guest you should not open your mouth;
25 you will play the host and provide drink without being thanked,
and besides this you will hear rude words like these:
26 "Come here, stranger, prepare the table;
let me eat what you have there."
27 "Be off, stranger, for an honored guest is here;
my brother has come for a visit, and I need the guest-room."
28 It is hard for a sensible person to bear
scolding about lodging and the insults of the moneylender.

200

SIRACH 201

CONCERNING CHILDREN
[Sirach 30]
Training of children
1 He who loves his son will whip him often,
so that he may rejoice at the way he turns out.
2 He who disciplines his son will profit by him,
and will boast of him among acquaintances.
3 He who teaches his son will make his enemies envious,
and will glory in him among his friends.
4 When the father dies he will not seem to be dead,
for he has left behind him one like himself,
5 whom in his life he looked upon with joy
and at death, without grief.
6 He has left behind him an avenger against his enemies,
and one to repay the kindness of his friends.
7 Whoever spoils his son will bind up his wounds,
and will suffer heartache at every cry.
8 An unbroken horse turns out stubborn,
and an unchecked son turns out headstrong.
9 Pamper a child, and he will terrorize you;
play with him, and he will grieve you.
10 Do not laugh with him, or you will have sorrow with him,
and in the end you will gnash your teeth.
11 Give him no freedom in his youth,
and do not ignore his errors.
12 Bow down his neck in his youth,
and beat his sides while he is young,
or else he will become stubborn and disobey you,
and you will have sorrow of soul from him.
13 Discipline your son and make his yoke heavy,
so that you may not be offended by his shamelessness.
On health and enjoyment of life
14 Better off poor, healthy, and fit
than rich and afflicted in body.

201

SIRACH 202

15 Health and fitness are better than any gold,
and a robust body than countless riches.
16 There is no wealth better than health of body,
and no gladness above joy of heart.
17 Death is better than a life of misery,
and eternal sleep than chronic sickness.
CONCERNING FOODS
18 Good things poured out upon a mouth that is closed
are like offerings of food placed upon a grave.
19 Of what use to an idol is a sacrifice?
For it can neither eat nor smell.
So is the one punished by the Lord;
20 he sees with his eyes and groans
as a eunuch groans when embracing a girl.
So is the person who does right under compulsion.
21 Do not give yourself over to sorrow,
and do not distress yourself deliberately.
22 A joyful heart is life itself,
and rejoicing lengthens one's life span.
23 Indulge yourself and take comfort,
and remove sorrow far from you,
for sorrow has destroyed many,
and no advantage ever comes from it.
24 Jealousy and anger shorten life,
and anxiety brings on premature old age.
25 Those who are cheerful and merry at table
will benefit from their food.
[Sirach 31]
On wealth
1 Wakefulness over wealth wastes away one's flesh,
and anxiety about it drives away sleep.
2 Wakeful anxiety prevents slumber,
and a severe illness carries off sleep.

202

SIRACH 203

3 The rich person toils to amass a fortune,
and when he rests he fills himself with his dainties.
4 The poor person toils to make a meager living,
and if ever he rests he becomes needy.
5 One who loves gold will not be justified;
one who pursues money will be led astray by it.
6 Many have come to ruin because of gold,
and their destruction has met them face to face.
7 It is a stumbling block to those who are avid for it,
and every fool will be taken captive by it.
8 Blessed is the rich person who is found blameless,
and who does not go after gold.
9 Who is he, that we may praise him?
For he has done wonders among his people.
10 Who has been tested by it and been found perfect?
Let it be for him a ground for boasting.
Who has had the power to transgress and did not transgress,
and to do evil and did not do it?
11 His prosperity will be established,
and the assembly will proclaim his acts of charity.
Temperance in eating and drinking
12 Are you seated at the table of the great?
Do not be greedy at it,
and do not say, "How much food there is here!"
13 Remember that a greedy eye is a bad thing.
What has been created more greedy than the eye?
Therefore it sheds tears for any reason.
14 Do not reach out your hand for everything you see,
and do not crowd your neighbor at the dish.
15 Judge your neighbor's feelings by your own,
and in every matter be thoughtful.
16 Eat what is set before you like a well brought-up person,
and do not chew greedily, or you will give offense.
17 Be the first to stop, as befits good manners,
and do not be insatiable, or you will give offense.

203

SIRACH 204

18 If you are seated among many persons,
do not help yourself before they do.
19 How ample a little is for a well-disciplined person!
He does not breathe heavily when in bed.
20 Healthy sleep depends on moderate eating;
he rises early, and feels fit.
The distress of sleeplessness and of nausea
and colic are with the glutton.
21 If you are overstuffed with food,
get up to vomit, and you will have relief.
22 Listen to me, my child, and do not disregard me,
and in the end you will appreciate my words.
In everything you do be moderate,
and no sickness will overtake you.
23 People bless the one who is liberal with food,
and their testimony to his generosity is trustworthy.
24 The city complains of the one who is stingy with food,
and their testimony to his stinginess is accurate.
25 Do not try to prove your strength by wine-drinking,
for wine has destroyed many.
26 As the furnace tests the work of the smith,
so wine tests hearts when the insolent quarrel.
27 Wine is very life to human beings
if taken in moderation.
What is life to one who is without wine?
It has been created to make people happy.
28 Wine drunk at the proper time and in moderation
is rejoicing of heart and gladness of soul.
29 Wine drunk to excess leads to bitterness of spirit,
to quarrels and stumbling.
30 Drunkenness increases the anger of a fool to his own hurt,
reducing his strength and adding wounds.
31 Do not reprove your neighbor at a banquet of wine,
and do not despise him in his merrymaking;
speak no word of reproach to him,
and do not distress him by making demands of him.

204

SIRACH 205

[Sirach 32]
1 If they make you master of the feast, do not exalt yourself;
be among them as one of their number.
Take care of them first and then sit down;
2 when you have fulfilled all your duties, take your place,
so that you may be merry along with them
and receive a wreath for your excellent leadership.
3 Speak, you who are older, for it is your right,
but with accurate knowledge, and do not interrupt the music.
4 Where there is entertainment, do not pour out talk;
do not display your cleverness at the wrong time.
5 A ruby seal in a setting of gold
is a concert of music at a banquet of wine.
6 A seal of emerald in a rich setting of gold
is the melody of music with good wine.
7 Speak, you who are young, if you are obliged to,
but no more than twice, and only if asked.
8 Be brief; say much in few words;
be as one who knows and can still hold his tongue.
9 Among the great do not act as their equal;
and when another is speaking, do not babble.
10 Lightning travels ahead of the thunder,
and approval goes before one who is modest.
11 Leave in good time and do not be the last;
go home quickly and do not linger.
12 Amuse yourself there to your heart's content,
but do not sin through proud speech.
13 But above all bless your Maker,
who fills you with his good gifts.
The God-fearing person contrasted with the sinner
14 The one who seeks God will accept his discipline,
and those who rise early to seek him will find favor.

205

SIRACH 206

15 The one who seeks the law will be filled with it,
but the hypocrite will stumble at it.
16 Those who fear the Lord will form true judgments,
and they will kindle righteous deeds like a light.
17 The sinner will shun reproof,
and will find a decision according to his liking.
18 A sensible person will not overlook a thoughtful suggestion;
an insolent and proud person will not be deterred by fear.
19 Do nothing without deliberation,
but when you have acted, do not regret it.
20 Do not go on a path full of hazards,
and do not stumble at an obstacle twice.
21 Do not be overconfident on a smooth road,
22 and give good heed to your paths.
23 Guard yourself in every act,
for this is the keeping of the commandments.
24 The one who keeps the law preserves himself,
and the one who trusts the Lord will not suffer loss.
[Sirach 33]
1 No evil will befall the one who fears the Lord,
but in trials such a one will be rescued again and again.
2 The wise will not hate the law,
but the one who is hypocritical about it is like a boat in a storm.
3 The sensible person will trust in the law;
for such a one the law is as dependable as a divine oracle.
4 Prepare what to say, and then you will be listened to;
draw upon your training, and give your answer.
5 The heart of a fool is like a cart wheel,
and his thoughts like a turning axle.
6 A mocking friend is like a stallion
that neighs no matter who the rider is.

206

SIRACH 207

Divinely ordained opposites in creation
7 Why is one day more important than another,
when all the daylight in the year is from the sun?
8 By the LORD's wisdom they were distinguished,
and he appointed the different seasons and festivals.
9 Some days he exalted and hallowed,
and some he made ordinary days.
10 All human beings come from the ground,
and humankind was created out of the dust.
11 In the fullness of his knowledge the Lord distinguished them
and appointed their different ways.
12 Some he blessed and exalted,
and some he made holy and brought near to himself;
but some he cursed and brought low,
and turned them out of their place.
13 Like clay in the hand of the potter,
to be molded as he pleases,
so all are in the hand of their Maker,
to be given whatever he decides.
14 Good is the opposite of evil,
and life the opposite of death;
so the sinner is the opposite of the godly.
15 Look at all the works of the Most High;
they come in pairs, one the opposite of the other.
The author's qualifications
16 Now I was the last to keep vigil;
I was like a gleaner following the grape-pickers;
17 by the blessing of the Lord I arrived first,
and like a grape-picker I filled my wine press.
18 Consider that I have not labored for myself alone,
but for all who seek instruction.
19 Hear me, you who are great among the people,
and you leaders of the congregation, pay heed!

207

SIRACH 208

On property and slaves
20 To son or wife, to brother or friend,
do not give power over yourself, as long as you live;
and do not give your property to another,
in case you change your mind and must ask for it.
21 While you are still alive and have breath in you,
do not let anyone take your place.
22 For it is better that your children should ask from you
than that you should look to the hand of your children.
23 Excel in all that you do;
bring no stain upon your honor.
24 At the time when you end the days of your life,
in the hour of death, distribute your inheritance.
25 Fodder and a stick and burdens for a donkey;
bread and discipline and work for a slave.
26 Set your slave to work, and you will find rest;
leave his hands idle, and he will seek liberty.
27 Yoke and thong will bow the neck,
and for a wicked slave there are racks and tortures.
28 Put him to work, in order that he may not be idle,
29 for idleness teaches much evil.
30 Set him to work, as is fitting for him,
and if he does not obey, make his fetters heavy.
Do not be overbearing toward anyone,
and do nothing unjust.
31 If you have but one slave, treat him like yourself,
because you have bought him with blood.
If you have but one slave, treat him like a brother,
for you will need him as you need your life.
32 If you ill-treat him, and he leaves you and runs away,
33 which way will you go to seek him?

208

SIRACH 209

[Sirach 34]
The vanity of dreams and omens
1 The senseless have vain and false hopes,
and dreams give wings to fools.
2 As one who catches at a shadow and pursues the wind,
so is anyone who believes in dreams.
3 What is seen in dreams is but a reflection,
the likeness of a face looking at itself.
4 From an unclean thing what can be clean?
And from something false what can be true?
5 Divinations and omens and dreams are unreal,
and like a woman in labor, the mind has fantasies.
6 Unless they are sent by intervention from the Most High,
pay no attention to them.
7 For dreams have deceived many,
and those who put their hope in them have perished.
8 Without such deceptions the law will be fulfilled,
and wisdom is complete in the mouth of the faithful.
Learning from experience
9 An educated person knows many things,
and one with much experience knows what he is talking about.
10 An inexperienced person knows few things,
11 but he that has traveled acquires much cleverness.
12 I have seen many things in my travels,
and I understand more than I can express.
13 I have often been in danger of death,
but have escaped because of these experiences.
14 The spirit of those who fear the Lord will live,
15 for their hope is in him who saves them.
16 Those who fear the Lord will not be timid,
or play the coward, for he is their hope.
17 Happy is the soul that fears the Lord!
18 To whom does he look? And who is his support?

209

SIRACH 210

19 The eyes of the Lord are on those who love him,
a mighty shield and strong support,
a shelter from scorching wind and a shade from noonday sun,
a guard against stumbling and a help against falling.
20 He lifts up the soul and makes the eyes sparkle;
he gives health and life and blessing.
Unacceptable sacrifices
21 If one sacrifices ill-gotten goods, the offering is blemished;
22 the gifts of the lawless are not acceptable.
23 The Most High is not pleased with the offerings of the ungodly,
nor for a multitude of sacrifices does he forgive sins.
24 Like one who kills a son before his father's eyes
is the person who offers a sacrifice from the property of the poor.
25 The bread of the needy is the life of the poor;
whoever deprives them of it is a murderer.
26 To take away a neighbor's living is to commit murder;
27 to deprive an employee of wages is to shed blood.
28 When one builds and another tears down,
what do they gain but hard work?
29 When one prays and another curses,
to whose voice will the Lord listen?
30 If one washes after touching a corpse, and touches it again,
what has been gained by washing?
31 So if one fasts for his sins,
and goes again and does the same things,
who will listen to his prayer?
And what has he gained by humbling himself?
[Sirach 35]
Acceptable sacrifices
1 The one who keeps the law makes many offerings;
2 one who heeds the commandments makes an offering of well-being.
3 The one who returns a kindness offers choice flour,
4 and one who gives alms sacrifices a thank offering.

210

SIRACH 211

5 To keep from wickedness is pleasing to the Lord,
and to forsake unrighteousness is an atonement.
6 Do not appear before the Lord empty-handed,
7 for all that you offer is in fulfillment of the commandment.
8 The offering of the righteous enriches the altar,
and its pleasing odor rises before the Most High.
9 The sacrifice of the righteous is acceptable,
and it will never be forgotten.
10 Be generous when you worship the Lord,
and do not stint the first fruits of your hands.
11 With every gift show a cheerful face,
and dedicate your tithe with gladness.
12 Give to the Most High as he has given to you,
and as generously as you can afford.
13 For the Lord is the one who repays,
and he will repay you sevenfold.
A warning against exploitation of the poor
14 Do not offer him a bribe, for he will not accept it;
15 and do not rely on a dishonest sacrifice;
for the Lord is the judge,
and with him there is no partiality.
16 He will not show partiality to the poor;
but he will listen to the prayer of one who is wronged.
17 He will not ignore the supplication of the orphan,
or the widow when she pours out her complaint.
18 Do not the tears of the widow run down her cheek
19 as she cries out against the one who causes them to fall?
20 The one whose service is pleasing to the Lord will be accepted,
and his prayer will reach to the clouds.
21 The prayer of the humble pierces the clouds,
and it will not rest until it reaches its goal;
it will not desist until the Most High responds

211

SIRACH 212

22 and does justice for the righteous, and executes judgment.
Indeed, the Lord will not delay,
and like a warrior will not be patient
until he crushes the loins of the unmerciful
23 and repays vengeance on the nations;
until he destroys the multitude of the insolent,
and breaks the scepters of the unrighteous;
24 until he repays mortals according to their deeds,
and the works of all according to their thoughts;
25 until he judges the case of his people
and makes them rejoice in his mercy.
26 His mercy is as welcome in time of distress
as clouds of rain in time of drought.
[Sirach 36]
A prayer for the deliverance and restoration of Israel
1 Have mercy upon us, O God of all,
2 and put all the nations in fear of you.
3 Lift up your hand against foreign nations
and let them see your might.
4 As you have used us to show your holiness to them,
so use them to show your glory to us.
5 Then they will know, as we have known,
that there is no God but you, O Lord.
6 Give new signs, and work other wonders;
7 make your hand and right arm glorious.
8 Rouse your anger and pour out your wrath;
9 destroy the adversary and wipe out the enemy.
10 Hasten the day, and remember the appointed time,
and let people recount your mighty deeds.
11 Let survivors be consumed in the fiery wrath,
and may those who harm your people meet destruction.
12 Crush the heads of hostile rulers
who say, "There is no one but ourselves."
13 Gather all the tribes of Jacob,

212

SIRACH 213

[Owing to a dislocation in the Greek manuscripts of Sirach, the verse
numbers 14 and 15 and not used in Chapter 36, though no text is
missing.]
16 and give them their inheritance, as at the beginning.
17 Have mercy, O Lord, on the people called by your name,
on Israel, whom you have named your firstborn,
18 Have pity on the city of your sanctuary,
Jerusalem, the place of your dwelling.
19 Fill Zion with your majesty,
and your temple with your glory.
20 Bear witness to those whom you created in the beginning,
and fulfill the prophecies spoken in your name.
21 Reward those who wait for you
and let your prophets be found trustworthy.
22 Hear, O Lord, the prayer of your servants,
according to your goodwill toward your people,
and all who are on the earth will know
that you are the Lord, the God of the ages.
Concerning discrimination
23 The stomach will take any food,
yet one food is better than another.
24 As the palate tastes the kinds of game,
so an intelligent mind detects false words.
25 A perverse mind will cause grief,
but a person with experience will pay him back.
On choices in marriage
26 A woman will accept any man as a husband,
but one girl is preferable to another.
27 A woman's beauty lights up a man's face,
and there is nothing he desires more.
28 If kindness and humility mark her speech,
her husband is more fortunate than other men.

213

SIRACH 214

29 He who acquires a wife gets his best possession,
a helper fit for him and a pillar of support.
30 Where there is no fence, the property will be plundered; and
where there is no wife, a man will become a fugitive
and a wanderer.
31 For who will trust a nimble robber
that skips from city to city?
So who will trust a man that has no nest,
but lodges wherever night overtakes him?
[Sirach 37]
False friends
1 Every friend says, "I too am a friend";
but some friends are friends only in name.
2 Is it not a sorrow like that for death itself
when a dear friend turns into an enemy?
3 O inclination to evil, why were you formed
to cover the land with deceit?
4 Some companions rejoice in the happiness of a friend,
but in time of trouble they are against him.
5 Some companions help a friend for their stomachs' sake,
yet in battle they will carry his shield.
6 Do not forget a friend during the battle,
and do not be unmindful of him when you distribute your spoils.
On taking counsel
7 All counselors praise the counsel they give,
but some give counsel in their own interest.
8 Be wary of a counselor,
and learn first what is his interest,
for he will take thought for himself.
He may cast the lot against you
9 and tell you, "Your way is good,"
and then stand aside to see what happens to you.
10 Do not consult the one who regards you with suspicion;
hide your intentions from those who are jealous of you.

214

SIRACH 215

11 Do not consult with a woman about her rival
or with a coward about war,
with a merchant about business
or with a buyer about selling,
with a miser about generosity
or with the merciless about kindness,
with an idler about any work
or with a seasonal laborer about completing his work,
with a lazy servant about a big task —
pay no attention to any advice they give.
12 But associate with a godly person
whom you know to be a keeper of the commandments,
who is like-minded with yourself,
and who will grieve with you if you fail.
13 And heed the counsel of your own heart,
for no one is more faithful to you than it is.
14 For our own mind sometimes keeps us better informed
than seven sentinels sitting high on a watchtower.
15 But above all pray to the Most High
that he may direct your way in truth.
Enduring wisdom
16 Discussion is the beginning of every work,
and counsel precedes every undertaking.
17 The mind is the root of all conduct;
18 it sprouts four branches,
good and evil, life and death;
and it is the tongue that continually rules them.
19 Some people may be clever enough to teach many,
and yet be useless to themselves.
20 A skillful speaker may be hated;
he will be destitute of all food,
21 for the Lord has withheld the gift of charm,
since he is lacking in all wisdom.
22 If a person is wise to his own advantage,
the fruits of his good sense will be praiseworthy.

215

SIRACH 216

23 A wise person instructs his own people,
and the fruits of his good sense will endure.
24 A wise person will have praise heaped upon him,
and all who see him will call him happy.
25 The days of a person's life are numbered,
but the days of Israel are without number.
26 One who is wise among his people will inherit honor,
and his name will live forever.
Temperance
27 My child, test yourself while you live;
see what is bad for you and do not give in to it.
28 For not everything is good for everyone,
and no one enjoys everything.
29 Do not be greedy for every delicacy,
and do not eat without restraint;
30 for overeating brings sickness,
and gluttony leads to nausea.
31 Many have died of gluttony,
but the one who guards against it prolongs his life.
[Sirach 38]
Concerning physicians
1 Honor physicians for their services,
for the Lord created them;
2 for their gift of healing comes from the Most High,
and they are rewarded by the king.
3 The skill of physicians makes them distinguished,
and in the presence of the great they are admired.
4 The Lord created medicines out of the earth,
and the sensible will not despise them.
5 Was not water made sweet with a tree
in order that its power might be known?
6 And he gave skill to human beings
that he might be glorified in his marvelous works.
7 By them the physician heals and takes away pain;

216

SIRACH 217

8 the pharmacist makes a mixture from them.
God's works will never be finished;
and from him health spreads over all the earth.
9 My child, when you are ill, do not delay,
but pray to the Lord, and he will heal you.
10 Give up your faults and direct your hands rightly,
and cleanse your heart from all sin.
11 Offer a sweet-smelling sacrifice, and a memorial portion of
choice flour,
and pour oil on your offering, as much as you can afford.
12 Then give the physician his place, for the Lord created him;
do not let him leave you, for you need him.
13 There may come a time when recovery lies in the hands
of physicians,
14 for they too pray to the Lord
that he grant them success in diagnosis
and in healing, for the sake of preserving life.
15 He who sins against his Maker,
will be defiant toward the physician.
On mourning and grief
16 My child, let your tears fall for the dead,
and as one in great pain begin the lament.
Lay out the body with due ceremony,
and do not neglect the burial.
17 Let your weeping be bitter and your wailing fervent;
make your mourning worthy of the departed,
for one day, or two, to avoid criticism;
then be comforted for your grief.
18 For grief may result in death,
and a sorrowful heart saps one's strength.
19 When a person is taken away, sorrow is over;
but the life of the poor weighs down the heart.
20 Do not give your heart to grief;
drive it away, and remember your own end.

217

SIRACH 218

21 Do not forget, there is no coming back;
you do the dead no good, and you injure yourself.
22 Remember his fate, for yours is like it;
yesterday it was his, and today it is yours.
23 When the dead is at rest, let his remembrance rest too,
and be comforted for him when his spirit has departed.
Skilled workers contrasted with the scribe
24 The wisdom of the scribe depends on the opportunity of leisure;
only the one who has little business can become wise.
25 How can one become wise who handles the plow,
and who glories in the shaft of a goad,
who drives oxen and is occupied with their work,
and whose talk is about bulls?
26 He sets his heart on plowing furrows,
and he is careful about fodder for the heifers.
27 So it is with every artisan and master artisan
who labors by night as well as by day;
those who cut the signets of seals,
each is diligent in making a great variety;
they set their heart on painting a lifelike image,
and they are careful to finish their work.
28 So it is with the smith, sitting by the anvil,
intent on his iron-work;
the breath of the fire melts his flesh,
and he struggles with the heat of the furnace;
the sound of the hammer deafens his ears,
and his eyes are on the pattern of the object.
He sets his heart on finishing his handiwork,
and he is careful to complete its decoration.
29 So it is with the potter sitting at his work
and turning the wheel with his feet;
he is always deeply concerned over his products,
and he produces them in quantity.

218

SIRACH 219

30 He molds the clay with his arm
and makes it pliable with his feet;
he sets his heart to finish the glazing,
and he takes care in firing the kiln.
31 All these rely on their hands,
and all are skillful in their own work.
32 Without them no city can be inhabited,
and wherever they live, they will not go hungry.
Yet they are not sought out for the council of the people,
33
nor do they attain eminence in the public assembly.
They do not sit in the judge's seat,
nor do they understand the decisions of the courts;
they cannot expound discipline or judgment,
and they are not found among the rulers.
34a But they maintain the fabric of the world,
and their concern is for the exercise of their trade.
Praise of the scribe
34b How different the one who devotes himself
to the study of the law of the Most High!
[Sirach 39]
1 He seeks out the wisdom of all the ancients,
and is concerned with prophecies;
2 he preserves the sayings of the famous
and penetrates the subtleties of parables;
3 he seeks out the hidden meanings of proverbs
and is at home with the obscurities of parables.
4 He serves among the great
and appears before rulers;
he travels in foreign lands
and learns what is good and evil in the human lot.

219

SIRACH 220

5 He sets his heart to rise early
to seek the Lord who made him,
and to petition the Most High;
he opens his mouth in prayer
and asks pardon for his sins.
6 If the great Lord is willing,
he will be filled with the spirit of understanding;
he will pour forth words of wisdom of his own
and give thanks to the Lord in prayer.
7 The Lord will direct his counsel and knowledge,
as he meditates on his mysteries.
8 He will show the wisdom of what he has learned,
and will glory in the law of the LORD's covenant.
9 Many will praise his understanding;
it will never be blotted out.
His memory will not disappear,
and his name will live through all generations.
10 Nations will speak of his wisdom,
and the congregation will proclaim his praise.
11 If he lives long, he will leave a name greater than a thousand,
and if he goes to rest, it is enough for him.
A hymn of praise
12 I have more on my mind to express;
I am full like the full moon.
13 Listen to me, my faithful children, and blossom
like a rose growing by a stream of water.
14 Send out fragrance like incense,
and put forth blossoms like a lily.
Scatter the fragrance, and sing a hymn of praise;
bless the Lord for all his works.
15 Ascribe majesty to his name
and give thanks to him with praise,
with songs on your lips, and with harps;
this is what you shall say in thanksgiving:

220

SIRACH 221

16 "All the works of the Lord are very good,
and whatever he commands will be done at the appointed time.
17 No one can say, 'What is this?' or 'Why is that?' —
for at the appointed time all such questions will be answered.
At his word the waters stood in a heap,
and the reservoirs of water at the word of his mouth.
18 When he commands, his every purpose is fulfilled,
and none can limit his saving power.
19 The works of all are before him,
and nothing can be hidden from his eyes.
20 From the beginning to the end of time he can see everything,
and nothing is too marvelous for him.
21 No one can say, 'What is this?' or 'Why is that?' —
for everything has been created for its own purpose.
22 "His blessing covers the dry land like a river,
and drenches it like a flood.
23 But his wrath drives out the nations,
as when he turned a watered land into salt.
24 To the faithful his ways are straight,
but full of pitfalls for the wicked.
25 From the beginning good things were created for the good,
but for sinners good things and bad.
26 The basic necessities of human life
are water and fire and iron and salt
and wheat flour and milk and honey,
the blood of the grape and oil and clothing.
27 All these are good for the godly,
but for sinners they turn into evils.
28 "There are winds created for vengeance,
and in their anger they can dislodge mountains;
on the day of reckoning they will pour out their strength
and calm the anger of their Maker.
29 Fire and hail and famine and pestilence,
all these have been created for vengeance;
30 the fangs of wild animals and scorpions and vipers,
and the sword that punishes the ungodly with destruction.

221

SIRACH 222

31 They take delight in doing his bidding,
always ready for his service on earth;
and when their time comes they never disobey his command."
32 So from the beginning I have been convinced of all this
and have thought it out and left it in writing:
33 All the works of the Lord are good,
and he will supply every need in its time.
34 No one can say, "This is not as good as that,"
for everything proves good in its appointed time.
35 So now sing praise with all your heart and voice,
and bless the name of the Lord.
[Sirach 40]
Reflections on the human condition
1 Hard work was created for everyone,
and a heavy yoke is laid on the children of Adam,
from the day they come forth from their mother's womb
until the day they return to the mother of all the living.
2 Perplexities and fear of heart are theirs,
and anxious thought of the day of their death.
3 From the one who sits on a splendid throne
to the one who grovels in dust and ashes,
4 from the one who wears purple and a crown
to the one who is clothed in burlap,
5 there is anger and envy and trouble and unrest,
and fear of death, and fury and strife.
And when one rests upon his bed,
his sleep at night confuses his mind.
6 He gets little or no rest;
he struggles in his sleep as he did by day.
He is troubled by the visions of his mind
like one who has escaped from the battlefield.
7 At the moment he reaches safety he wakes up,
astonished that his fears were groundless.
8 To all creatures, human and animal,
but to sinners seven times more,

222

SIRACH 223

9 come death and bloodshed and strife and sword,
calamities and famine and ruin and plague.
10 All these were created for the wicked,
and on their account the flood came.
11 All that is of earth returns to earth,
and what is from above returns above.
12 All bribery and injustice will be blotted out,
but good faith will last forever.
13 The wealth of the unjust will dry up like a river,
and crash like a loud clap of thunder in a storm.
14 As a generous person has cause to rejoice,
so lawbreakers will utterly fail.
15 The children of the ungodly put out few branches;
they are unhealthy roots on sheer rock.
16 The reeds by any water or river bank
are plucked up before any grass;
17 but kindness is like a garden of blessings,
and almsgiving endures forever.
18 Wealth and wages make life sweet,
but better than either is finding a treasure.
19 Children and the building of a city establish one's name,
but better than either is the one who finds wisdom.
Cattle and orchards make one prosperous;
but a blameless wife is accounted better than either.
20 Wine and music gladden the heart,
but the love of friends is better than either.
21 The flute and the harp make sweet melody,
but a pleasant voice is better than either.
22 The eye desires grace and beauty,
but the green shoots of grain more than either.
23 A friend or companion is always welcome,
but a sensible wife is better than either.
24 Kindred and helpers are for a time of trouble,
but almsgiving rescues better than either.
25 Gold and silver make one stand firm,
but good counsel is esteemed more than either.

223

SIRACH 224

26 Riches and strength build up confidence,
but the fear of the Lord is better than either.
There is no want in the fear of the Lord,
and with it there is no need to seek for help.
27 The fear of the Lord is like a garden of blessing,
and covers a person better than any glory.
28 My child, do not lead the life of a beggar;
it is better to die than to beg.
29 When one looks to the table of another,
one's way of life cannot be considered a life.
One loses self-respect with another person's food,
but one who is intelligent and well instructed guards
against that.
30 In the mouth of the shameless begging is sweet,
but it kindles a fire inside him.
[Sirach 41]
1 O death, how bitter is the thought of you
to the one at peace among possessions,
who has nothing to worry about and is prosperous in everything,
and still is vigorous enough to enjoy food!
2 O death, how welcome is your sentence
to one who is needy and failing in strength,
worn down by age and anxious about everything;
to one who is contrary, and has lost all patience!
3 Do not fear death's decree for you;
remember those who went before you and those who will
come after.
4 This is the LORD's decree for all flesh;
why then should you reject the will of the Most High?
Whether life lasts for ten years or a hundred or a thousand,
there are no questions asked in Hades.
5 The children of sinners are abominable children,
and they frequent the haunts of the ungodly.

224

SIRACH 225

6 The inheritance of the children of sinners will perish,
and on their offspring will be a perpetual disgrace.
7 Children will blame an ungodly father,
for they suffer disgrace because of him.
8 Woe to you, the ungodly,
who have forsaken the law of the Most High God!
9 If you have children, calamity will be theirs;
you will beget them only for groaning.
When you stumble, there is lasting joy;
and when you die, a curse is your lot.
10 Whatever comes from earth returns to earth;
so the ungodly go from curse to destruction.
11 The human body is a fleeting thing,
but a virtuous name will never be blotted out.
12 Have regard for your name, since it will outlive you
longer than a thousand hoards of gold.
13 The days of a good life are numbered,
but a good name lasts forever.
A poem on shame, true and false
14 My children, be true to your training and be at peace;
hidden wisdom and unseen treasure — of what value is either?
15 Better are those who hide their folly
than those who hide their wisdom.
16 Therefore show respect for my words;
for it is not good to feel shame in every circumstance,
nor is every kind of abashment to be approved.
17 Be ashamed of sexual immorality, before your father or mother;
and of a lie, before a prince or a ruler;
18 of a crime, before a judge or magistrate;
and of a breach of the law, before the congregation and the
people; of unjust dealing, before your partner or your friend;

225

SIRACH 226

19 and of theft, in the place where you live.
Be ashamed of breaking an oath or agreement,
and of leaning on your elbow at meals;
of surliness in receiving or giving,
20 and of silence, before those who greet you;
of looking at a prostitute,
21 and of rejecting the appeal of a relative;
of taking away someone's portion or gift,
and of gazing at another man's wife;
22 of meddling with his servant-girl —
and do not approach her bed;
of abusive words, before friends —
and do not be insulting after making a gift.
[Sirach 42]
1 Be ashamed of repeating what you hear,
and of betraying secrets.
Then you will show proper shame,
and will find favor with everyone.
Of the following things do not be ashamed,
and do not sin to save face:
2 Do not be ashamed of the law of the Most High and his covenant,
and of rendering judgment to acquit the ungodly;
3 of keeping accounts with a partner or with traveling companions,
and of dividing the inheritance of friends;
4 of accuracy with scales and weights,
and of acquiring much or little;
5 of profit from dealing with merchants,
and of frequent disciplining of children,
and of drawing blood from the back of a wicked slave.
6 Where there is an untrustworthy wife, a seal is a good thing;
and where there are many hands, lock things up.
7 When you make a deposit, be sure it is counted and weighed,
and when you give or receive, put it all in writing.

226

SIRACH 227

8 Do not be ashamed to correct the stupid or foolish
or the aged who are guilty of sexual immorality.
Then you will show your sound training,
and will be approved by all.
A man's anxiety over daughters
9 A daughter is a secret anxiety to her father,
and worry over her robs him of sleep;
when she is young, for fear she may not marry,
or if married, for fear she may be disliked;
10 while a virgin, for fear she may be seduced
and become pregnant in her father's house;
or having a husband, for fear she may go astray,
or, though married, for fear she may be barren.
11 Keep strict watch over a headstrong daughter,
or she may make you a laughingstock to your enemies,
a byword in the city and the assembly of the people,
and put you to shame in public gatherings.
See that there is no lattice in her room,
no spot that overlooks the approaches to the house.
12 Do not let her parade her beauty before any man,
or spend her time among married women;
13 for from garments comes the moth,
and from a woman comes woman's wickedness.
14 Better is the wickedness of a man than a woman who does good;
it is woman who brings shame and disgrace.
In praise of God and the wonders of creation
15 I will now call to mind the works of the Lord,
and will declare what I have seen.
By the word of the Lord his works are made;
and all his creatures do his will.
16 The sun looks down on everything with its light,
and the work of the Lord is full of his glory.

227

SIRACH 228

17 The Lord has not empowered even his holy ones
to recount all his marvelous works,
which the Lord the Almighty has established
so that the universe may stand firm in his glory.
18 He searches out the abyss and the human heart;
he understands their innermost secrets.
For the Most High knows all that may be known;
he sees from of old the things that are to come.
19 He discloses what has been and what is to be,
and he reveals the traces of hidden things.
20 No thought escapes him,
and nothing is hidden from him.
21 He has set in order the splendors of his wisdom;
he is from all eternity one and the same.
Nothing can be added or taken away,
and he needs no one to be his counselor.
22 How desirable are all his works,
and how sparkling they are to see!
23 All these things live and remain forever;
each creature is preserved to meet a particular need.
24 All things come in pairs, one opposite the other,
and he has made nothing incomplete.
25 Each supplements the virtues of the other.
Who could ever tire of seeing his glory?
[Sirach 43]
1 The pride of the higher realms is the clear vault of the sky,
as glorious to behold as the sight of the heavens.
2 The sun, when it appears, proclaims as it rises
what a marvelous instrument it is, the work of the Most High.
3 At noon it parches the land,
and who can withstand its burning heat?
4 A man tending a furnace works in burning heat,
but three times as hot is the sun scorching the mountains;
it breathes out fiery vapors,
and its bright rays blind the eyes.

228

SIRACH 229

5 Great is the Lord who made it;
at his orders it hurries on its course.
6 It is the moon that marks the changing seasons,
governing the times, their everlasting sign.
7 From the moon comes the sign for festal days,
a light that wanes when it completes its course.
8 The new moon, as its name suggests, renews itself;
how marvelous it is in this change,
a beacon to the hosts on high,
shining in the vault of the heavens!
9 The glory of the stars is the beauty of heaven,
a glittering array in the heights of the Lord.
10 On the orders of the Holy One they stand in their appointed places;
they never relax in their watches.
11 Look at the rainbow, and praise him who made it;
it is exceedingly beautiful in its brightness.
12 It encircles the sky with its glorious arc;
the hands of the Most High have stretched it out.
13 By his command he sends the driving snow
and speeds the lightnings of his judgment.
14 Therefore the storehouses are opened,
and the clouds fly out like birds.
15 In his majesty he gives the clouds their strength,
and the hailstones are broken in pieces.
17a The voice of his thunder rebukes the earth;
16
when he appears, the mountains shake.
At his will the south wind blows;
17b so do the storm from the north and the whirlwind.
He scatters the snow like birds flying down,
and its descent is like locusts alighting.
18 The eye is dazzled by the beauty of its whiteness,
and the mind is amazed as it falls.
19 He pours frost over the earth like salt,
and icicles form like pointed thorns.

229

SIRACH 230

20 The cold north wind blows,
and ice freezes on the water;
it settles on every pool of water,
and the water puts it on like a breastplate.
21 He consumes the mountains and burns up the wilderness,
and withers the tender grass like fire.
22 A mist quickly heals all things;
the falling dew gives refreshment from the heat.
23 By his plan he stilled the deep
and planted islands in it.
24 Those who sail the sea tell of its dangers,
and we marvel at what we hear.
25 In it are strange and marvelous creatures,
all kinds of living things, and huge sea-monsters.
26 Because of him each of his messengers succeeds,
and by his word all things hold together.
27 We could say more but could never say enough;
let the final word be: "He is the all."
28 Where can we find the strength to praise him?
For he is greater than all his works.
29 Awesome is the Lord and very great,
and marvelous is his power.
30 Glorify the Lord and exalt him as much as you can,
for he surpasses even that.
When you exalt him, summon all your strength,
and do not grow weary, for you cannot praise him enough.
31 Who has seen him and can describe him?
Or who can extol him as he is?
32 Many things greater than these lie hidden,
for I have seen but few of his works.
33 For the Lord has made all things,
and to the godly he has given wisdom.

230

SIRACH 231

HYMN IN HONOR OF OUR ANCESTORS
[Sirach 44]
In praise of Israel's ancestors; Introduction
1 Let us now sing the praises of famous men,
our ancestors in their generations.
2 The Lord apportioned to them great glory,
his majesty from the beginning.
3 There were those who ruled in their kingdoms,
and made a name for themselves by their valor;
those who gave counsel because they were intelligent;
those who spoke in prophetic oracles;
4 those who led the people by their counsels
and by their knowledge of the people's lore;
they were wise in their words of instruction;
5 those who composed musical tunes,
or put verses in writing;
6 rich men endowed with resources,
living peacefully in their homes —
7 all these were honored in their generations,
and were the pride of their times.
8 Some of them have left behind a name,
so that others declare their praise.
9 But of others there is no memory;
they have perished as though they had never existed;
they have become as though they had never been born,
they and their children after them.
10 But these also were godly men,
whose righteous deeds have not been forgotten;
11 their wealth will remain with their descendants,
and their inheritance with their children's children.
12 Their descendants stand by the covenants;
their children also, for their sake.
13 Their offspring will continue forever,
and their glory will never be blotted out.
14 Their bodies are buried in peace,
but their name lives on generation after generation.

231

SIRACH 232

15 The assembly declares their wisdom,
and the congregation proclaims their praise.
Enoch
16 Enoch pleased the Lord and was taken up,
an example of repentance to all generations.
Noah
17 Noah was found perfect and righteous;
in the time of wrath he kept the race alive;
therefore a remnant was left on the earth
when the flood came.
18 Everlasting covenants were made with him
that all flesh should never again be blotted out by a flood.
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob/Israel
19 Abraham was the great father of a multitude of nations,
and no one has been found like him in glory.
20 He kept the law of the Most High,
and entered into a covenant with him;
he certified the covenant in his flesh,
and when he was tested he proved faithful.
21 Therefore the Lord assured him with an oath
that the nations would be blessed through his offspring;
that he would make him as numerous as the dust of the earth,
and exalt his offspring like the stars,
and give them an inheritance from sea to sea
and from the Euphrates to the ends of the earth.

232

SIRACH 233

22 To Isaac also he gave the same assurance
for the sake of his father Abraham.
The blessing of all people and the covenant
23a he made to rest on the head of Jacob;
he acknowledged him with his blessings,
and gave him his inheritance;
he divided his portions,
and distributed them among twelve tribes.
Moses
23b From his descendants the Lord brought forth a godly man,
who found favor in the sight of all
[Sirach 45]
1 and was beloved by God and people,
Moses, whose memory is blessed.
2 He made him equal in glory to the holy ones,
and made him great, to the terror of his enemies.
3 By his words he performed swift miracles;
the Lord glorified him in the presence of kings.
He gave him commandments for his people,
and revealed to him his glory.
4 For his faithfulness and meekness he consecrated him,
choosing him out of all humankind.
5 He allowed him to hear his voice,
and led him into the dark cloud,
and gave him the commandments face to face,
the law of life and knowledge,
so that he might teach Jacob the covenant,
and Israel his decrees.
Aaron and Phinehas
6 He exalted Aaron, a holy man like Moses
who was his brother, of the tribe of Levi.

233

SIRACH 234

7 He made an everlasting covenant with him,
and gave him the priesthood of the people.
He blessed him with stateliness,
and put a glorious robe on him.
8 He clothed him in perfect splendor,
and strengthened him with the symbols of authority,
the linen undergarments, the long robe, and the ephod.
9 And he encircled him with pomegranates,
with many golden bells all around,
to send forth a sound as he walked,
to make their ringing heard in the temple
as a reminder to his people;
10 with the sacred vestment, of gold and violet
and purple, the work of an embroiderer;
with the oracle of judgment, Urim and Thummim;
11 with twisted crimson, the work of an artisan;
with precious stones engraved like seals,
in a setting of gold, the work of a jeweler,
to commemorate in engraved letters
each of the tribes of Israel;
12 with a gold crown upon his turban,
inscribed like a seal with "Holiness,"
a distinction to be prized, the work of an expert,
a delight to the eyes, richly adorned.
13 Before him such beautiful things did not exist.
No outsider ever put them on,
but only his sons
and his descendants in perpetuity.
14 His sacrifices shall be wholly burned
twice every day continually.
15 Moses ordained him,
and anointed him with holy oil;
it was an everlasting covenant for him
and for his descendants as long as the heavens endure,
to minister to the Lord and serve as priest
and bless his people in his name.

234

SIRACH 235

16 He chose him out of all the living
to offer sacrifice to the Lord,
incense and a pleasing odor as a memorial portion,
to make atonement for the people.
17 In his commandments he gave him
authority and statutes and judgments,
to teach Jacob the testimonies,
and to enlighten Israel with his law.
18 Outsiders conspired against him,
and envied him in the wilderness,
Dathan and Abiram and their followers
and the company of Korah, in wrath and anger.
19 The Lord saw it and was not pleased,
and in the heat of his anger they were destroyed;
he performed wonders against them
to consume them in flaming fire.
20 He added glory to Aaron
and gave him a heritage;
he allotted to him the best of the first fruits,
and prepared bread of first fruits in abundance;
21 for they eat the sacrifices of the Lord,
which he gave to him and his descendants.
22 But in the land of the people he has no inheritance,
and he has no portion among the people;
for the Lord himself is his portion and inheritance.
23 Phinehas son of Eleazar ranks third in glory
for being zealous in the fear of the Lord,
and standing firm, when the people turned away,
in the noble courage of his soul;
and he made atonement for Israel.
24 Therefore a covenant of friendship was established with him,
that he should be leader of the sanctuary and of his people,
that he and his descendants should have
the dignity of the priesthood forever.

235

SIRACH 236

25 Just as a covenant was established with David
son of Jesse of the tribe of Judah,
that the king's heritage passes only from son to son,
so the heritage of Aaron is for his descendants alone.
A prayer for high priests
26 And now bless the Lord
who has crowned you with glory.
May the Lord grant you wisdom of mind
to judge his people with justice,
so that their prosperity may not vanish,
and that their glory may endure through all their generations.
[Sirach 46]
Joshua, Caleb, the judges, and Samuel
1 Joshua son of Nun was mighty in war,
and was the successor of Moses in the prophetic office.
He became, as his name implies,
a great savior of God's elect,
to take vengeance on the enemies that rose against them,
so that he might give Israel its inheritance.
2 How glorious he was when he lifted his hands
and brandished his sword against the cities!
3 Who before him ever stood so firm?
For he waged the wars of the Lord.
4 Was it not through him that the sun stood still
and one day became as long as two?
5 He called upon the Most High, the Mighty One,
when enemies pressed him on every side,
and the great Lord answered him
with hailstones of mighty power.
6 He overwhelmed that nation in battle,
and on the slope he destroyed his opponents,
so that the nations might know his armament,
that he was fighting in the sight of the Lord;
for he was a devoted follower of the Mighty One.

236

SIRACH 237

7 And in the days of Moses he proved his loyalty,
he and Caleb son of Jephunneh:
they opposed the congregation,
restrained the people from sin,
and stilled their wicked grumbling.
8 And these two alone were spared
out of six hundred thousand infantry,
to lead the people into their inheritance,
the land flowing with milk and honey.
9 The Lord gave Caleb strength,
which remained with him in his old age,
so that he went up to the hill country,
and his children obtained it for an inheritance,
10 so that all the Israelites might see
how good it is to follow the Lord.
11 The judges also, with their respective names,
whose hearts did not fall into idolatry
and who did not turn away from the Lord —
may their memory be blessed!
12 May their bones send forth new life from where they lie,
and may the names of those who have been honored
live again in their children!
13 Samuel was beloved by his Lord;
a prophet of the Lord, he established the kingdom
and anointed rulers over his people.
14 By the law of the Lord he judged the congregation,
and the Lord watched over Jacob.
15 By his faithfulness he was proved to be a prophet,
and by his words he became known as a trustworthy seer.
16 He called upon the Lord, the Mighty One,
when his enemies pressed him on every side,
and he offered in sacrifice a suckling lamb.
17 Then the Lord thundered from heaven,
and made his voice heard with a mighty sound;
18 he subdued the leaders of the enemy
and all the rulers of the Philistines.

237

SIRACH 238

19 Before the time of his eternal sleep,
Samuel bore witness before the Lord and his anointed:
"No property, not so much as a pair of shoes,
have I taken from anyone!"
And no one accused him.
20 Even after he had fallen asleep, he prophesied
and made known to the king his death,
and lifted up his voice from the ground
in prophecy, to blot out the wickedness of the people.
[Sirach 47]
Nathan, David, and Solomon
1 After him Nathan rose up
to prophesy in the days of David.
2 As the fat is set apart from the offering of well-being,
so David was set apart from the Israelites.
3 He played with lions as though they were young goats,
and with bears as though they were lambs of the flock.
4 In his youth did he not kill a giant,
and take away the people's disgrace,
when he whirled the stone in the sling
and struck down the boasting Goliath?
5 For he called on the Lord, the Most High,
and he gave strength to his right arm
to strike down a mighty warrior,
and to exalt the power of his people.
6 So they glorified him for the tens of thousands he conquered,
and praised him for the blessings bestowed by the Lord,
when the glorious diadem was given to him.
7 For he wiped out his enemies on every side,
and annihilated his adversaries the Philistines;
he crushed their power to our own day.
8 In all that he did he gave thanks
to the Holy One, the Most High, proclaiming his glory;
he sang praise with all his heart,
and he loved his Maker.

238

SIRACH 239

9 He placed singers before the altar,
to make sweet melody with their voices,
and daily they sing his praises.
10 He gave beauty to the festivals,
and arranged their times throughout the year,
while they praised God's holy name,
and the sanctuary resounded from early morning.
11 The Lord took away his sins,
and exalted his power forever;
he gave him a covenant of kingship
and a glorious throne in Israel.
12 After him a wise son rose up
who because of him lived in security:
13 Solomon reigned in an age of peace,
because God made all his borders tranquil,
so that he might build a house in his name
and provide a sanctuary to stand forever.
14 How wise you were when you were young!
You overflowed like the Nile with understanding.
15 Your influence spread throughout the earth,
and you filled it with proverbs having deep meaning.
16 Your fame reached to far-off islands,
and you were loved for your peaceful reign.
17 Your songs, proverbs, and parables,
and the answers you gave astounded the nations.
18 In the name of the Lord God,
who is called the God of Israel,
you gathered gold like tin
and amassed silver like lead.
19 But you brought in women to lie at your side,
and through your body you were brought into subjection.
20 You stained your honor,
and defiled your family line,
so that you brought wrath upon your children,
and they were grieved at your folly,
21 because the sovereignty was divided
and a rebel kingdom arose out of Ephraim.

239

SIRACH 240

22 But the Lord will never give up his mercy,
or cause any of his works to perish;
he will never blot out the descendants of his chosen one,
or destroy the family line of him who loved him.
So he gave a remnant to Jacob,
and to David a root from his own family.
Kings and prophets; Solomon's son, Rehoboam; Jeroboam
23 Solomon rested with his ancestors,
and left behind him one of his sons,
broad in folly and lacking in sense,
Rehoboam, whose policy drove the people to revolt.
Then Jeroboam son of Nebat led Israel into sin
and started Ephraim on its sinful ways.
24 Their sins increased more and more,
until they were exiled from their land.
25 For they sought out every kind of wickedness,
until vengeance came upon them.
[Sirach 48]
Elijah
1 Then Elijah arose, a prophet like fire,
and his word burned like a torch.
2 He brought a famine upon them,
and by his zeal he made them few in number.
3 By the word of the Lord he shut up the heavens,
and also three times brought down fire.
4 How glorious you were, Elijah, in your wondrous deeds!
Whose glory is equal to yours?
5 You raised a corpse from death
and from Hades, by the word of the Most High.
6 You sent kings down to destruction,
and famous men, from their sickbeds.
7 You heard rebuke at Sinai
and judgments of vengeance at Horeb.

240

SIRACH 241

8 You anointed kings to inflict retribution,
and prophets to succeed you.
9 You were taken up by a whirlwind of fire,
in a chariot with horses of fire.
10 At the appointed time, it is written, you are destined
to calm the wrath of God before it breaks out in fury,
to turn the hearts of parents to their children,
and to restore the tribes of Jacob.
11 Happy are those who saw you
and were adorned with your love!
For we also shall surely live.
Elisha
12 When Elijah was enveloped in the whirlwind,
Elisha was filled with his spirit.
He performed twice as many signs,
and marvels with every utterance of his mouth.
Never in his lifetime did he tremble before any ruler,
nor could anyone intimidate him at all.
13 Nothing was too hard for him,
and when he was dead, his body prophesied.
14 In his life he did wonders,
and in death his deeds were marvelous.
15 Despite all this the people did not repent,
nor did they forsake their sins,
until they were carried off as plunder from their land,
and were scattered over all the earth.
The people were left very few in number,
but with a ruler from the house of David.
16 Some of them did what was right,
but others sinned more and more.

241

SIRACH 242

Rulers and prophets in the kingdom of Judah; Hezekiah
17 Hezekiah fortified his city,
and brought water into its midst;
he tunneled the rock with iron tools,
and built cisterns for the water.
18 In his days Sennacherib invaded the country;
he sent his commander from Lachish and departed;
he shook his fist against Zion,
and made great boasts in his arrogance.
19 Then their hearts were shaken and their hands trembled,
and they were in anguish, like women in labor.
20 But they called upon the Lord who is merciful,
spreading out their hands toward him.
The Holy One quickly heard them from heaven,
and delivered them through Isaiah.
21 The Lord struck down the camp of the Assyrians,
and his angel wiped them out.
22 For Hezekiah did what was pleasing to the Lord,
and he kept firmly to the ways of his ancestor David,
as he was commanded by the prophet Isaiah,
who was great and trustworthy in his visions.
Isaiah
23 In Isaiah's days the sun went backward,
and he prolonged the life of the king.
24 By his dauntless spirit he saw the future,
and comforted the mourners in Zion.
25 He revealed what was to occur to the end of time,
and the hidden things before they happened.

242

SIRACH 243

[Sirach 49]
Josiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Job, and the Twelve Prophets
1 The name of Josiah is like blended incense
prepared by the skill of the perfumer;
his memory is as sweet as honey to every mouth,
and like music at a banquet of wine.
2 He did what was right by reforming the people,
and removing the wicked abominations.
3 He kept his heart fixed on the Lord;
in lawless times he made godliness prevail.
4 Except for David and Hezekiah and Josiah,
all of them were great sinners,
for they abandoned the law of the Most High;
the kings of Judah came to an end.
5 They gave their power to others,
and their glory to a foreign nation,
6 who set fire to the chosen city of the sanctuary,
and made its streets desolate,
as Jeremiah had foretold.
7 For they had mistreated him,
who even in the womb had been consecrated a prophet,
to pluck up and ruin and destroy,
and likewise to build and to plant.
8 It was Ezekiel who saw the vision of glory,
which God showed him above the chariot of the cherubim.
9 For God also mentioned Job
who held fast to all the ways of justice.
10 May the bones of the Twelve Prophets
send forth new life from where they lie,
for they comforted the people of Jacob
and delivered them with confident hope.

243

SIRACH 244

Leaders of the restoration: Zerubbabel, Jeshua, and Nehemiah
11 How shall we magnify Zerubbabel?
He was like a signet ring on the right hand,
12 and so was Jeshua son of Jozadak;
in their days they built the house
and raised a temple holy to the Lord,
destined for everlasting glory.
13 The memory of Nehemiah also is lasting;
he raised our fallen walls,
and set up gates and bars,
and rebuilt our ruined houses.
Conclusion of the historical review
14 Few have ever been created on earth like Enoch,
for he was taken up from the earth.
15 Nor was anyone ever born like Joseph;
even his bones were cared for.
16 Shem and Seth and Enosh were honored,
but above every other created living being was Adam.
[Sirach 50]
Simon, son of Onias
1 The leader of his brothers and the pride of his people
was the high priest, Simon son of Onias,
who in his life repaired the house,
and in his time fortified the temple.
2 He laid the foundations for the high double walls,
the high retaining walls for the temple enclosure.
3 In his days a water cistern was dug,
a reservoir like the sea in circumference.
4 He considered how to save his people from ruin,
and fortified the city against siege.
5 How glorious he was, surrounded by the people,
as he came out of the house of the curtain.

244

SIRACH 245

6 Like the morning star among the clouds,
like the full moon at the festal season;
7 like the sun shining on the temple of the Most High,
like the rainbow gleaming in splendid clouds;
8 like roses in the days of first fruits,
like lilies by a spring of water,
like a green shoot on Lebanon on a summer day;
9 like fire and incense in the censer,
like a vessel of hammered gold
studded with all kinds of precious stones;
10 like an olive tree laden with fruit,
and like a cypress towering in the clouds.
11 When he put on his glorious robe
and clothed himself in perfect splendor,
when he went up to the holy altar,
he made the court of the sanctuary glorious.
12 When he received the portions from the hands of the priests,
as he stood by the hearth of the altar
with a garland of brothers around him,
he was like a young cedar on Lebanon
surrounded by the trunks of palm trees.
13 All the sons of Aaron in their splendor
held the LORD's offering in their hands
before the whole congregation of Israel.
14 Finishing the service at the altars,
and arranging the offering to the Most High, the Almighty,
15 he held out his hand for the cup
and poured a drink offering of the blood of the grape;
he poured it out at the foot of the altar,
a pleasing odor to the Most High, the king of all.
16 Then the sons of Aaron shouted;
they blew their trumpets of hammered metal;
they sounded a mighty fanfare
as a reminder before the Most High.

245

SIRACH 246

17 Then all the people together quickly
fell to the ground on their faces
to worship their Lord,
the Almighty, God Most High.
18 Then the singers praised him with their voices
in sweet and full-toned melody.
19 And the people of the Lord Most High offered
their prayers before the Merciful One,
until the order of worship of the Lord was ended,
and they completed his ritual.
20 Then Simon came down and raised his hands
over the whole congregation of Israelites,
to pronounce the blessing of the Lord with his lips,
and to glory in his name;
21 and they bowed down in worship a second time,
to receive the blessing from the Most High.
22 And now bless the God of all,
who everywhere works great wonders,
who fosters our growth from birth,
and deals with us according to his mercy.
23 May he give us gladness of heart,
and may there be peace in our days
in Israel, as in the days of old.
24 May he entrust to us his mercy,
and may he deliver us in our days!
An invective against Idumeans
25 Two nations my soul detests,
and the third is not even a people:
26 Those who live in Seir, and the Philistines,
and the foolish people that live in Shechem.

246

SIRACH 247

A postscript
27 Instruction in understanding and knowledge
I have written in this book,
Jesus son of Eleazar son of Sirach of Jerusalem,
whose mind poured forth wisdom.
28 Happy are those who concern themselves with these things,
and those who lay them to heart will become wise.
29 For if they put them into practice, they will be equal to anything,
for the fear of the Lord is their path.
PRAYER OF JESUS SON OF SIRACH
[Sirach 51]
Appendices
A psalm of thanksgiving for deliverance
1 I give you thanks, O Lord and King,
and praise you, O God my Savior.
I give thanks to your name,
2 for you have been my protector and helper
and have delivered me from destruction
and from the trap laid by a slanderous tongue,
from lips that fabricate lies.
In the face of my adversaries
you have been my helper 3 and delivered me,
in the greatness of your mercy and of your name,
from grinding teeth about to devour me,
from the hand of those seeking my life,
from the many troubles I endured,
4 from choking fire on every side,
and from the midst of fire that I had not kindled,
5 from the deep belly of Hades,
from an unclean tongue and lying words —
6 the slander of an unrighteous tongue to the king.
My soul drew near to death,
and my life was on the brink of Hades below.

247

SIRACH 248

7 They surrounded me on every side,
and there was no one to help me;
I looked for human assistance,
and there was none.
8 Then I remembered your mercy, O Lord,
and your kindness from of old,
for you rescue those who wait for you
and save them from the hand of their enemies.
9 And I sent up my prayer from the earth,
and begged for rescue from death.
10 I cried out, "Lord, you are my Father;
do not forsake me in the days of trouble,
when there is no help against the proud.
11 I will praise your name continually,
and will sing hymns of thanksgiving."
My prayer was heard,
12 for you saved me from destruction
and rescued me in time of trouble.
For this reason I thank you and praise you,
and I bless the name of the Lord.
The Hebrew text adds:
Give thanks to the LORD, for he is good,
for his mercy endures forever;
Give thanks to the God of praises,
for his mercy endures forever;
Give thanks to the guardian of Israel,
for his mercy endures forever;
Give thanks to him who formed all things,
for his mercy endures forever;
Give thanks to the redeemer of Israel,
for his mercy endures forever;

248

SIRACH 249

Give thanks to him who gathers the dispersed of Israel,
for his mercy endures forever;
Give thanks to him who rebuilt his city and his sanctuary,
for his mercy endures forever;
Give thanks to him who makes a horn to sprout for the
house of David, for his mercy endures forever;
Give thanks to him who has chosen the sons of Zadok
to be priests, for his mercy endures forever;
Give thanks to the shield of Abraham,
for his mercy endures forever;
Give thanks to the rock of Isaac,
for his mercy endures forever;
Give thanks to the mighty one of Jacob,
for his mercy endures forever;
Give thanks to him who has chosen Zion,
for his mercy endures forever;
Give thanks to the King of the kings of kings,
for his mercy endures forever;
He has raised up a horn for his people,
praise for all his loyal ones.
For the children of Israel, the people close to him.
Praise the LORD!

249

SIRACH 250

An acrostic poem about the author's love for Wisdom
13 While I was still young, before I went on my travels,
I sought wisdom openly in my prayer.
14 Before the temple I asked for her,
and I will search for her until the end.
15 From the first blossom to the ripening grape
my heart delighted in her;
my foot walked on the straight path;
from my youth I followed her steps.
16 I inclined my ear a little and received her,
and I found for myself much instruction.
17 I made progress in her;
to him who gives wisdom I will give glory.
18 For I resolved to live according to wisdom,
and I was zealous for the good,
and I shall never be disappointed.
19 My soul grappled with wisdom,
and in my conduct I was strict;
I spread out my hands to the heavens,
and lamented my ignorance of her.
20 I directed my soul to her,
and in purity I found her.
With her I gained understanding from the first;
therefore I will never be forsaken.
21 My heart was stirred to seek her;
therefore I have gained a prize possession.
22 The Lord gave me my tongue as a reward,
and I will praise him with it.
23 Draw near to me, you who are uneducated,
and lodge in the house of instruction.
24 Why do you say you are lacking in these things,
and why do you endure such great thirst?

250

SIRACH 251

25 I opened my mouth and said,
Acquire wisdom for yourselves without money.
26 Put your neck under her yoke,
and let your souls receive instruction;
it is to be found close by.
27 See with your own eyes that I have labored but little
and found for myself much serenity.
28 Hear but a little of my instruction,
and through me you will acquire silver and gold.
29 May your soul rejoice in God's mercy,
and may you never be ashamed to praise him.
30 Do your work in good time,
and in his own time God will give you your reward.

251

BARUCH 252

BARUCH
Introduction
The book of Baruch was probably written sometime between 200 and
60 BCE; it is set, however, during the Babylonian exile of the early sixth
century BCE and attributed to Jeremiah's friend and secretary, Baruch
son of Neriah (Jer 32.12; 36.4; 43.3; 45.1). Although Jeremiah and Baruch
both are reported in the book of Baruch and other Jewish sources
(Seder Olam Rabbah 36; Midrash Rabbah Song 5.5; Babylonian Talmud
Megillah 16b), that Baruch went to Babylon. The number of historical
errors in the introduction (1.1-14) makes it unlikely that the book was
written by Baruch or near the time of the exile. Although few clues to
the date of the composition exist, allusions to Sir 24 (ca. 180 BCE) and
Dan 9 (ca. 165 BCE) imply a date not earlier than the middle of the
second century BCE.
Most of Baruch is made up of pastiches of biblical passages copied or
paraphrased (e.g., Dan 9; Job 28; Isa 40-66). This mosaic technique was
popular in the late Second Temple period. Authors recombined texts in
new ways both as a means of interpreting canonical literature and as a
means of creating new literary entities.
Baruch falls into two main sections, each of which consists of two parts.
The first section, in prose, includes an introduction (1.1-14) and a
corporate confession of sin (1.15-3.8) for Jews in Jerusalem to recite at
the altar there, along with appropriate sacrifices, on various festival
days and seasons. The idea of a letter or scroll written in Babylon to be
read aloud in Jerusalem is derived from the exchange of letters
recorded in Jer 29 and the scroll of Jeremiah's oracles penned by
Baruch and read before King Jehoiakim in 605 BCE (Jer 36). The
corporate confession is modeled on Dan 9.4-19 (cf. Ezra 9.6-15; Neh 9.637).

252

BARUCH 253

The second section consists of two poems. The first (3.9-4.4) is a paean
of praise of Wisdom. Drawing on Job 28 and Sir 24, it describes Wisdom
as elusive but also as the Torah, God's precious gift to Israel. The
second contains an address by Jerusalem to the people of Israel (4.5-29)
and a rhetorical address to Jerusalem (4.30-5.9), inspired no doubt by
Isa 51.17-52.10; 54; and 60-62.
The text on which the following translation is based is the Greek
Septuagint; ancient Syriac, Latin, Coptic, Ethiopic, Arabic, and
Armenian versions based on the Greek also exist. The prose section (1.13.8) has long been viewed as a translation of a lost Hebrew originals.
Each of the major sections of the book has distinctive stylistic aspects
that may indicate different authors. For instance, different names for
God are used in the confession ("Lord"), in the wisdom poem ("God"),
and in the Zion poem ("the Everlasting"). Judgment as to whether
Baruch is the product of a single author or of an editor who compiled
already existing materials is complicated by the heavy dependence of
the confession and the poems on various scriptural models, since the
dependence may account for much of the variation in style and
theological perspective.
The book of Baruch would have well served Jewish communities in
Judah and the Diaspora during the Seleucid and later eras of suffering
and repression, since it deals with theological themes of particular
interest to Jews at that time: the confession of corporate sin in the
context of biblical history, the Torah as the gift of divine wisdom, and
the restoration of Zion. There is no evidence, however, that any Jewish
community afforded Baruch canonical status. In Christianity it is
included among the deuterocanonical books of the Roman Catholic
and Eastern Orthodox churches, but is listed in the Apocrypha by
Protestant churches.

253

BARUCH 254

[Baruch 1]
Historical introduction
1 These are the words of the book that Baruch son of Neriah son of
Mahseiah son of Zedekiah son of Hasadiah son of Hilkiah wrote in
Babylon, 2 in the fifth year, on the seventh day of the month, at the
time when the Chaldeans took Jerusalem and burned it with fire.
3 Baruch read the words of this book to Jeconiah son of Jehoiakim,
king of Judah, and to all the people who came to hear the book, 4 and
to the nobles and the princes, and to the elders, and to all the people,
small and great, all who lived in Babylon by the river Sud.
5 Then they wept, and fasted, and prayed before the Lord; 6 they
collected as much money as each could give, 7 and sent it to Jerusalem
to the high priest Jehoiakim son of Hilkiah son of Shallum, and to the
priests, and to all the people who were present with him in Jerusalem.
8 At the same time, on the tenth day of Sivan, Baruch took the vessels
of the house of the Lord, which had been carried away from the
temple, to return them to the land of Judah — the silver vessels that
Zedekiah son of Josiah, king of Judah, had made, 9 after King
Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon had carried away from Jerusalem Jeconiah
and the princes and the prisoners and the nobles and the people of the
land, and brought them to Babylon.
10 They said: Here we send you money; so buy with the money burnt
offerings and sin offerings and incense, and prepare a grain offering,
and offer them on the altar of the Lord our God; 11 and pray for the
life of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon, and for the life of his son
Belshazzar, so that their days on earth may be like the days of heaven.
12 The Lord will give us strength, and light to our eyes; we shall live
under the protection of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon, and under
the protection of his son Belshazzar, and we shall serve them many
days and find favor in their sight. 13 Pray also for us to the Lord our
God, for we have sinned against the Lord our God, and to this day the
anger of the Lord and his wrath have not turned away from us. 14 And
you shall read aloud this scroll that we are sending you, to make your

254

BARUCH 255

confession in the house of the Lord on the days of the festivals and at
appointed seasons.
Confession of sin
15 And you shall say: The Lord our God is in the right, but there is open
shame on us today, on the people of Judah, on the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, 16 and on our kings, our rulers, our priests, our prophets,
and our ancestors, 17 because we have sinned before the Lord. 18 We
have disobeyed him, and have not heeded the voice of the Lord our
God, to walk in the statutes of the Lord that he set before us. 19 From
the time when the Lord brought our ancestors out of the land of Egypt
until today, we have been disobedient to the Lord our God, and we
have been negligent, in not heeding his voice. 20 So to this day there
have clung to us the calamities and the curse that the Lord declared
through his servant Moses at the time when he brought our ancestors
out of the land of Egypt to give to us a land flowing with milk and
honey. 21 We did not listen to the voice of the Lord our God in all the
words of the prophets whom he sent to us, 22 but all of us followed
the intent of our own wicked hearts by serving other gods and doing
what is evil in the sight of the Lord our God.
[Baruch 2]
1 So the Lord carried out the threat he spoke against us: against our
judges who ruled Israel, and against our kings and our rulers and the
people of Israel and Judah. 2 Under the whole heaven there has not
been done the like of what he has done in Jerusalem, in accordance
with the threats that were written in the law of Moses. 3 Some of us
ate the flesh of their sons and others the flesh of their daughters. 4 He
made them subject to all the kingdoms around us, to be an object of
scorn and a desolation among all the surrounding peoples, where the
Lord has scattered them. 5 They were brought down and not raised up,
because our nation sinned against the Lord our God, in not heeding his
voice.
6 The Lord our God is in the right, but there is open shame on us and
our ancestors this very day. 7 All those calamities with which the Lord

255

BARUCH 256

threatened us have come upon us. 8 Yet we have not entreated the
favor of the Lord by turning away, each of us, from the thoughts of
our wicked hearts. 9 And the Lord has kept the calamities ready, and
the Lord has brought them upon us, for the Lord is just in all the works
that he has commanded us to do. 10 Yet we have not obeyed his voice,
to walk in the statutes of the Lord that he set before us.
11 And now, O Lord God of Israel, who brought your people out of the
land of Egypt with a mighty hand and with signs and wonders and
with great power and outstretched arm, and made yourself a name
that continues to this day, 12 we have sinned, we have been ungodly,
we have done wrong, O Lord our God, against all your ordinances. 13
Let your anger turn away from us, for we are left, few in number,
among the nations where you have scattered us. 14 Hear, O Lord, our
prayer and our supplication, and for your own sake deliver us, and
grant us favor in the sight of those who have carried us into exile; 15 so
that all the earth may know that you are the Lord our God, for Israel
and his descendants are called by your name.
16 O Lord, look down from your holy dwelling, and consider us. Incline
your ear, O Lord, and hear; 17 open your eyes, O Lord, and see, for the
dead who are in Hades, whose spirit has been taken from their bodies,
will not ascribe glory or justice to the Lord; 18 but the person who is
deeply grieved, who walks bowed and feeble, with failing eyes and
famished soul, will declare your glory and righteousness, O Lord.
19 For it is not because of any righteous deeds of our ancestors or our
kings that we bring before you our prayer for mercy, O Lord our God.
20 For you have sent your anger and your wrath upon us, as you
declared by your servants the prophets, saying: 21 Thus says the Lord:
Bend your shoulders and serve the king of Babylon, and you will
remain in the land that I gave to your ancestors. 22 But if you will not
obey the voice of the Lord and will not serve the king of Babylon, 23 I
will make to cease from the towns of Judah and from the region
around Jerusalem the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the
voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, and the whole land
will be a desolation without inhabitants.

256

BARUCH 257

24 But we did not obey your voice, to serve the king of Babylon; and
you have carried out your threats, which you spoke by your servants
the prophets, that the bones of our kings and the bones of our
ancestors would be brought out of their resting place; 25 and indeed
they have been thrown out to the heat of day and the frost of night.
They perished in great misery, by famine and sword and pestilence. 26
And the house that is called by your name you have made as it is today,
because of the wickedness of the house of Israel and the house of
Judah.
27 Yet you have dealt with us, O Lord our God, in all your kindness and
in all your great compassion, 28 as you spoke by your servant Moses on
the day when you commanded him to write your law in the presence
of the people of Israel, saying, 29 "If you will not obey my voice, this
very great multitude will surely turn into a small number among the
nations, where I will scatter them. 30 For I know that they will not obey
me, for they are a stiff-necked people. But in the land of their exile
they will come to themselves 31 and know that I am the Lord their God.
I will give them a heart that obeys and ears that hear; 32 they will
praise me in the land of their exile, and will remember my name 33 and
turn from their stubbornness and their wicked deeds; for they will
remember the ways of their ancestors, who sinned before the Lord. 34 I
will bring them again into the land that I swore to give to their
ancestors, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and they will rule over it; and I
will increase them, and they will not be diminished. 35 I will make an
everlasting covenant with them to be their God and they shall be my
people; and I will never again remove my people Israel from the land
that I have given them."
[Baruch 3]
1 O Lord Almighty, God of Israel, the soul in anguish and the wearied
spirit cry out to you. 2 Hear, O Lord, and have mercy, for we have
sinned before you. 3 For you are enthroned forever, and we are
perishing forever. 4 O Lord Almighty, God of Israel, hear now the
prayer of the people of Israel, the children of those who sinned before
you, who did not heed the voice of the Lord their God, so that
calamities have clung to us. 5 Do not remember the iniquities of our

257

BARUCH 258

ancestors, but in this crisis remember your power and your name. 6 For
you are the Lord our God, and it is you, O Lord, whom we will praise. 7
For you have put the fear of you in our hearts so that we would call
upon your name; and we will praise you in our exile, for we have put
away from our hearts all the iniquity of our ancestors who sinned
against you. 8 See, we are today in our exile where you have scattered
us, to be reproached and cursed and punished for all the iniquities of
our ancestors, who forsook the Lord our God.
Wisdom, found by God, was given to Israel as the Torah
9 Hear the commandments of life, O Israel;
give ear, and learn wisdom!
10 Why is it, O Israel, why is it that you are in the land of your enemies,
that you are growing old in a foreign country,
that you are defiled with the dead,
11
that you are counted among those in Hades?
12 You have forsaken the fountain of wisdom.
13 If you had walked in the way of God,
you would be living in peace forever.
14 Learn where there is wisdom,
where there is strength,
where there is understanding,
so that you may at the same time discern
where there is length of days, and life,
where there is light for the eyes, and peace.
15 Who has found her place?
And who has entered her storehouses?
16 Where are the rulers of the nations,
and those who lorded it over the animals on earth;
17 those who made sport of the birds of the air,
and who hoarded up silver and gold
in which people trust,
and there is no end to their getting;
18 those who schemed to get silver, and were anxious,
but there is no trace of their works?

258

BARUCH 259

19 They have vanished and gone down to Hades,
and others have arisen in their place.
20 Later generations have seen the light of day,
and have lived upon the earth;
but they have not learned the way to knowledge,
nor understood her paths,
nor laid hold of her.
21 Their descendants have strayed far from her way.
22 She has not been heard of in Canaan,
or seen in Teman;
23 the descendants of Hagar, who seek for understanding on the earth,
the merchants of Merran and Teman,
the story-tellers and the seekers for understanding,
have not learned the way to wisdom,
or given thought to her paths.
24 O Israel, how great is the house of God,
how vast the territory that he possesses!
25 It is great and has no bounds;
it is high and immeasurable.
26 The giants were born there, who were famous of old,
great in stature, expert in war.
27 God did not choose them,
or give them the way to knowledge;
28 so they perished because they had no wisdom,
they perished through their folly.
29 Who has gone up into heaven, and taken her,
and brought her down from the clouds?
30 Who has gone over the sea, and found her,
and will buy her for pure gold?
31 No one knows the way to her,
or is concerned about the path to her.
32 But the one who knows all things knows her,
he found her by his understanding.
The one who prepared the earth for all time
filled it with four-footed creatures;

259

BARUCH 260

33 the one who sends forth the light, and it goes;
he called it, and it obeyed him, trembling;
34 the stars shone in their watches, and were glad;
he called them, and they said, "Here we are!"
They shone with gladness for him who made them.
35 This is our God;
no other can be compared to him.
36 He found the whole way to knowledge,
and gave her to his servant Jacob
and to Israel, whom he loved.
37 Afterward she appeared on earth
and lived with humankind.
[Baruch 4]
1 She is the book of the commandments of God,
the law that endures forever.
All who hold her fast will live,
and those who forsake her will die.
2 Turn, O Jacob, and take her;
walk toward the shining of her light.
3 Do not give your glory to another,
or your advantages to an alien people.
4 Happy are we, O Israel,
for we know what is pleasing to God.
Poem of comfort and restoration
5 Take courage, my people,
who perpetuate Israel's name!
6 It was not for destruction
that you were sold to the nations,
but you were handed over to your enemies
because you angered God.
7 For you provoked the one who made you
by sacrificing to demons and not to God.
8 You forgot the everlasting God, who brought you up,
and you grieved Jerusalem, who reared you.

260

BARUCH 261

9 For she saw the wrath that came upon you from God,
and she said:
Listen, you neighbors of Zion,
God has brought great sorrow upon me;
10 for I have seen the exile of my sons and daughters,
which the Everlasting brought upon them.
11 With joy I nurtured them,
but I sent them away with weeping and sorrow.
12 Let no one rejoice over me, a widow
and bereaved of many;
I was left desolate because of the sins of my children,
because they turned away from the law of God.
13 They had no regard for his statutes;
they did not walk in the ways of God's commandments,
or tread the paths his righteousness showed them.
14 Let the neighbors of Zion come;
remember the capture of my sons and daughters,
which the Everlasting brought upon them.
15 For he brought a distant nation against them,
a nation ruthless and of a strange language,
which had no respect for the aged
and no pity for a child.
16 They led away the widow's beloved sons,
and bereaved the lonely woman of her daughters.
17 But I, how can I help you?
18 For he who brought these calamities upon you
will deliver you from the hand of your enemies.
19 Go, my children, go;
for I have been left desolate.
20 I have taken off the robe of peace
and put on sackcloth for my supplication;
I will cry to the Everlasting all my days.
21 Take courage, my children, cry to God,
and he will deliver you from the power and hand of the enemy.

261

BARUCH 262

22 For I have put my hope in the Everlasting to save you,
and joy has come to me from the Holy One,
because of the mercy that will soon come to you
from your everlasting savior.
23 For I sent you out with sorrow and weeping,
but God will give you back to me with joy and gladness forever.
24 For as the neighbors of Zion have now seen your capture,
so they soon will see your salvation by God,
which will come to you with great glory
and with the splendor of the Everlasting.
25 My children, endure with patience the wrath that has come
upon you from God. Your enemy has overtaken you,
but you will soon see their destruction
and will tread upon their necks.
26 My pampered children have traveled rough roads;
they were taken away like a flock carried off by the enemy.
27 Take courage, my children, and cry to God,
for you will be remembered by the one who brought this
upon you.
28 For just as you were disposed to go astray from God,
return with tenfold zeal to seek him.
29 For the one who brought these calamities upon you
will bring you everlasting joy with your salvation.
30 Take courage, O Jerusalem,
for the one who named you will comfort you.
31 Wretched will be those who mistreated you
and who rejoiced at your fall.
32 Wretched will be the cities that your children served as slaves;
wretched will be the city that received your offspring.
33 For just as she rejoiced at your fall
and was glad for your ruin,
so she will be grieved at her own desolation.
34 I will take away her pride in her great population,
and her insolence will be turned to grief.
35 For fire will come upon her from the Everlasting for many days,
and for a long time she will be inhabited by demons.

262

BARUCH 263

36 Look toward the east, O Jerusalem,
and see the joy that is coming to you from God.
37 Look, your children are coming, whom you sent away;
they are coming, gathered from east and west,
at the word of the Holy One,
rejoicing in the glory of God.
[Baruch 5]
1 Take off the garment of your sorrow and affliction, O Jerusalem,
and put on forever the beauty of the glory from God.
2 Put on the robe of the righteousness that comes from God;
put on your head the diadem of the glory of the Everlasting;
3 for God will show your splendor everywhere under heaven.
4 For God will give you evermore the name,
"Righteous Peace, Godly Glory."
5 Arise, O Jerusalem, stand upon the height;
look toward the east,
and see your children gathered from west and east
at the word of the Holy One,
rejoicing that God has remembered them.
6 For they went out from you on foot,
led away by their enemies;
but God will bring them back to you,
carried in glory, as on a royal throne.
7 For God has ordered that every high mountain and the everlasting
hills be made low and the valleys filled up, to make level ground,
so that Israel may walk safely in the glory of God.
8 The woods and every fragrant tree
have shaded Israel at God's command.
9 For God will lead Israel with joy,
in the light of his glory,
with the mercy and righteousness that come from him.

263

LETTER OF JEREMIAH 264

LETTER OF JEREMIAH
Introduction
These seventy-three verses purport to be a letter composed by
Jeremiah for those about to be taken into exile from Judah to
Babylonia in 597 BCE by Nebuchadnezzar's forces. It was undoubtedly
inspired by Jeremiah's letter (Jer 29.1-23) to those taken hostage in 597,
a decade before the final defeat of Judah and the destruction of
Jerusalem. The Letter of Jeremiah is an impassioned sermon against
idol worship and polytheism based on Jer 10, and particularly Jer 10.11:
"The gods who did not make the heavens and the earth shall perish
from the earth and from under the heavens." The Letter is also
influenced, however, by other biblical polemics against idol worship (Ps
115.4-8; 135.15-18; Isa 40.18.20; 41.6-7; 44.9-20; 46.1-7; etc.). The body of
the letter is composed of a series of ten warnings to Jews, who might
be attracted to idol worship, to recognize and be wary of idolatry. Each
part ends on a common refrain, with variations, insisting that idols are
not gods nor to be confused with the one, true God (vv. 16, 23, 29, 40,
44, 52, 56, 65, 69, 72).
Although all surviving manuscripts of the letter are in Greek, including
one fragment from Cave 7 at Qumran, the Letter was probably
composed originally in Hebrew or Aramaic. Most scholars date the
Letter to the Hellenistic period. The reference in v. 3 to an exile lasting
seven generations (280 years) has been taken as a clue to the date of
composition of the letter (317 BCE), but the reference to seven
generations is probably symbolic. The allusion to the Letter in 2 Macc
2.1-3 would indicate a date no later than the second century BCE.
The Letter has different placements in various manuscripts and versions
of the Bible. It stands as a discrete work between Lamentations and
Ezekiel in two major Greek Septuagint manuscripts (fourth-century
Vaticanus and fifth-century Alexandrius), in the Milan Syriac Hexapla,
264

LETTER OF JEREMIAH 265

and in Arabic. In other Greek and Syriac manuscripts, and in the Latin
version, it appears as the sixth chapter of Baruch. Since it is, however,
clearly independent of Baruch, the New Revised Standard Version
treats it as a separate book. This pseudepigraphical work was written
for a Jewish audience, perhaps in Palestine. It is not included in either
the Jewish or Protestant canons, but is one of the deuterocanonical
books of the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches.

[Letter of Jeremiah 6]
Historical introduction
1 A copy of a letter that Jeremiah sent to those who were to be taken
to Babylon as exiles by the king of the Babylonians, to give them the
message that God had commanded him.
The People Face a Long Captivity
2 Because of the sins that you have committed before God, you will be
taken to Babylon as exiles by Nebuchadnezzar, king of the
Babylonians. 3 Therefore when you have come to Babylon you will
remain there for many years, for a long time, up to seven generations;
after that I will bring you away from there in peace. 4 Now in Babylon
you will see gods made of silver and gold and wood, which people
carry on their shoulders, and which cause the heathen to fear. 5 So
beware of becoming at all like the foreigners or of letting fear for
these gods possess you 6 when you see the multitude before and
behind them worshiping them. But say in your heart, "It is you, O Lord,
whom we must worship." 7 For my angel is with you, and he is
watching over your lives.
Condemnation of idolatry
8 Their tongues are smoothed by the carpenter, and they themselves
are overlaid with gold and silver; but they are false and cannot speak. 9
People take gold and make crowns for the heads of their gods, as they

265

LETTER OF JEREMIAH 266

might for a girl who loves ornaments. 10 Sometimes the priests secretly
take gold and silver from their gods and spend it on themselves, 11 or
even give some of it to the prostitutes on the terrace. They deck their
gods out with garments like human beings — these gods of silver and
gold and wood 12 that cannot save themselves from rust and corrosion.
When they have been dressed in purple robes, 13 their faces are wiped
because of the dust from the temple, which is thick upon them. 14 One
of them holds a scepter, like a district judge, but is unable to destroy
anyone who offends it. 15 Another has a dagger in its right hand, and
an ax, but cannot defend itself from war and robbers. 16 From this it is
evident that they are not gods; so do not fear them.
Uselessness and helplessness of idols
17 For just as someone's dish is useless when it is broken, 18 so are their
gods when they have been set up in the temples. Their eyes are full of
the dust raised by the feet of those who enter. And just as the gates
are shut on every side against anyone who has offended a king, as
though under sentence of death, so the priests make their temples
secure with doors and locks and bars, in order that they may not be
plundered by robbers. 19 They light more lamps for them than they
light for themselves, though their gods can see none of them. 20 They
are just like a beam of the temple, but their hearts, it is said, are eaten
away when crawling creatures from the earth devour them and their
robes. They do not notice 21 when their faces have been blackened by
the smoke of the temple. 22 Bats, swallows, and birds alight on their
bodies and heads; and so do cats. 23 From this you will know that they
are not gods; so do not fear them.
Idols are unable to feel or move
24 As for the gold that they wear for beauty — it will not shine unless
someone wipes off the tarnish; for even when they were being cast,
they did not feel it. 25 They are bought without regard to cost, but
there is no breath in them. 26 Having no feet, they are carried on the
shoulders of others, revealing to humankind their worthlessness. And
those who serve them are put to shame 27 because, if any of these
gods falls to the ground, they themselves must pick it up. If anyone sets

266

LETTER OF JEREMIAH 267

it upright, it cannot move itself; and if it is tipped over, it cannot
straighten itself. Gifts are placed before them just as before the dead.
28 The priests sell the sacrifices that are offered to these gods and use
the money themselves. Likewise their wives preserve some of the meat
with salt, but give none to the poor or helpless. 29 Sacrifices to them
may even be touched by women in their periods or at childbirth. Since
you know by these things that they are not gods, do not fear them.
Idols cannot repay good or evil, or help worshipers
30 For how can they be called gods? Women serve meals for gods of
silver and gold and wood; 31 and in their temples the priests sit with
their clothes torn, their heads and beards shaved, and their heads
uncovered. 32 They howl and shout before their gods as some do at a
funeral banquet. 33 The priests take some of the clothing of their gods
to clothe their wives and children. 34 Whether one does evil to them or
good, they will not be able to repay it. They cannot set up a king or
depose one. 35 Likewise they are not able to give either wealth or
money; if one makes a vow to them and does not keep it, they will not
require it. 36 They cannot save anyone from death or rescue the weak
from the strong. 37 They cannot restore sight to the blind; they cannot
rescue one who is in distress. 38 They cannot take pity on a widow or
do good to an orphan. 39 These things that are made of wood and
overlaid with gold and silver are like stones from the mountain, and
those who serve them will be put to shame. 40 Why then must anyone
think that they are gods, or call them gods?
The Chaldeans dishonor their own idols
Besides, even the Chaldeans themselves dishonor them; for when they
see someone who cannot speak, they bring Bel and pray that the mute
may speak, as though Bel were able to understand! 41 Yet they
themselves cannot perceive this and abandon them, for they have no
sense. 42 And the women, with cords around them, sit along the
passageways, burning bran for incense. 43 When one of them is led off
by one of the passers-by and is taken to bed by him, she derides the
woman next to her, because she was not as attractive as herself and

267

LETTER OF JEREMIAH 268

her cord was not broken. 44 Whatever is done for these idols is false.
Why then must anyone think that they are gods, or call them gods?
Idols are but the work of human hands
45 They are made by carpenters and goldsmiths; they can be nothing
but what the artisans wish them to be. 46 Those who make them will
certainly not live very long themselves; 47 how then can the things that
are made by them be gods? They have left only lies and reproach for
those who come after. 48 For when war or calamity comes upon them,
the priests consult together as to where they can hide themselves and
their gods. 49 How then can one fail to see that these are not gods, for
they cannot save themselves from war or calamity? 50 Since they are
made of wood and overlaid with gold and silver, it will afterward be
known that they are false. 51 It will be manifest to all the nations and
kings that they are not gods but the work of human hands, and that
there is no work of God in them. 52 Who then can fail to know that
they are not gods?
The impotence of idols
53 For they cannot set up a king over a country or give rain to people.
54 They cannot judge their own cause or deliver one who is wronged,
for they have no power; 55 they are like crows between heaven and
earth. When fire breaks out in a temple of wooden gods overlaid with
gold or silver, their priests will flee and escape, but the gods will be
burned up like timbers. 56 Besides, they can offer no resistance to king
or enemy. Why then must anyone admit or think that they are gods?
Idols are helpless, useless, and not to be compared with celestial
phenomena
57 Gods made of wood and overlaid with silver and gold are unable to
save themselves from thieves or robbers. 58 Anyone who can will strip
them of their gold and silver and of the robes they wear, and go off
with this booty, and they will not be able to help themselves. 59 So it is
better to be a king who shows his courage, or a household utensil that
serves its owner's need, than to be these false gods; better even the

268

LETTER OF JEREMIAH 269

door of a house that protects its contents, than these false gods; better
also a wooden pillar in a palace, than these false gods.
60 For sun and moon and stars are bright, and when sent to do a
service, they are obedient. 61 So also the lightning, when it flashes, is
widely seen; and the wind likewise blows in every land. 62 When God
commands the clouds to go over the whole world, they carry out his
command. 63 And the fire sent from above to consume mountains and
woods does what it is ordered. But these idols are not to be compared
with them in appearance or power. 64 Therefore one must not think
that they are gods, nor call them gods, for they are not able either to
decide a case or to do good to anyone. 65 Since you know then that
they are not gods, do not fear them.
The helplessness of idols
66 They can neither curse nor bless kings; 67 they cannot show signs in
the heavens for the nations, or shine like the sun or give light like the
moon. 68 The wild animals are better than they are, for they can flee
to shelter and help themselves. 69 So we have no evidence whatever
that they are gods; therefore do not fear them.
Idols are compared with a scarecrow, thornbush, and corpse
70 Like a scarecrow in a cucumber bed, which guards nothing, so are
their gods of wood, overlaid with gold and silver. 71 In the same way,
their gods of wood, overlaid with gold and silver, are like a thornbush
in a garden on which every bird perches; or like a corpse thrown out in
the darkness. 72 From the purple and linen that rot upon them you will
know that they are not gods; and they will finally be consumed
themselves, and be a reproach in the land. 73 Better, therefore, is
someone upright who has no idols; such a person will be far above
reproach.

269

THE ADDITIONS TO DANIEL 270

THE ADDITIONS TO DANIEL
The Additions to the Greek Book of Daniel
• The Prayer of Azariah and the Song of the Three Jews
• Susanna
• Bel and the Dragon

THE ADDITIONS TO DANIEL
Greek manuscripts of both the Septuagint and the Theodotion versions
of the book of Daniel add three Additions to the twelve original
Hebrew and Aramaic chapters: "The Prayer of Azariah and the Song of
the Three Jews," "Susanna," and "Bel and the Dragon." Behind the
Greek may lie Hebrew or Aramaic originals, although no such versions
of the three stories have been found even among the Dead Sea Scrolls,
and there is no indisputable Talmudic reference to them. Like the
folktales in Dan 1-6, the Additions in all probability originated prior to
the Maccabean revolt in the mid-second century BCE; they may been
originally composed as early as the Persian period (fifth-fourth century
BCE). Scholars debate the place of composition: a Semitic (Hebrew or
Aramaic) original would suggest a provenance in Alexandria. The
Additions, which do not cite each other, likely circulated independently
and only later, perhaps ca. 100 BCE when the book of Daniel was
translated into Greek, were they added to the Danielic corpus. The first
independent citations of the Additions date from the church fathers of
the second century CE.
The Prayer of Azariah and the Song of the Three Jews are found in all
Greek versions between Dan 3.23 and 3.24. The Septuagint locates the
other two Additions at the end of the book of Daniel, after 12.13;
Theodotion's version places Susanna at the opening of the book of
Daniel, and Bel and the Dragon at the conclusion of ch 6. Other ancient

270

THE ADDITIONS TO DANIEL 271

versions follow Theodotian's order. The NRSV follows Theodotion's text
but places the Additions by themselves in the Apocrypha rather than
integrating them into the text.

THE PRAYER OF AZARIAH AND THE SONG
OF THE THREE JEWS
Introduction
The Prayer of Azariah (vv. 1-22) and the Song of the Three Jews (vv. 2868), along with a brief prose paragraph (vv. 23-27) concerning the fate
of the three in Nebuchadnezzar's furnace, are placed by ancient
manuscripts between Dan 3.23 and 3.24. Likely composed
independently in the second or first century BCE, the Prayer and Song
(with the exception of the end of the Song) may have originally had no
connection to the book of Daniel. They appear as numbers 7 and 8 of
the fifteen "Odes" added to the Psalter in a few manuscripts of the
Septuagint, a placement that complements the resemblance of these
Additions to Ps 148 in terms of theme and Ps 136 in terms of structure.
Their placement in Dan 3 gives their general emphasis on hope for
deliverance, national repentance, and divine faithfulness a poignant
focus as the three Jews face death in Babylonian exile.
Similar prayers and hymns are a hallmark of Second Temple Jewish
texts, and they are found in such works as Judith, Tobit, and Baruch, as
well as in Dan 9 and among the scrolls discovered at Qumran (the Dead
Sea Scrolls); they may represent early forms of synagogue liturgies. The
Additions to Daniel are, in particular, comparable to the Additions to
Esther: In both, prose narrative is supplemented with prayer and song
that emphasize the piety of the main characters. The Prayer of Azariah
resembles other postexilic works highlighting divine righteousness, the
failure of the covenant community to remain faithful, assertion of
divine mercy, and appeal for mercy (Ps 106; Ezra 9.6-15; Neh 1.5-11; Bar
271

THE ADDITIONS TO DANIEL 272

1.15-3.8; and some Qumran texts). The Song of the Three Jews has
allusions to numerous psalmic and prophetic passages in it exhortations
to the heavens (vv. 36-14), nature (vv. 42-51), earth and its creatures (vv.
52-59), and humanity (vv.60-68). Unlike the book of Daniel and the
Prayer of Azariah, however, it does not suggest a period of persecution
or a time when the Temple was either destroyed or profaned.
Whether the Prayer and Song were initially written in Hebrew or
Aramaic or even Greek remains debated; their place of composition
does as well, although the Prayer contains several references that
correspond to the time of Antiochus IV (175-164 BCE).

The Prayer of Azariah and the Song of the Three Jews
The Prayer of Azariah
(Additions to Daniel, inserted between 3.23 and 3.24)
1 They walked around in the midst of the flames, singing hymns to God
and blessing the Lord. 2 Then Azariah stood still in the fire and prayed
aloud:
3 "Blessed are you, O Lord, God of our ancestors, and worthy of praise;
and glorious is your name forever!
4 For you are just in all you have done;
all your works are true and your ways right,
and all your judgments are true.
5 You have executed true judgments in all you have brought upon us
and upon Jerusalem, the holy city of our ancestors;
by a true judgment you have brought all this upon us because
of our sins.
6 For we have sinned and broken your law in turning away from you;
in all matters we have sinned grievously.
7 We have not obeyed your commandments,
we have not kept them or done what you have commanded
us for our own good.

272

THE ADDITIONS TO DANIEL 273

8 So all that you have brought upon us,
and all that you have done to us,
you have done by a true judgment.
9 You have handed us over to our enemies, lawless and hateful rebels,
and to an unjust king, the most wicked in all the world.
10 And now we cannot open our mouths;
we, your servants who worship you, have become a shame and
a reproach.
11 For your name's sake do not give us up forever,
and do not annul your covenant.
12
Do not withdraw your mercy from us,
for the sake of Abraham your beloved
and for the sake of your servant Isaac
and Israel your holy one,
13 to whom you promised
to multiply their descendants like the stars of heaven
and like the sand on the shore of the sea.
14 For we, O Lord, have become fewer than any other nation,
and are brought low this day in all the world because of our sins.
15 In our day we have no ruler, or prophet, or leader,
no burnt offering, or sacrifice, or oblation, or incense,
no place to make an offering before you and to find mercy.
16 Yet with a contrite heart and a humble spirit may we be accepted,
17
as though it were with burnt offerings of rams and bulls,
or with tens of thousands of fat lambs;
such may our sacrifice be in your sight today,
and may we unreservedly follow you,
for no shame will come to those who trust in you.
18 And now with all our heart we follow you;
we fear you and seek your presence.
19 Do not put us to shame,
but deal with us in your patience
and in your abundant mercy.
20 Deliver us in accordance with your marvelous works,
and bring glory to your name, O Lord.
21 Let all who do harm to your servants be put to shame;
let them be disgraced and deprived of all power,
and let their strength be broken.

273

THE ADDITIONS TO DANIEL 274

22 Let them know that you alone are the Lord God,
glorious over the whole world."
Protection in the furnace
23 Now the king's servants who threw them in kept stoking the furnace
with naphtha, pitch, tow, and brushwood. 24 And the flames poured
out above the furnace forty-nine cubits, 25 and spread out and burned
those Chaldeans who were caught near the furnace. 26 But the angel
of the Lord came down into the furnace to be with Azariah and his
companions, and drove the fiery flame out of the furnace, 27 and made
the inside of the furnace as though a moist wind were whistling
through it. The fire did not touch them at all and caused them no pain
or distress.
Song of thanksgiving
28 Then the three with one voice praised and glorified and blessed
God in the furnace:
29 "Blessed are you, O Lord, God of our ancestors,
and to be praised and highly exalted forever;
30 And blessed is your glorious, holy name,
and to be highly praised and highly exalted forever.
31 Blessed are you in the temple of your holy glory,
and to be extolled and highly glorified forever.
32 Blessed are you who look into the depths from your throne on
the cherubim, and to be praised and highly exalted forever.
33 Blessed are you on the throne of your kingdom,
and to be extolled and highly exalted forever.
34 Blessed are you in the firmament of heaven,
and to be sung and glorified forever.
The litany of praise
35 "Bless the Lord, all you works of the Lord;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.

274

THE ADDITIONS TO DANIEL 275

36 Bless the Lord, you heavens;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
37 Bless the Lord, you angels of the Lord;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
38 Bless the Lord, all you waters above the heavens;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
39 Bless the Lord, all you powers of the Lord;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
40 Bless the Lord, sun and moon;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
41 Bless the Lord, stars of heaven;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
42 "Bless the Lord, all rain and dew;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
43 Bless the Lord, all you winds;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
44 Bless the Lord, fire and heat;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
45 Bless the Lord, winter cold and summer heat;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
46 Bless the Lord, dews and falling snow;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
47 Bless the Lord, nights and days;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
48 Bless the Lord, light and darkness;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
49 Bless the Lord, ice and cold;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
50 Bless the Lord, frosts and snows;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
51 Bless the Lord, lightnings and clouds;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
52 "Let the earth bless the Lord;
let it sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
53 Bless the Lord, mountains and hills;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.

275

THE ADDITIONS TO DANIEL 276

54 Bless the Lord, all that grows in the ground;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
55 Bless the Lord, seas and rivers;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
56 Bless the Lord, you springs;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
57 Bless the Lord, you whales and all that swim in the waters;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
58 Bless the Lord, all birds of the air;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
59 Bless the Lord, all wild animals and cattle;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
60 "Bless the Lord, all people on earth;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
61 Bless the Lord, O Israel;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
62 Bless the Lord, you priests of the Lord;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
63 Bless the Lord, you servants of the Lord;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
64 Bless the Lord, spirits and souls of the righteous;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
65 Bless the Lord, you who are holy and humble in heart;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
66 "Bless the Lord, Hananiah, Azariah, and Mishael;
sing praise to him and highly exalt him forever.
For he has rescued us from Hades and saved us from the power of
death, and delivered us from the midst of the burning fiery
furnace; from the midst of the fire he has delivered us.
67 Give thanks to the Lord, for he is good,
for his mercy endures forever.
68 All who worship the Lord, bless the God of gods,
sing praise to him and give thanks to him,
for his mercy endures forever."

276

THE ADDITIONS TO DANIEL 277

SUSANNA
Introduction
Often called the first detective story, this Addition to the book of
Daniel appears in two different forms and locations in the early textual
traditions. The Septuagint (and the Vulgate) locate it after Dan 13;
Theodotion, the version followed in this as well as most modern
translations, locates the story at the beginning of the book of Daniel,
since Sus 45 describes Daniel as a "young man." Perhaps composed as
early as the Persian period (fifth-fourth century BCE), Susanna's tale
was added to the Danielic literature probably ca. 100 BCE. The story
may originally not have been about Daniel, and the naming of the
rescuing lad Daniel thus a secondary attribute of the story, added
when the tale was attached to the other materials concerning Daniel,
just as the Prayer of Azariah and the Song of the Three Jews may not
have had an original connection to Dan 3. Susanna's setting in peaceful
Babylon, in which the enemies are not wicked pagan kings but corrupt
Jewish judges, contrasts with threats emphasized in Dan 1-6.
Like Greek Esther, Judith, and Sarah of the book of Tobit, Susanna is
beautiful and chaste, and as in those books, prayer and piety are major
motifs. Indeed, with the exception of the villainous elders, all the
characters — including the narrator — mention God. First cited as
having canonical status by the church father Irenaeus of Lyons in the
late second century CE, Susanna's story was also adopted by Samaritan
and medieval Jewish (including Falashic) writers.

Susanna
Susanna's beauty attracts two elders
1 There was a man living in Babylon whose name was Joakim. 2 He
married the daughter of Hilkiah, named Susanna, a very beautiful
277

THE ADDITIONS TO DANIEL 278

woman and one who feared the Lord. 3 Her parents were righteous,
and had trained their daughter according to the law of Moses. 4
Joakim was very rich, and had a fine garden adjoining his house; the
Jews used to come to him because he was the most honored of them
all.
5 That year two elders from the people were appointed as judges.
Concerning them the Lord had said: "Wickedness came forth from
Babylon, from elders who were judges, who were supposed to govern
the people." 6 These men were frequently at Joakim's house, and all
who had a case to be tried came to them there.
7 When the people left at noon, Susanna would go into her husband's
garden to walk. 8 Every day the two elders used to see her, going in
and walking about, and they began to lust for her. 9 They suppressed
their consciences and turned away their eyes from looking to Heaven
or remembering their duty to administer justice. 10 Both were
overwhelmed with passion for her, but they did not tell each other of
their distress, 11 for they were ashamed to disclose their lustful desire
to seduce her. 12 Day after day they watched eagerly to see her.
13 One day they said to each other, "Let us go home, for it is time for
lunch." So they both left and parted from each other. 14 But turning
back, they met again; and when each pressed the other for the reason,
they confessed their lust. Then together they arranged for a time when
they could find her alone.
The attempted rape
15 Once, while they were watching for an opportune day, she went in
as before with only two maids, and wished to bathe in the garden, for
it was a hot day. 16 No one was there except the two elders, who had
hidden themselves and were watching her. 17 She said to her maids,
"Bring me olive oil and ointments, and shut the garden doors so that I
can bathe." 18 They did as she told them: they shut the doors of the
garden and went out by the side doors to bring what they had been
commanded; they did not see the elders, because they were hiding.

278

THE ADDITIONS TO DANIEL 279

19 When the maids had gone out, the two elders got up and ran to her.
20 They said, "Look, the garden doors are shut, and no one can see us.
We are burning with desire for you; so give your consent, and lie with
us. 21 If you refuse, we will testify against you that a young man was
with you, and this was why you sent your maids away."
Susanna's response
22 Susanna groaned and said, "I am completely trapped. For if I do this,
it will mean death for me; if I do not, I cannot escape your hands. 23 I
choose not to do it; I will fall into your hands, rather than sin in the
sight of the Lord."
24 Then Susanna cried out with a loud voice, and the two elders
shouted against her. 25 And one of them ran and opened the garden
doors. 26 When the people in the house heard the shouting in the
garden, they rushed in at the side door to see what had happened to
her. 27 And when the elders told their story, the servants felt very
much ashamed, for nothing like this had ever been said about Susanna.
The Elders Testify against Susanna
28 The next day, when the people gathered at the house of her
husband Joakim, the two elders came, full of their wicked plot to have
Susanna put to death. In the presence of the people they said, 29
"Send for Susanna daughter of Hilkiah, the wife of Joakim." 30 So they
sent for her. And she came with her parents, her children, and all her
relatives.
31 Now Susanna was a woman of great refinement and beautiful in
appearance. 32 As she was veiled, the scoundrels ordered her to be
unveiled, so that they might feast their eyes on her beauty. 33 Those
who were with her and all who saw her were weeping.
34 Then the two elders stood up before the people and laid their hands
on her head. 35 Through her tears she looked up toward Heaven, for
her heart trusted in the Lord. 36 The elders said, "While we were
walking in the garden alone, this woman came in with two maids, shut

279

THE ADDITIONS TO DANIEL 280

the garden doors, and dismissed the maids. 37 Then a young man, who
was hiding there, came to her and lay with her. 38 We were in a corner
of the garden, and when we saw this wickedness we ran to them. 39
Although we saw them embracing, we could not hold the man,
because he was stronger than we, and he opened the doors and got
away. 40 We did, however, seize this woman and asked who the young
man was, 41 but she would not tell us. These things we testify."
Because they were elders of the people and judges, the assembly
believed them and condemned her to death.
Susanna's prayer
42 Then Susanna cried out with a loud voice, and said, "O eternal God,
you know what is secret and are aware of all things before they come
to be; 43 you know that these men have given false evidence against
me. And now I am to die, though I have done none of the wicked
things that they have charged against me!"
Daniel responds
44 The Lord heard her cry. 45 Just as she was being led off to
execution, God stirred up the holy spirit of a young lad named Daniel,
46 and he shouted with a loud voice, "I want no part in shedding this
woman's blood!"
Daniel Rescues Susanna
47 All the people turned to him and asked, "What is this you are
saying?" 48 Taking his stand among them he said, "Are you such fools,
O Israelites, as to condemn a daughter of Israel without examination
and without learning the facts? 49 Return to court, for these men have
given false evidence against her."

280

THE ADDITIONS TO DANIEL 281

Susanna's acquittal
50 So all the people hurried back. And the rest of the elders said to
him, "Come, sit among us and inform us, for God has given you the
standing of an elder." 51 Daniel said to them, "Separate them far from
each other, and I will examine them."
52 When they were separated from each other, he summoned one of
them and said to him, "You old relic of wicked days, your sins have
now come home, which you have committed in the past, 53
pronouncing unjust judgments, condemning the innocent and
acquitting the guilty, though the Lord said, 'You shall not put an
innocent and righteous person to death.' 54 Now then, if you really
saw this woman, tell me this: Under what tree did you see them being
intimate with each other?" He answered, "Under a mastic tree." 55
And Daniel said, "Very well! This lie has cost you your head, for the
angel of God has received the sentence from God and will immediately
cut you in two."
56 Then, putting him to one side, he ordered them to bring the other.
And he said to him, "You offspring of Canaan and not of Judah,
beauty has beguiled you and lust has perverted your heart. 57 This is
how you have been treating the daughters of Israel, and they were
intimate with you through fear; but a daughter of Judah would not
tolerate your wickedness. 58 Now then, tell me: Under what tree did
you catch them being intimate with each other?" He answered, "Under
an evergreen oak." 59 Daniel said to him, "Very well! This lie has cost
you also your head, for the angel of God is waiting with his sword to
split you in two, so as to destroy you both."
60 Then the whole assembly raised a great shout and blessed God, who
saves those who hope in him. 61 And they took action against the two
elders, because out of their own mouths Daniel had convicted them of
bearing false witness; they did to them as they had wickedly planned
to do to their neighbor. 62 Acting in accordance with the law of Moses,
they put them to death. Thus innocent blood was spared that day.

281

THE ADDITIONS TO DANIEL 282

63 Hilkiah and his wife praised God for their daughter Susanna, and so
did her husband Joakim and all her relatives, because she was found
innocent of a shameful deed.
Epilogue
64 And from that day onward Daniel had a great reputation among
the people.

282

THE ADDITIONS TO DANIEL 283

BEL AND THE DRAGON
Introduction
Perhaps composed as early as the Persian period (fifth-fourth centuries
BCE) as a midrash on Jer 51; these idol parodies which appear as ch 14
of the Greek version of the book of Daniel display the foolishness of
pagan worship, divine protection of the faithful Jews, and the
cleverness of the court favorite, Daniel. In the account of Bel, Daniel
demonstrates that the idol is not a god by proving that it does not eat
the food set out for it each night; the second story reverses this
scenario as Daniel proves the dragon is not divine by feeding it a
noxious concoction that kills it. This second story recapitulates the
account of Daniel in the lion's den (Dan 6.16-24) and adds to it Daniel's
own miraculous feeding by the prophet Habbakuk. Food references
culminate at the end, when Daniel's enemies are eaten by the lions
into whose den Daniel had been thrown.

Bel and the Dragon
Daniel in the Persian court
1 When King Astyages was laid to rest with his ancestors, Cyrus the
Persian succeeded to his kingdom. 2 Daniel was a companion of the
king, and was the most honored of all his Friends.
The worship of Bel
3 Now the Babylonians had an idol called Bel, and every day they
provided for it twelve bushels of choice flour and forty sheep and six
measures of wine. 4 The king revered it and went every day to worship
it. But Daniel worshiped his own God.

283

THE ADDITIONS TO DANIEL 284

So the king said to him, "Why do you not worship Bel?" 5 He
answered, "Because I do not revere idols made with hands, but the
living God, who created heaven and earth and has dominion over all
living creatures."
6 The king said to him, "Do you not think that Bel is a living god? Do
you not see how much he eats and drinks every day?" 7 And Daniel
laughed, and said, "Do not be deceived, O king, for this thing is only
clay inside and bronze outside, and it never ate or drank anything."
Bel's trial
8 Then the king was angry and called the priests of Bel and said to
them, "If you do not tell me who is eating these provisions, you shall
die. 9 But if you prove that Bel is eating them, Daniel shall die, because
he has spoken blasphemy against Bel." Daniel said to the king, "Let it
be done as you have said."
10 Now there were seventy priests of Bel, besides their wives and
children. So the king went with Daniel into the temple of Bel. 11 The
priests of Bel said, "See, we are now going outside; you yourself, O
king, set out the food and prepare the wine, and shut the door and
seal it with your signet. 12 When you return in the morning, if you do
not find that Bel has eaten it all, we will die; otherwise Daniel will,
who is telling lies about us." 13 They were unconcerned, for beneath
the table they had made a hidden entrance, through which they used
to go in regularly and consume the provisions. 14 After they had gone
out, the king set out the food for Bel. Then Daniel ordered his servants
to bring ashes, and they scattered them throughout the whole temple
in the presence of the king alone. Then they went out, shut the door
and sealed it with the king's signet, and departed. 15 During the night
the priests came as usual, with their wives and children, and they ate
and drank everything.

284

THE ADDITIONS TO DANIEL 285

16 Early in the morning the king rose and came, and Daniel with him.
17 The king said, "Are the seals unbroken, Daniel?" He answered,
"They are unbroken, O king." 18 As soon as the doors were opened,
the king looked at the table, and shouted in a loud voice, "You are
great, O Bel, and in you there is no deceit at all!"
19 But Daniel laughed and restrained the king from going in. "Look at
the floor," he said, "and notice whose footprints these are." 20 The
king said, "I see the footprints of men and women and children."
21 Then the king was enraged, and he arrested the priests and their
wives and children. They showed him the secret doors through which
they used to enter to consume what was on the table. 22 Therefore the
king put them to death, and gave Bel over to Daniel, who destroyed it
and its temple.
The destruction of the dragon
23 Now in that place there was a great dragon, which the Babylonians
revered. 24 The king said to Daniel, "You cannot deny that this is a
living god; so worship him." 25 Daniel said, "I worship the Lord my
God, for he is the living God. 26 But give me permission, O king, and I
will kill the dragon without sword or club." The king said, "I give you
permission."
27 Then Daniel took pitch, fat, and hair, and boiled them together and
made cakes, which he fed to the dragon. The dragon ate them, and
burst open. Then Daniel said, "See what you have been worshiping!"
Daniel in the lion pit
28 When the Babylonians heard about it, they were very indignant and
conspired against the king, saying, "The king has become a Jew; he has
destroyed Bel, and killed the dragon, and slaughtered the priests." 29
Going to the king, they said, "Hand Daniel over to us, or else we will
kill you and your household." 30 The king saw that they were pressing
him hard, and under compulsion he handed Daniel over to them.

285

THE ADDITIONS TO DANIEL 286

Daniel in the Lions' Den
31 They threw Daniel into the lions' den, and he was there for six days.
32 There were seven lions in the den, and every day they had been
given two human bodies and two sheep; but now they were given
nothing, so that they would devour Daniel.
33 Now the prophet Habakkuk was in Judea; he had made a stew and
had broken bread into a bowl, and was going into the field to take it
to the reapers. 34 But the angel of the Lord said to Habakkuk, "Take
the food that you have to Babylon, to Daniel, in the lions' den." 35
Habakkuk said, "Sir, I have never seen Babylon, and I know nothing
about the den." 36 Then the angel of the Lord took him by the crown
of his head and carried him by his hair; with the speed of the wind he
set him down in Babylon, right over the den.
37 Then Habakkuk shouted, "Daniel, Daniel! Take the food that God
has sent you." 38 Daniel said, "You have remembered me, O God, and
have not forsaken those who love you." 39 So Daniel got up and ate.
And the angel of God immediately returned Habakkuk to his own
place.
40 On the seventh day the king came to mourn for Daniel. When he
came to the den he looked in, and there sat Daniel! 41 The king
shouted with a loud voice, "You are great, O Lord, the God of Daniel,
and there is no other besides you!" 42 Then he pulled Daniel out, and
threw into the den those who had attempted his destruction, and they
were instantly eaten before his eyes.

286

1 MACCABEES 287

1 MACCABEES
Introduction
Set in the tumultuous years of 175-143 BCE, 1 Maccabees narrates the
history of the revolt against Seleucid rule in Judea led by Judas
Maccabeus and his brothers. Although the book opens with a brief
historical summary of events leading up to the revolt, a word of
background on the religious situation will be helpful to the reader.
Judea had known a long period of relative peace and prosperity, first
under Alexander the Great (332-323 BCE), then under the Ptolemies, the
successors to Alexander's rule in Egypt (323-198 BCE). As a result of
Alexander's rule, Hellenism, a mixture of Greek and Semitic cultures,
had dominated all the countries of the eastern Mediterranean basin.
The book of Sirach and the translation of the Hebrew Scriptures into
Greek (the Septuagint) demonstrate the influence of Greek ideas on
Judaism during the fourth and third centuries BCE. By the second
century, however, when Judea came under the control of the Seleucids,
the successors to Alexander's rule in Mesopotamia and Syria, Jews were
divided over the problem of accommodating to Gentile culture. The
upper class in Jerusalem, the Hellenizers, had long adopted Greek
ways, while the poorer people of the rural areas tended to cling to the
customs of their ancestors. The conflict among Judeans is evident at
the beginning of 1 Maccabees (1.11-15) and is present throughout the
book.
In this situation of complex religious, economic, and political tensions,
the actions of the Seleucid rule Antiochus IV were a match in a
tinderbox. Motivated perhaps by a political desire to remove Jewish
religious law as a source of conflict and potential rebellion within
Judea, Antiochus tried to eradicate the distinctive identity of the Jews.
By plundering the Temple and outlawing religious practices, however,
Antiochus instead sparked the first Jewish war of independence as well
as the first Jewish martyrdoms. The first chapters of 1 Maccabees
287

1 MACCABEES 288

describe this edict and its immediate consequences. Jews were
prohibited from making daily offerings in the Temple, keeping the
sabbath, and circumcising their sons, and were required to make
sacrifices to other gods. Those who obeyed the Torah rather than the
kind were publicly put to death, and those who withdrew to the
wilderness were slaughtered on the sabbath, when they would not
fight.
Into this crisis the author introduces the priestly family of Mattathias
and his sons Judas (whose epithet Maccabeus, "the hammer," gives rise
to the name Maccabees), Jonathan, and Simon as the deliverers of
Judea. Fearing that the Seleucids would kill all observant Jews and that
the Hellenizers would destroy Judaism, Judas Maccabeus and his men
mounted a campaign of armed resistance against both enemies. Using
a combination of guerrilla warfare and diplomacy, they succeeded in
recovering and purifying the Temple after Antiochus had defiled it,
fortifying Jerusalem and securing a measure of independence for
Judaa. The book is organized into sections that recount the history of
each hero: Mattathias (ch 2); Judas Maccabeus (3.1-9.22); Jonathan
(9.23-12.53); Simon (13.1-15.41); and John (16.1-24). By the end of the
book three generations of Mattathias's family had fought for Judea's
independence from the Seleucids and had established a ruling dynasty,
which was called Hasmonean after their ancestor. The family of
Mattathias is known as Hasmoneans from a traditional ancestor
Hashmonia, not mentioned in 1 Maccabees but named in Josephus
(Ant. 12.6.1). The name may be a rendering of Simeon, the grandfather
of Mattathias. Joarib was first in the list of divisions of priests (1 Chr
24.7; Neh 11.10). Modein, in the hills on the road from Beth-horon,
about 30 km (18 mi) northwest of Jerusalem. The Hasmoneans would
remain in power until the Roman occupation in 63 BCE.
First Maccabees is written in the straightforward style of historical
narrative filled with realistic detail. Scholars consider it the most
reliable historical resource for the study of the Maccabean revolt. The
author used both Jerusalem archives and Seleucid annals as sources;
diplomatic correspondence and royal edicts are cited fourteen times in
the book. Oral traditions of Jewish history probably supplemented
written sources. Following the conventions of both biblical and

288

1 MACCABEES 289

Hellenistic historiography, the author placed eloquent speeches in the
mouths of major characters at critical points in the narrative. These
compositions provide the reader with clues to some of the important
religious themes in the book. The author used the Jewish scriptures as
a literary model and consultant backdrop for his story. The book is
organized in the manner of the historical books of the Hebrew Bible,
which tend to mark periods in Israel's history by the deaths of divinely
appointed deliverers (Josh 1.1; Judg 1.1; 2 Sam 1.17; 1 Kings 11.41-43). In 1
Maccabees the reader is clearly guided by refrains signaling the
peaceful passing of leadership from one member of the Hasmonean
family to the next (2.69-0; 9.19-22; 13.25-30). There are no accounts of
miraculous interventions, but the author believes that God was
working through the Maccabees, as he did through the deliverers in
Israel (5.62; cf. Judg 2.16; 6.14).
Frequent allusions to Israel's history and the use of biblical vocabulary
guide the reader to see Mattathias and his sons as heirs of biblical
heroes. Mattathias is portrayed in language that evokes the stories of
Phineas (2.23-26; Num 25.6-9) and Jacob (2.49-70; Gen 49), while Judas
is likened to Jonathan son of Saul (3.16-22; 1 Sam 14.6) and to Solomon
(4.52-58; 1 Kings 8). Even a simple phrase like "he tore down their
altars" (5.68) evokes the story of Gideon (Judg 6.25) and the commands
of Moses (Deut 7.5; 12.3). The use of anachronistic terms like
"Philistines" and "Israel" link the Maccabean battles with the times of
Joshua and David. The most overt guide for the reader is the set of ten
poetic pieces scattered throughout the narrative. Their vocabulary and
style evoke the poetry of ancient Israel, especially the Psalms, and their
allusions often bring to mind the destruction of Jerusalem by the
Babylonians in 586 BCE. Like the poetry in the narratives of the Hebrew
Bible (e.g., Ex 15; 1 Sam 2; 2 Sam 1; 2 Sam 22), they provide the reader
with theological commentary on the action of the story. In short, the
author has woven scriptural allusions into the history of the Maccabean
revolt.
The work was written between the rule of John Hyrcanus I, introduced
at the end of the book 134-104 BCE), and Pompey's conquest of Rome
in 63 BCE. Josephus used it as a source when he began his Jewish
Antiquities in about 75 CE. The earliest extant manuscripts are from the

289

1 MACCABEES 290

fourth and fifth centuries CE in Greek and Latin. Scholars since the time
of Jerome have noticed that the Greek of 1 Maccabees reads like a
translation from Hebrew, almost certainly the book's original
language.

1 Maccabees
[1 Maccabees 1]
Introduction; Summary of history from Alexander to Antiochus IV
1 After Alexander son of Philip, the Macedonian, who came from the
land of Kittim, had defeated King Darius of the Persians and the
Medes, he succeeded him as king. (He had previously become king of
Greece.) 2 He fought many battles, conquered strongholds, and put to
death the kings of the earth. 3 He advanced to the ends of the earth,
and plundered many nations. When the earth became quiet before
him, he was exalted, and his heart was lifted up. 4 He gathered a very
strong army and ruled over countries, nations, and princes, and they
became tributary to him.
5 After this he fell sick and perceived that he was dying. 6 So he
summoned his most honored officers, who had been brought up with
him from youth, and divided his kingdom among them while he was
still alive. 7 And after Alexander had reigned twelve years, he died.
8 Then his officers began to rule, each in his own place. 9 They all put
on crowns after his death, and so did their descendants after them for
many years; and they caused many evils on the earth.
10 From them came forth a sinful root, Antiochus Epiphanes, son of
King Antiochus; he had been a hostage in Rome. He began to reign in
the one hundred thirty-seventh year of the kingdom of the Greeks.

290

1 MACCABEES 291

Conflicts over Hellenization
11 In those days certain renegades came out from Israel and misled
many, saying, "Let us go and make a covenant with the Gentiles
around us, for since we separated from them many disasters have come
upon us." 12 This proposal pleased them, 13 and some of the people
eagerly went to the king, who authorized them to observe the
ordinances of the Gentiles. 14 So they built a gymnasium in Jerusalem,
according to Gentile custom, 15 and removed the marks of
circumcision, and abandoned the holy covenant. They joined with the
Gentiles and sold themselves to do evil.
Antiochus invades Egypt and Palestine
16 When Antiochus saw that his kingdom was established, he
determined to become king of the land of Egypt, in order that he
might reign over both kingdoms. 17 So he invaded Egypt with a strong
force, with chariots and elephants and cavalry and with a large fleet. 18
He engaged King Ptolemy of Egypt in battle, and Ptolemy turned and
fled before him, and many were wounded and fell. 19 They captured
the fortified cities in the land of Egypt, and he plundered the land of
Egypt.
20 After subduing Egypt, Antiochus returned in the one hundred fortythird year. He went up against Israel and came to Jerusalem with a
strong force. 21 He arrogantly entered the sanctuary and took the
golden altar, the lampstand for the light, and all its utensils. 22 He took
also the table for the bread of the Presence, the cups for drink
offerings, the bowls, the golden censers, the curtain, the crowns, and
the gold decoration on the front of the temple; he stripped it all off. 23
He took the silver and the gold, and the costly vessels; he took also the
hidden treasures that he found. 24 Taking them all, he went into his
own land.
He shed much blood,
and spoke with great arrogance.
25 Israel mourned deeply in every community,

291

1 MACCABEES 292

26

rulers and elders groaned,
young women and young men became faint,
the beauty of the women faded.
27 Every bridegroom took up the lament;
she who sat in the bridal chamber was mourning.
28 Even the land trembled for its inhabitants,
and all the house of Jacob was clothed with shame.
29 Two years later the king sent to the cities of Judah a chief collector
of tribute, and he came to Jerusalem with a large force. 30 Deceitfully
he spoke peaceable words to them, and they believed him; but he
suddenly fell upon the city, dealt it a severe blow, and destroyed many
people of Israel. 31 He plundered the city, burned it with fire, and tore
down its houses and its surrounding walls. 32 They took captive the
women and children, and seized the livestock. 33 Then they fortified
the city of David with a great strong wall and strong towers, and it
became their citadel. 34 They stationed there a sinful people, men who
were renegades. These strengthened their position; 35 they stored up
arms and food, and collecting the spoils of Jerusalem they stored them
there, and became a great menace,
36 for the citadel became an ambush against the sanctuary,
an evil adversary of Israel at all times.
37 On every side of the sanctuary they shed innocent blood;
they even defiled the sanctuary.
38 Because of them the residents of Jerusalem fled;
she became a dwelling of strangers;
she became strange to her offspring,
and her children forsook her.
39 Her sanctuary became desolate like a desert;
her feasts were turned into mourning,
her sabbaths into a reproach,
her honor into contempt.
40 Her dishonor now grew as great as her glory;
her exaltation was turned into mourning.

292

1 MACCABEES 293

Desecration of the Temple
41 Then the king wrote to his whole kingdom that all should be one
people, 42 and that all should give up their particular customs. 43 All
the Gentiles accepted the command of the king. Many even from Israel
gladly adopted his religion; they sacrificed to idols and profaned the
sabbath. 44 And the king sent letters by messengers to Jerusalem and
the towns of Judah; he directed them to follow customs strange to the
land, 45 to forbid burnt offerings and sacrifices and drink offerings in
the sanctuary, to profane sabbaths and festivals, 46 to defile the
sanctuary and the priests, 47 to build altars and sacred precincts and
shrines for idols, to sacrifice swine and other unclean animals, 48 and
to leave their sons uncircumcised. They were to make themselves
abominable by everything unclean and profane, 49 so that they would
forget the law and change all the ordinances. 50 He added, "And
whoever does not obey the command of the king shall die."
51 In such words he wrote to his whole kingdom. He appointed
inspectors over all the people and commanded the towns of Judah to
offer sacrifice, town by town. 52 Many of the people, everyone who
forsook the law, joined them, and they did evil in the land; 53 they
drove Israel into hiding in every place of refuge they had.
54 Now on the fifteenth day of Chislev, in the one hundred forty-fifth
year, they erected a desolating sacrilege on the altar of burnt offering.
They also built altars in the surrounding towns of Judah, 55 and
offered incense at the doors of the houses and in the streets. 56 The
books of the law that they found they tore to pieces and burned with
fire. 57 Anyone found possessing the book of the covenant, or anyone
who adhered to the law, was condemned to death by decree of the
king. 58 They kept using violence against Israel, against those who
were found month after month in the towns. 59 On the twenty-fifth
day of the month they offered sacrifice on the altar that was on top of
the altar of burnt offering. 60 According to the decree, they put to
death the women who had their children circumcised, 61 and their
families and those who circumcised them; and they hung the infants
from their mothers' necks.

293

1 MACCABEES 294

62 But many in Israel stood firm and were resolved in their hearts not
to eat unclean food. 63 They chose to die rather than to be defiled by
food or to profane the holy covenant; and they did die. 64 Very great
wrath came upon Israel.
[1 Maccabees 2]
Revolt of Mattathias
1 In those days Mattathias son of John son of Simeon, a priest of the
family of Joarib, moved from Jerusalem and settled in Modein. 2 He
had five sons, John surnamed Gaddi, 3 Simon called Thassi, 4 Judas
called Maccabeus, 5 Eleazar called Avaran, and Jonathan called
Apphus. 6 He saw the blasphemies being committed in Judah and
Jerusalem, 7 and said,
"Alas! Why was I born to see this,
the ruin of my people, the ruin of the holy city,
and to live there when it was given over to the enemy,
the sanctuary given over to aliens?
8 Her temple has become like a person without honor;
9
her glorious vessels have been carried into exile.
Her infants have been killed in her streets,
her youths by the sword of the foe.
10 What nation has not inherited her palaces
and has not seized her spoils?
11 All her adornment has been taken away;
no longer free, she has become a slave.
12 And see, our holy place, our beauty,
and our glory have been laid waste;
the Gentiles have profaned them.
13
Why should we live any longer?"
14 Then Mattathias and his sons tore their clothes, put on sackcloth,
and mourned greatly.
15 The king's officers who were enforcing the apostasy came to the
town of Modein to make them offer sacrifice. 16 Many from Israel
came to them; and Mattathias and his sons were assembled. 17 Then
the king's officers spoke to Mattathias as follows: "You are a leader,

294

1 MACCABEES 295

honored and great in this town, and supported by sons and brothers.
18 Now be the first to come and do what the king commands, as all the
Gentiles and the people of Judah and those that are left in Jerusalem
have done. Then you and your sons will be numbered among the
Friends of the king, and you and your sons will be honored with silver
and gold and many gifts."
19 But Mattathias answered and said in a loud voice: "Even if all the
nations that live under the rule of the king obey him, and have chosen
to obey his commandments, everyone of them abandoning the religion
of their ancestors, 20 I and my sons and my brothers will continue to
live by the covenant of our ancestors. 21 Far be it from us to desert the
law and the ordinances. 22 We will not obey the king's words by
turning aside from our religion to the right hand or to the left."
23 When he had finished speaking these words, a Jew came forward in
the sight of all to offer sacrifice on the altar in Modein, according to
the king's command. 24 When Mattathias saw it, he burned with zeal
and his heart was stirred. He gave vent to righteous anger; he ran and
killed him on the altar. 25 At the same time he killed the king's officer
who was forcing them to sacrifice, and he tore down the altar. 26 Thus
he burned with zeal for the law, just as Phinehas did against Zimri son
of Salu.
27 Then Mattathias cried out in the town with a loud voice, saying:
"Let every one who is zealous for the law and supports the covenant
come out with me!" 28 Then he and his sons fled to the hills and left
all that they had in the town.
29 At that time many who were seeking righteousness and justice went
down to the wilderness to live there, 30 they, their sons, their wives,
and their livestock, because troubles pressed heavily upon them. 31 And
it was reported to the king's officers, and to the troops in Jerusalem
the city of David, that those who had rejected the king's command had
gone down to the hiding places in the wilderness. 32 Many pursued
them, and overtook them; they encamped opposite them and prepared
for battle against them on the sabbath day. 33 They said to them,
"Enough of this! Come out and do what the king commands, and you

295

1 MACCABEES 296

will live." 34 But they said, "We will not come out, nor will we do what
the king commands and so profane the sabbath day." 35 Then the
enemy quickly attacked them. 36 But they did not answer them or hurl
a stone at them or block up their hiding places, 37 for they said, "Let us
all die in our innocence; heaven and earth testify for us that you are
killing us unjustly." 38 So they attacked them on the sabbath, and they
died, with their wives and children and livestock, to the number of a
thousand persons.
39 When Mattathias and his friends learned of it, they mourned for
them deeply. 40 And all said to their neighbors: "If we all do as our
kindred have done and refuse to fight with the Gentiles for our lives
and for our ordinances, they will quickly destroy us from the earth." 41
So they made this decision that day: "Let us fight against anyone who
comes to attack us on the sabbath day; let us not all die as our kindred
died in their hiding places."
42 Then there united with them a company of Hasideans, mighty
warriors of Israel, all who offered themselves willingly for the law. 43
And all who became fugitives to escape their troubles joined them and
reinforced them. 44 They organized an army, and struck down sinners
in their anger and renegades in their wrath; the survivors fled to the
Gentiles for safety. 45 And Mattathias and his friends went around and
tore down the altars; 46 they forcibly circumcised all the uncircumcised
boys that they found within the borders of Israel. 47 They hunted
down the arrogant, and the work prospered in their hands. 48 They
rescued the law out of the hands of the Gentiles and kings, and they
never let the sinner gain the upper hand.
Last Words of Mattathias
49 Now the days drew near for Mattathias to die, and he said to his
sons: "Arrogance and scorn have now become strong; it is a time of
ruin and furious anger. 50 Now, my children, show zeal for the law,
and give your lives for the covenant of our ancestors.

296

1 MACCABEES 297

51 "Remember the deeds of the ancestors, which they did in their
generations; and you will receive great honor and an everlasting name.
52 Was not Abraham found faithful when tested, and it was reckoned
to him as righteousness? 53 Joseph in the time of his distress kept the
commandment, and became lord of Egypt. 54 Phinehas our ancestor,
because he was deeply zealous, received the covenant of everlasting
priesthood. 55 Joshua, because he fulfilled the command, became a
judge in Israel. 56 Caleb, because he testified in the assembly, received
an inheritance in the land. 57 David, because he was merciful, inherited
the throne of the kingdom forever. 58 Elijah, because of great zeal for
the law, was taken up into heaven. 59 Hananiah, Azariah, and Mishael
believed and were saved from the flame. 60 Daniel, because of his
innocence, was delivered from the mouth of the lions.
61 "And so observe, from generation to generation, that none of those
who put their trust in him will lack strength. 62 Do not fear the words
of sinners, for their splendor will turn into dung and worms. 63 Today
they will be exalted, but tomorrow they will not be found, because
they will have returned to the dust, and their plans will have perished.
64 My children, be courageous and grow strong in the law, for by it
you will gain honor.
65 "Here is your brother Simeon who, I know, is wise in counsel; always
listen to him; he shall be your father. 66 Judas Maccabeus has been a
mighty warrior from his youth; he shall command the army for you and
fight the battle against the peoples. 67 You shall rally around you all
who observe the law, and avenge the wrong done to your people. 68
Pay back the Gentiles in full, and obey the commands of the law."
69 Then he blessed them, and was gathered to his ancestors. 70 He
died in the one hundred forty-sixth year and was buried in the tomb of
his ancestors at Modein. And all Israel mourned for him with great
lamentation.

297

1 MACCABEES 298

[1 Maccabees 3]
Defeat of Apollonius
1 Then his son Judas, who was called Maccabeus, took command in his
place. 2 All his brothers and all who had joined his father helped him;
they gladly fought for Israel.
3 He extended the glory of his people.
Like a giant he put on his breastplate;
he bound on his armor of war and waged battles,
protecting the camp by his sword.
4 He was like a lion in his deeds,
like a lion's cub roaring for prey.
5 He searched out and pursued those who broke the law;
he burned those who troubled his people.
6 Lawbreakers shrank back for fear of him;
all the evildoers were confounded;
and deliverance prospered by his hand.
7 He embittered many kings,
but he made Jacob glad by his deeds,
and his memory is blessed forever.
8 He went through the cities of Judah;
he destroyed the ungodly out of the land;
thus he turned away wrath from Israel.
9 He was renowned to the ends of the earth;
he gathered in those who were perishing.
10 Apollonius now gathered together Gentiles and a large force from
Samaria to fight against Israel. 11 When Judas learned of it, he went
out to meet him, and he defeated and killed him. Many were wounded
and fell, and the rest fled. 12 Then they seized their spoils; and Judas
took the sword of Apollonius, and used it in battle the rest of his life.
Battle of Beth-horon
13 When Seron, the commander of the Syrian army, heard that Judas
had gathered a large company, including a body of faithful soldiers
who stayed with him and went out to battle, 14 he said, "I will make a

298

1 MACCABEES 299

name for myself and win honor in the kingdom. I will make war on
Judas and his companions, who scorn the king's command." 15 Once
again a strong army of godless men went up with him to help him, to
take vengeance on the Israelites.
16 When he approached the ascent of Beth-horon, Judas went out to
meet him with a small company. 17 But when they saw the army
coming to meet them, they said to Judas, "How can we, few as we are,
fight against so great and so strong a multitude? And we are faint, for
we have eaten nothing today." 18 Judas replied, "It is easy for many to
be hemmed in by few, for in the sight of Heaven there is no difference
between saving by many or by few. 19 It is not on the size of the army
that victory in battle depends, but strength comes from Heaven. 20
They come against us in great insolence and lawlessness to destroy us
and our wives and our children, and to despoil us; 21 but we fight for
our lives and our laws. 22 He himself will crush them before us; as for
you, do not be afraid of them."
23 When he finished speaking, he rushed suddenly against Seron and
his army, and they were crushed before him. 24 They pursued them
down the descent of Beth-horon to the plain; eight hundred of them
fell, and the rest fled into the land of the Philistines. 25 Then Judas and
his brothers began to be feared, and terror fell on the Gentiles all
around them. 26 His fame reached the king, and the Gentiles talked of
the battles of Judas.
Campaigns of Lysias
27 When King Antiochus heard these reports, he was greatly angered;
and he sent and gathered all the forces of his kingdom, a very strong
army. 28 He opened his coffers and gave a year's pay to his forces, and
ordered them to be ready for any need. 29 Then he saw that the
money in the treasury was exhausted, and that the revenues from the
country were small because of the dissension and disaster that he had
caused in the land by abolishing the laws that had existed from the
earliest days. 30 He feared that he might not have such funds as he had
before for his expenses and for the gifts that he used to give more
lavishly than preceding kings. 31 He was greatly perplexed in mind;

299

1 MACCABEES 300

then he determined to go to Persia and collect the revenues from those
regions and raise a large fund.
32 He left Lysias, a distinguished man of royal lineage, in charge of the
king's affairs from the river Euphrates to the borders of Egypt. 33 Lysias
was also to take care of his son Antiochus until he returned. 34 And he
turned over to Lysias half of his forces and the elephants, and gave him
orders about all that he wanted done. As for the residents of Judea
and Jerusalem, 35 Lysias was to send a force against them to wipe out
and destroy the strength of Israel and the remnant of Jerusalem; he
was to banish the memory of them from the place, 36 settle aliens in all
their territory, and distribute their land by lot. 37 Then the king took
the remaining half of his forces and left Antioch his capital in the one
hundred and forty-seventh year. He crossed the Euphrates river and
went through the upper provinces.
Preparations for Battle
38 Lysias chose Ptolemy son of Dorymenes, and Nicanor and Gorgias,
able men among the Friends of the king, 39 and sent with them forty
thousand infantry and seven thousand cavalry to go into the land of
Judah and destroy it, as the king had commanded. 40 So they set out
with their entire force, and when they arrived they encamped near
Emmaus in the plain. 41 When the traders of the region heard what
was said to them, they took silver and gold in immense amounts, and
fetters, and went to the camp to get the Israelites for slaves. And forces
from Syria and the land of the Philistines joined with them.
42 Now Judas and his brothers saw that misfortunes had increased and
that the forces were encamped in their territory. They also learned
what the king had commanded to do to the people to cause their final
destruction. 43 But they said to one another, "Let us restore the ruins
of our people, and fight for our people and the sanctuary." 44 So the
congregation assembled to be ready for battle, and to pray and ask for
mercy and compassion.

300

1 MACCABEES 301

45 Jerusalem was uninhabited like a wilderness;
not one of her children went in or out.
The sanctuary was trampled down,
and aliens held the citadel;
it was a lodging place for the Gentiles.
Joy was taken from Jacob;
the flute and the harp ceased to play.
46 Then they gathered together and went to Mizpah, opposite
Jerusalem, because Israel formerly had a place of prayer in Mizpah. 47
They fasted that day, put on sackcloth and sprinkled ashes on their
heads, and tore their clothes. 48 And they opened the book of the law
to inquire into those matters about which the Gentiles consulted the
likenesses of their gods. 49 They also brought the vestments of the
priesthood and the first fruits and the tithes, and they stirred up the
nazirites who had completed their days; 50 and they cried aloud to
Heaven, saying,
"What shall we do with these?
Where shall we take them?
51 Your sanctuary is trampled down and profaned,
and your priests mourn in humiliation.
52 Here the Gentiles are assembled against us to destroy us;
you know what they plot against us.
53 How will we be able to withstand them,
if you do not help us?"
54 Then they sounded the trumpets and gave a loud shout. 55 After
this Judas appointed leaders of the people, in charge of thousands and
hundreds and fifties and tens. 56 Those who were building houses, or
were about to be married, or were planting a vineyard, or were
fainthearted, he told to go home again, according to the law. 57 Then
the army marched out and encamped to the south of Emmaus.
58 And Judas said, "Arm yourselves and be courageous. Be ready early
in the morning to fight with these Gentiles who have assembled
against us to destroy us and our sanctuary. 59 It is better for us to die
in battle than to see the misfortunes of our nation and of the
sanctuary. 60 But as his will in heaven may be, so shall he do."

301

1 MACCABEES 302

The Battle at Emmaus
[1 Maccabees 4]
1 Now Gorgias took five thousand infantry and one thousand picked
cavalry, and this division moved out by night 2 to fall upon the camp of
the Jews and attack them suddenly. Men from the citadel were his
guides. 3 But Judas heard of it, and he and his warriors moved out to
attack the king's force in Emmaus 4 while the division was still absent
from the camp. 5 When Gorgias entered the camp of Judas by night,
he found no one there, so he looked for them in the hills, because he
said, "These men are running away from us."
6 At daybreak Judas appeared in the plain with three thousand men,
but they did not have armor and swords such as they desired. 7 And
they saw the camp of the Gentiles, strong and fortified, with cavalry all
around it; and these men were trained in war. 8 But Judas said to those
who were with him, "Do not fear their numbers or be afraid when
they charge. 9 Remember how our ancestors were saved at the Red
Sea, when Pharaoh with his forces pursued them. 10 And now, let us
cry to Heaven, to see whether he will favor us and remember his
covenant with our ancestors and crush this army before us today. 11
Then all the Gentiles will know that there is one who redeems and
saves Israel."
12 When the foreigners looked up and saw them coming against them,
13 they went out from their camp to battle. Then the men with Judas
blew their trumpets 14 and engaged in battle. The Gentiles were
crushed, and fled into the plain, 15 and all those in the rear fell by the
sword. They pursued them to Gazara, and to the plains of Idumea, and
to Azotus and Jamnia; and three thousand of them fell. 16 Then Judas
and his force turned back from pursuing them, 17 and he said to the
people, "Do not be greedy for plunder, for there is a battle before us;
18 Gorgias and his force are near us in the hills. But stand now against
our enemies and fight them, and afterward seize the plunder boldly."
19 Just as Judas was finishing this speech, a detachment appeared,
coming out of the hills. 20 They saw that their army had been put to
flight, and that the Jews were burning the camp, for the smoke that

302

1 MACCABEES 303

was seen showed what had happened. 21 When they perceived this,
they were greatly frightened, and when they also saw the army of
Judas drawn up in the plain for battle, 22 they all fled into the land of
the Philistines. 23 Then Judas returned to plunder the camp, and they
seized a great amount of gold and silver, and cloth dyed blue and sea
purple, and great riches. 24 On their return they sang hymns and
praises to Heaven — "For he is good, for his mercy endures forever." 25
Thus Israel had a great deliverance that day.
First Campaign of Lysias
26 Those of the foreigners who escaped went and reported to Lysias all
that had happened. 27 When he heard it, he was perplexed and
discouraged, for things had not happened to Israel as he had intended,
nor had they turned out as the king had ordered. 28 But the next year
he mustered sixty thousand picked infantry and five thousand cavalry
to subdue them. 29 They came into Idumea and encamped at Beth-zur,
and Judas met them with ten thousand men.
30 When he saw that their army was strong, he prayed, saying,
"Blessed are you, O Savior of Israel, who crushed the attack of the
mighty warrior by the hand of your servant David, and gave the camp
of the Philistines into the hands of Jonathan son of Saul, and of the
man who carried his armor. 31 Hem in this army by the hand of your
people Israel, and let them be ashamed of their troops and their
cavalry. 32 Fill them with cowardice; melt the boldness of their
strength; let them tremble in their destruction. 33 Strike them down
with the sword of those who love you, and let all who know your
name praise you with hymns."
34 Then both sides attacked, and there fell of the army of Lysias five
thousand men; they fell in action. 35 When Lysias saw the rout of his
troops and observed the boldness that inspired those of Judas, and
how ready they were either to live or to die nobly, he withdrew to
Antioch and enlisted mercenaries in order to invade Judea again with
an even larger army.

303

1 MACCABEES 304

Rededication of the Temple
36 Then Judas and his brothers said, "See, our enemies are crushed; let
us go up to cleanse the sanctuary and dedicate it." 37 So all the army
assembled and went up to Mount Zion. 38 There they saw the
sanctuary desolate, the altar profaned, and the gates burned. In the
courts they saw bushes sprung up as in a thicket, or as on one of the
mountains. They saw also the chambers of the priests in ruins. 39 Then
they tore their clothes and mourned with great lamentation; they
sprinkled themselves with ashes 40 and fell face down on the ground.
And when the signal was given with the trumpets, they cried out to
Heaven.
41 Then Judas detailed men to fight against those in the citadel until
he had cleansed the sanctuary. 42 He chose blameless priests devoted
to the law, 43 and they cleansed the sanctuary and removed the
defiled stones to an unclean place. 44 They deliberated what to do
about the altar of burnt offering, which had been profaned. 45 And
they thought it best to tear it down, so that it would not be a lasting
shame to them that the Gentiles had defiled it. So they tore down the
altar, 46 and stored the stones in a convenient place on the temple hill
until a prophet should come to tell what to do with them. 47 Then they
took unhewn stones, as the law directs, and built a new altar like the
former one. 48 They also rebuilt the sanctuary and the interior of the
temple, and consecrated the courts. 49 They made new holy vessels,
and brought the lampstand, the altar of incense, and the table into the
temple. 50 Then they offered incense on the altar and lit the lamps on
the lampstand, and these gave light in the temple. 51 They placed the
bread on the table and hung up the curtains. Thus they finished all the
work they had undertaken.
52 Early in the morning on the twenty-fifth day of the ninth month,
which is the month of Chislev, in the one hundred forty-eighth year, 53
they rose and offered sacrifice, as the law directs, on the new altar of
burnt offering that they had built. 54 At the very season and on the
very day that the Gentiles had profaned it, it was dedicated with songs
and harps and lutes and cymbals. 55 All the people fell on their faces
and worshiped and blessed Heaven, who had prospered them. 56 So

304

1 MACCABEES 305

they celebrated the dedication of the altar for eight days, and joyfully
offered burnt offerings; they offered a sacrifice of well-being and a
thanksgiving offering. 57 They decorated the front of the temple with
golden crowns and small shields; they restored the gates and the
chambers for the priests, and fitted them with doors. 58 There was very
great joy among the people, and the disgrace brought by the Gentiles
was removed.
59 Then Judas and his brothers and all the assembly of Israel
determined that every year at that season the days of dedication of the
altar should be observed with joy and gladness for eight days,
beginning with the twenty-fifth day of the month of Chislev.
60 At that time they fortified Mount Zion with high walls and strong
towers all around, to keep the Gentiles from coming and trampling
them down as they had done before. 61 Judas stationed a garrison
there to guard it; he also fortified Beth-zur to guard it, so that the
people might have a stronghold that faced Idumea.
[1 Maccabees 5]
Judas gathers Jews into Judea
1 When the Gentiles all around heard that the altar had been rebuilt
and the sanctuary dedicated as it was before, they became very angry,
2 and they determined to destroy the descendants of Jacob who lived
among them. So they began to kill and destroy among the people. 3
But Judas made war on the descendants of Esau in Idumea, at
Akrabattene, because they kept lying in wait for Israel. He dealt them a
heavy blow and humbled them and despoiled them. 4 He also
remembered the wickedness of the sons of Baean, who were a trap
and a snare to the people and ambushed them on the highways. 5
They were shut up by him in their towers; and he encamped against
them, vowed their complete destruction, and burned with fire their
towers and all who were in them. 6 Then he crossed over to attack the
Ammonites, where he found a strong band and many people, with
Timothy as their leader. 7 He engaged in many battles with them, and
they were crushed before him; he struck them down. 8 He also took
Jazer and its villages; then he returned to Judea.

305

1 MACCABEES 306

9 Now the Gentiles in Gilead gathered together against the Israelites
who lived in their territory, and planned to destroy them. But they fled
to the stronghold of Dathema, 10 and sent to Judas and his brothers a
letter that said, "The Gentiles around us have gathered together to
destroy us. 11 They are preparing to come and capture the stronghold
to which we have fled, and Timothy is leading their forces. 12 Now
then, come and rescue us from their hands, for many of us have fallen,
13 and all our kindred who were in the land of Tob have been killed;
the enemy have captured their wives and children and goods, and have
destroyed about a thousand persons there."
14 While the letter was still being read, other messengers, with their
garments torn, came from Galilee and made a similar report; 15 they
said that the people of Ptolemais and Tyre and Sidon, and all Galilee of
the Gentiles, had gathered together against them "to annihilate us."
16 When Judas and the people heard these messages, a great assembly
was called to determine what they should do for their kindred who
were in distress and were being attacked by enemies. 17 Then Judas
said to his brother Simon, "Choose your men and go and rescue your
kindred in Galilee; Jonathan my brother and I will go to Gilead." 18 But
he left Joseph, son of Zechariah, and Azariah, a leader of the people,
with the rest of the forces, in Judea to guard it; 19 and he gave them
this command, "Take charge of this people, but do not engage in
battle with the Gentiles until we return." 20 Then three thousand men
were assigned to Simon to go to Galilee, and eight thousand to Judas
for Gilead.
21 So Simon went to Galilee and fought many battles against the
Gentiles, and the Gentiles were crushed before him. 22 He pursued
them to the gate of Ptolemais; as many as three thousand of the
Gentiles fell, and he despoiled them. 23 Then he took the Jews of
Galilee and Arbatta, with their wives and children, and all they
possessed, and led them to Judea with great rejoicing.
24 Judas Maccabeus and his brother Jonathan crossed the Jordan and
made three days' journey into the wilderness. 25 They encountered the
Nabateans, who met them peaceably and told them all that had
happened to their kindred in Gilead: 26 "Many of them have been shut

306

1 MACCABEES 307

up in Bozrah and Bosor, in Alema and Chaspho, Maked and Carnaim"
— all these towns were strong and large — 27 "and some have been
shut up in the other towns of Gilead; the enemy are getting ready to
attack the strongholds tomorrow and capture and destroy all these
people in a single day."
28 Then Judas and his army quickly turned back by the wilderness road
to Bozrah; and he took the town, and killed every male by the edge of
the sword; then he seized all its spoils and burned it with fire. 29 He
left the place at night, and they went all the way to the stronghold of
Dathema. 30 At dawn they looked out and saw a large company, which
could not be counted, carrying ladders and engines of war to capture
the stronghold, and attacking the Jews within. 31 So Judas saw that the
battle had begun and that the cry of the town went up to Heaven,
with trumpets and loud shouts, 32 and he said to the men of his forces,
"Fight today for your kindred!" 33 Then he came up behind them in
three companies, who sounded their trumpets and cried aloud in
prayer. 34 And when the army of Timothy realized that it was
Maccabeus, they fled before him, and he dealt them a heavy blow. As
many as eight thousand of them fell that day.
35 Next he turned aside to Maapha, and fought against it and took it;
and he killed every male in it, plundered it, and burned it with fire. 36
From there he marched on and took Chaspho, Maked, and Bosor, and
the other towns of Gilead.
37 After these things Timothy gathered another army and encamped
opposite Raphon, on the other side of the stream. 38 Judas sent men to
spy out the camp, and they reported to him, "All the Gentiles around
us have gathered to him; it is a very large force. 39 They also have hired
Arabs to help them, and they are encamped across the stream, ready to
come and fight against you." And Judas went to meet them.
40 Now as Judas and his army drew near to the stream of water,
Timothy said to the officers of his forces, "If he crosses over to us first,
we will not be able to resist him, for he will surely defeat us. 41 But if
he shows fear and camps on the other side of the river, we will cross
over to him and defeat him." 42 When Judas approached the stream of

307

1 MACCABEES 308

water, he stationed the officers of the army at the stream and gave
them this command, "Permit no one to encamp, but make them all
enter the battle." 43 Then he crossed over against them first, and the
whole army followed him. All the Gentiles were defeated before him,
and they threw away their arms and fled into the sacred precincts at
Carnaim. 44 But he took the town and burned the sacred precincts
with fire, together with all who were in them. Thus Carnaim was
conquered; they could stand before Judas no longer.
45 Then Judas gathered together all the Israelites in Gilead, the small
and the great, with their wives and children and goods, a very large
company, to go to the land of Judah. 46 So they came to Ephron. This
was a large and very strong town on the road, and they could not go
around it to the right or to the left; they had to go through it. 47 But
the people of the town shut them out and blocked up the gates with
stones.
48 Judas sent them this friendly message, "Let us pass through your
land to get to our land. No one will do you harm; we will simply pass
by on foot." But they refused to open to him. 49 Then Judas ordered
proclamation to be made to the army that all should encamp where
they were. 50 So the men of the forces encamped, and he fought
against the town all that day and all the night, and the town was
delivered into his hands. 51 He destroyed every male by the edge of the
sword, and razed and plundered the town. Then he passed through
the town over the bodies of the dead.
52 Then they crossed the Jordan into the large plain before Beth-shan.
53 Judas kept rallying the laggards and encouraging the people all the
way until he came to the land of Judah. 54 So they went up to Mount
Zion with joy and gladness, and offered burnt offerings, because they
had returned in safety; not one of them had fallen.
55 Now while Judas and Jonathan were in Gilead and their brother
Simon was in Galilee before Ptolemais, 56 Joseph son of Zechariah, and
Azariah, the commanders of the forces, heard of their brave deeds and
of the heroic war they had fought. 57 So they said, "Let us also make a
name for ourselves; let us go and make war on the Gentiles around

308

1 MACCABEES 309

us." 58 So they issued orders to the men of the forces that were with
them and marched against Jamnia. 59 Gorgias and his men came out of
the town to meet them in battle. 60 Then Joseph and Azariah were
routed, and were pursued to the borders of Judea; as many as two
thousand of the people of Israel fell that day. 61 Thus the people
suffered a great rout because, thinking to do a brave deed, they did
not listen to Judas and his brothers. 62 But they did not belong to the
family of those men through whom deliverance was given to Israel.
63 The man Judas and his brothers were greatly honored in all Israel
and among all the Gentiles, wherever their name was heard. 64 People
gathered to them and praised them.
65 Then Judas and his brothers went out and fought the descendants
of Esau in the land to the south. He struck Hebron and its villages and
tore down its strongholds and burned its towers on all sides. 66 Then
he marched off to go into the land of the Philistines, and passed
through Marisa. 67 On that day some priests, who wished to do a brave
deed, fell in battle, for they went out to battle unwisely. 68 But Judas
turned aside to Azotus in the land of the Philistines; he tore down their
altars, and the carved images of their gods he burned with fire; he
plundered the towns and returned to the land of Judah.
[1 Maccabees 6]
Death of Antiochus Epiphanes IV and accession of Antiochus V
1 King Antiochus was going through the upper provinces when he
heard that Elymais in Persia was a city famed for its wealth in silver and
gold. 2 Its temple was very rich, containing golden shields, breastplates,
and weapons left there by Alexander son of Philip, the Macedonian
king who first reigned over the Greeks. 3 So he came and tried to take
the city and plunder it, but he could not because his plan had become
known to the citizens 4 and they withstood him in battle. So he fled
and in great disappointment left there to return to Babylon.
5 Then someone came to him in Persia and reported that the armies
that had gone into the land of Judah had been routed; 6 that Lysias
had gone first with a strong force, but had turned and fled before the

309

1 MACCABEES 310

Jews; that the Jews had grown strong from the arms, supplies, and
abundant spoils that they had taken from the armies they had cut
down; 7 that they had torn down the abomination that he had erected
on the altar in Jerusalem; and that they had surrounded the sanctuary
with high walls as before, and also Beth-zur, his town.
8 When the king heard this news, he was astounded and badly shaken.
He took to his bed and became sick from disappointment, because
things had not turned out for him as he had planned. 9 He lay there
for many days, because deep disappointment continually gripped him,
and he realized that he was dying. 10 So he called all his Friends and
said to them, "Sleep has departed from my eyes and I am downhearted
with worry. 11 I said to myself, 'To what distress I have come! And into
what a great flood I now am plunged! For I was kind and beloved in
my power.' 12 But now I remember the wrong I did in Jerusalem. I
seized all its vessels of silver and gold, and I sent to destroy the
inhabitants of Judah without good reason. 13 I know that it is because
of this that these misfortunes have come upon me; here I am, perishing
of bitter disappointment in a strange land."
14 Then he called for Philip, one of his Friends, and made him ruler
over all his kingdom. 15 He gave him the crown and his robe and the
signet, so that he might guide his son Antiochus and bring him up to
be king. 16 Thus King Antiochus died there in the one hundred fortyninth year. 17 When Lysias learned that the king was dead, he set up
Antiochus the king's son to reign. Lysias had brought him up from
boyhood; he named him Eupator.
Attack on the citadel and second battle at Beth-zur
18 Meanwhile the garrison in the citadel kept hemming Israel in
around the sanctuary. They were trying in every way to harm them and
strengthen the Gentiles. 19 Judas therefore resolved to destroy them,
and assembled all the people to besiege them. 20 They gathered
together and besieged the citadel in the one hundred fiftieth year; and
he built siege towers and other engines of war. 21 But some of the
garrison escaped from the siege and some of the ungodly Israelites
joined them. 22 They went to the king and said, "How long will you fail

310

1 MACCABEES 311

to do justice and to avenge our kindred? 23 We were happy to serve
your father, to live by what he said, and to follow his commands. 24
For this reason the sons of our people besieged the citadel and became
hostile to us; moreover, they have put to death as many of us as they
have caught, and they have seized our inheritances. 25 It is not against
us alone that they have stretched out their hands; they have also
attacked all the lands on their borders. 26 And see, today they have
encamped against the citadel in Jerusalem to take it; they have
fortified both the sanctuary and Beth-zur; 27 unless you quickly prevent
them, they will do still greater things, and you will not be able to stop
them."
28 The king was enraged when he heard this. He assembled all his
Friends, the commanders of his forces and those in authority. 29
Mercenary forces also came to him from other kingdoms and from
islands of the seas. 30 The number of his forces was one hundred
thousand foot soldiers, twenty thousand horsemen, and thirty-two
elephants accustomed to war. 31 They came through Idumea and
encamped against Beth-zur, and for many days they fought and built
engines of war; but the Jews sallied out and burned these with fire,
and fought courageously.
32 Then Judas marched away from the citadel and encamped at Bethzechariah, opposite the camp of the king. 33 Early in the morning the
king set out and took his army by a forced march along the road to
Beth-zechariah, and his troops made ready for battle and sounded
their trumpets. 34 They offered the elephants the juice of grapes and
mulberries, to arouse them for battle. 35 They distributed the animals
among the phalanxes; with each elephant they stationed a thousand
men armed with coats of mail, and with brass helmets on their heads;
and five hundred picked horsemen were assigned to each beast. 36
These took their position beforehand wherever the animal was;
wherever it went, they went with it, and they never left it. 37 On the
elephants were wooden towers, strong and covered; they were
fastened on each animal by special harness, and on each were four
armed men who fought from there, and also its Indian driver. 38 The
rest of the cavalry were stationed on either side, on the two flanks of
the army, to harass the enemy while being themselves protected by the

311

1 MACCABEES 312

phalanxes. 39 When the sun shone on the shields of gold and brass, the
hills were ablaze with them and gleamed like flaming torches.
40 Now a part of the king's army was spread out on the high hills, and
some troops were on the plain, and they advanced steadily and in
good order. 41 All who heard the noise made by their multitude, by the
marching of the multitude and the clanking of their arms, trembled,
for the army was very large and strong. 42 But Judas and his army
advanced to the battle, and six hundred of the king's army fell. 43 Now
Eleazar, called Avaran, saw that one of the animals was equipped with
royal armor. It was taller than all the others, and he supposed that the
king was on it. 44 So he gave his life to save his people and to win for
himself an everlasting name. 45 He courageously ran into the midst of
the phalanx to reach it; he killed men right and left, and they parted
before him on both sides. 46 He got under the elephant, stabbed it
from beneath, and killed it; but it fell to the ground upon him and he
died. 47 When the Jews saw the royal might and the fierce attack of
the forces, they turned away in flight.
48 The soldiers of the king's army went up to Jerusalem against them,
and the king encamped in Judea and at Mount Zion. 49 He made peace
with the people of Beth-zur, and they evacuated the town because
they had no provisions there to withstand a siege, since it was a
sabbatical year for the land. 50 So the king took Beth-zur and
stationed a guard there to hold it. 51 Then he encamped before the
sanctuary for many days. He set up siege towers, engines of war to
throw fire and stones, machines to shoot arrows, and catapults. 52 The
Jews also made engines of war to match theirs, and fought for many
days. 53 But they had no food in storage, because it was the seventh
year; those who had found safety in Judea from the Gentiles had
consumed the last of the stores. 54 Only a few men were left in the
sanctuary; the rest scattered to their own homes, for the famine
proved too much for them.
Lysias makes peace
55 Then Lysias heard that Philip, whom King Antiochus while still living
had appointed to bring up his son Antiochus to be king, 56 had

312

1 MACCABEES 313

returned from Persia and Media with the forces that had gone with the
king, and that he was trying to seize control of the government. 57 So
he quickly gave orders to withdraw, and said to the king, to the
commanders of the forces, and to the troops, "Daily we grow weaker,
our food supply is scant, the place against which we are fighting is
strong, and the affairs of the kingdom press urgently on us. 58 Now
then let us come to terms with these people, and make peace with
them and with all their nation. 59 Let us agree to let them live by their
laws as they did before; for it was on account of their laws that we
abolished that they became angry and did all these things."
60 The speech pleased the king and the commanders, and he sent to
the Jews an offer of peace, and they accepted it. 61 So the king and the
commanders gave them their oath. On these conditions the Jews
evacuated the stronghold. 62 But when the king entered Mount Zion
and saw what a strong fortress the place was, he broke the oath he
had sworn and gave orders to tear down the wall all around. 63 Then
he set off in haste and returned to Antioch. He found Philip in control
of the city, but he fought against him, and took the city by force.
[1 Maccabees 7]
Demetrius I becomes king
1 In the one hundred fifty-first year Demetrius son of Seleucus set out
from Rome, sailed with a few men to a town by the sea, and there
began to reign. 2 As he was entering the royal palace of his ancestors,
the army seized Antiochus and Lysias to bring them to him. 3 But when
this act became known to him, he said, "Do not let me see their faces!"
4 So the army killed them, and Demetrius took his seat on the throne
of his kingdom.
Alcimus as high priest
5 Then there came to him all the renegade and godless men of Israel;
they were led by Alcimus, who wanted to be high priest. 6 They
brought to the king this accusation against the people: "Judas and his
brothers have destroyed all your Friends, and have driven us out of our
land. 7 Now then send a man whom you trust; let him go and see all

313

1 MACCABEES 314

the ruin that Judas has brought on us and on the land of the king, and
let him punish them and all who help them."
8 So the king chose Bacchides, one of the king's Friends, governor of
the province Beyond the River; he was a great man in the kingdom and
was faithful to the king. 9 He sent him, and with him he sent the
ungodly Alcimus, whom he made high priest; and he commanded him
to take vengeance on the Israelites. 10 So they marched away and came
with a large force into the land of Judah; and he sent messengers to
Judas and his brothers with peaceable but treacherous words. 11 But
they paid no attention to their words, for they saw that they had come
with a large force.
12 Then a group of scribes appeared in a body before Alcimus and
Bacchides to ask for just terms. 13 The Hasideans were first among the
Israelites to seek peace from them, 14 for they said, "A priest of the line
of Aaron has come with the army, and he will not harm us." 15 Alcimus
spoke peaceable words to them and swore this oath to them, "We will
not seek to injure you or your friends." 16 So they trusted him; but he
seized sixty of them and killed them in one day, in accordance with the
word that was written,
17 "The flesh of your faithful ones and their blood
they poured out all around Jerusalem,
and there was no one to bury them."
18 Then the fear and dread of them fell on all the people, for they said,
"There is no truth or justice in them, for they have violated the
agreement and the oath that they swore."
19 Then Bacchides withdrew from Jerusalem and encamped in Bethzaith. And he sent and seized many of the men who had deserted to
him, and some of the people, and killed them and threw them into a
great pit. 20 He placed Alcimus in charge of the country and left with
him a force to help him; then Bacchides went back to the king.
21 Alcimus struggled to maintain his high priesthood, 22 and all who
were troubling their people joined him. They gained control of the
land of Judah and did great damage in Israel. 23 And Judas saw all the

314

1 MACCABEES 315

wrongs that Alcimus and those with him had done among the
Israelites; it was more than the Gentiles had done. 24 So Judas went
out into all the surrounding parts of Judea, taking vengeance on those
who had deserted and preventing those in the city from going out into
the country. 25 When Alcimus saw that Judas and those with him had
grown strong, and realized that he could not withstand them, he
returned to the king and brought malicious charges against them.
Defeat of Nicanor
26 Then the king sent Nicanor, one of his honored princes, who hated
and detested Israel, and he commanded him to destroy the people. 27
So Nicanor came to Jerusalem with a large force, and treacherously
sent to Judas and his brothers this peaceable message, 28 "Let there be
no fighting between you and me; I shall come with a few men to see
you face to face in peace."
29 So he came to Judas, and they greeted one another peaceably; but
the enemy were preparing to kidnap Judas. 30 It became known to
Judas that Nicanor had come to him with treacherous intent, and he
was afraid of him and would not meet him again. 31 When Nicanor
learned that his plan had been disclosed, he went out to meet Judas in
battle near Caphar-salama. 32 About five hundred of the army of
Nicanor fell, and the rest fled into the city of David.
33 After these events Nicanor went up to Mount Zion. Some of the
priests from the sanctuary and some of the elders of the people came
out to greet him peaceably and to show him the burnt offering that
was being offered for the king. 34 But he mocked them and derided
them and defiled them and spoke arrogantly, 35 and in anger he swore
this oath, "Unless Judas and his army are delivered into my hands this
time, then if I return safely I will burn up this house." And he went out
in great anger. 36 At this the priests went in and stood before the altar
and the temple; they wept and said,

315

1 MACCABEES 316

37 "You chose this house to be called by your name,
and to be for your people a house of prayer and supplication.
38 Take vengeance on this man and on his army,
and let them fall by the sword;
remember their blasphemies,
and let them live no longer."
39 Now Nicanor went out from Jerusalem and encamped in Bethhoron, and the Syrian army joined him. 40 Judas encamped in Adasa
with three thousand men. Then Judas prayed and said, 41 "When the
messengers from the king spoke blasphemy, your angel went out and
struck down one hundred eighty-five thousand of the Assyrians. 42 So
also crush this army before us today; let the rest learn that Nicanor has
spoken wickedly against the sanctuary, and judge him according to this
wickedness."
43 So the armies met in battle on the thirteenth day of the month of
Adar. The army of Nicanor was crushed, and he himself was the first to
fall in the battle. 44 When his army saw that Nicanor had fallen, they
threw down their arms and fled. 45 The Jews pursued them a day's
journey, from Adasa as far as Gazara, and as they followed they kept
sounding the battle call on the trumpets. 46 People came out of all the
surrounding villages of Judea, and they outflanked the enemy and
drove them back to their pursuers, so that they all fell by the sword;
not even one of them was left. 47 Then the Jews seized the spoils and
the plunder; they cut off Nicanor's head and the right hand that he
had so arrogantly stretched out, and brought them and displayed them
just outside Jerusalem. 48 The people rejoiced greatly and celebrated
that day as a day of great gladness. 49 They decreed that this day
should be celebrated each year on the thirteenth day of Adar. 50 So
the land of Judah had rest for a few days.
[1 Maccabees 8]
Treaty with Rome
1 Now Judas heard of the fame of the Romans, that they were very
strong and were well-disposed toward all who made an alliance with
them, that they pledged friendship to those who came to them, 2 and

316

1 MACCABEES 317

that they were very strong. He had been told of their wars and of the
brave deeds that they were doing among the Gauls, how they had
defeated them and forced them to pay tribute, 3 and what they had
done in the land of Spain to get control of the silver and gold mines
there, 4 and how they had gained control of the whole region by their
planning and patience, even though the place was far distant from
them. They also subdued the kings who came against them from the
ends of the earth, until they crushed them and inflicted great disaster
on them; the rest paid them tribute every year. 5 They had crushed in
battle and conquered Philip, and King Perseus of the Macedonians, and
the others who rose up against them. 6 They also had defeated
Antiochus the Great, king of Asia, who went to fight against them with
one hundred twenty elephants and with cavalry and chariots and a
very large army. He was crushed by them; 7 they took him alive and
decreed that he and those who would reign after him should pay a
heavy tribute and give hostages and surrender some of their best
provinces, 8 the countries of India, Media, and Lydia. These they took
from him and gave to King Eumenes. 9 The Greeks planned to come
and destroy them, 10 but this became known to them, and they sent a
general against the Greeks and attacked them. Many of them were
wounded and fell, and the Romans took captive their wives and
children; they plundered them, conquered the land, tore down their
strongholds, and enslaved them to this day. 11 The remaining kingdoms
and islands, as many as ever opposed them, they destroyed and
enslaved; 12 but with their friends and those who rely on them they
have kept friendship. They have subdued kings far and near, and as
many as have heard of their fame have feared them. 13 Those whom
they wish to help and to make kings, they make kings, and those
whom they wish they depose; and they have been greatly exalted. 14
Yet for all this not one of them has put on a crown or worn purple as a
mark of pride, 15 but they have built for themselves a senate chamber,
and every day three hundred twenty senators constantly deliberate
concerning the people, to govern them well. 16 They trust one man
each year to rule over them and to control all their land; they all heed
the one man, and there is no envy or jealousy among them.

317

1 MACCABEES 318

17 So Judas chose Eupolemus son of John son of Accos, and Jason son
of Eleazar, and sent them to Rome to establish friendship and alliance,
18 and to free themselves from the yoke; for they saw that the
kingdom of the Greeks was enslaving Israel completely. 19 They went
to Rome, a very long journey; and they entered the senate chamber
and spoke as follows: 20 "Judas, who is also called Maccabeus, and his
brothers and the people of the Jews have sent us to you to establish
alliance and peace with you, so that we may be enrolled as your allies
and friends." 21 The proposal pleased them, 22 and this is a copy of the
letter that they wrote in reply, on bronze tablets, and sent to
Jerusalem to remain with them there as a memorial of peace and
alliance:
23 "May all go well with the Romans and with the nation of the Jews
at sea and on land forever, and may sword and enemy be far from
them. 24 If war comes first to Rome or to any of their allies in all their
dominion, 25 the nation of the Jews shall act as their allies
wholeheartedly, as the occasion may indicate to them. 26 To the enemy
that makes war they shall not give or supply grain, arms, money, or
ships, just as Rome has decided; and they shall keep their obligations
without receiving any return. 27 In the same way, if war comes first to
the nation of the Jews, the Romans shall willingly act as their allies, as
the occasion may indicate to them. 28 And to their enemies there shall
not be given grain, arms, money, or ships, just as Rome has decided;
and they shall keep these obligations and do so without deceit. 29 Thus
on these terms the Romans make a treaty with the Jewish people. 30 If
after these terms are in effect both parties shall determine to add or
delete anything, they shall do so at their discretion, and any addition
or deletion that they may make shall be valid.
31 "Concerning the wrongs that King Demetrius is doing to them, we
have written to him as follows, 'Why have you made your yoke heavy
on our friends and allies the Jews? 32 If now they appeal again for help
against you, we will defend their rights and fight you on sea and on
land.'"

318

1 MACCABEES 319

[1 Maccabees 9]
Death of Judas
1 When Demetrius heard that Nicanor and his army had fallen in battle,
he sent Bacchides and Alcimus into the land of Judah a second time,
and with them the right wing of the army. 2 They went by the road
that leads to Gilgal and encamped against Mesaloth in Arbela, and
they took it and killed many people. 3 In the first month of the one
hundred fifty-second year they encamped against Jerusalem; 4 then
they marched off and went to Berea with twenty thousand foot
soldiers and two thousand cavalry.
5 Now Judas was encamped in Elasa, and with him were three
thousand picked men. 6 When they saw the huge number of the
enemy forces, they were greatly frightened, and many slipped away
from the camp, until no more than eight hundred of them were left.
7 When Judas saw that his army had slipped away and the battle was
imminent, he was crushed in spirit, for he had no time to assemble
them. 8 He became faint, but he said to those who were left, "Let us
get up and go against our enemies. We may have the strength to fight
them." 9 But they tried to dissuade him, saying, "We do not have the
strength. Let us rather save our own lives now, and let us come back
with our kindred and fight them; we are too few." 10 But Judas said,
"Far be it from us to do such a thing as to flee from them. If our time
has come, let us die bravely for our kindred, and leave no cause to
question our honor."
11 Then the army of Bacchides marched out from the camp and took its
stand for the encounter. The cavalry was divided into two companies,
and the slingers and the archers went ahead of the army, as did all the
chief warriors. 12 Bacchides was on the right wing. Flanked by the two
companies, the phalanx advanced to the sound of the trumpets; and
the men with Judas also blew their trumpets. 13 The earth was shaken
by the noise of the armies, and the battle raged from morning until
evening.

319

1 MACCABEES 320

14 Judas saw that Bacchides and the strength of his army were on the
right; then all the stouthearted men went with him, 15 and they
crushed the right wing, and he pursued them as far as Mount Azotus.
16 When those on the left wing saw that the right wing was crushed,
they turned and followed close behind Judas and his men. 17 The battle
became desperate, and many on both sides were wounded and fell. 18
Judas also fell, and the rest fled.
19 Then Jonathan and Simon took their brother Judas and buried him
in the tomb of their ancestors at Modein, 20 and wept for him. All
Israel made great lamentation for him; they mourned many days and
said,
21 "How is the mighty fallen,
the savior of Israel!"
22 Now the rest of the acts of Judas, and his wars and the brave deeds
that he did, and his greatness, have not been recorded, but they were
very many.
Jonathan becomes leader and defeats Bacchides
23 After the death of Judas, the renegades emerged in all parts of
Israel; all the wrongdoers reappeared. 24 In those days a very great
famine occurred, and the country went over to their side. 25 Bacchides
chose the godless and put them in charge of the country. 26 They made
inquiry and searched for the friends of Judas, and brought them to
Bacchides, who took vengeance on them and made sport of them. 27
So there was great distress in Israel, such as had not been since the
time that prophets ceased to appear among them.
28 Then all the friends of Judas assembled and said to Jonathan, 29
"Since the death of your brother Judas there has been no one like him
to go against our enemies and Bacchides, and to deal with those of our
nation who hate us. 30 Now therefore we have chosen you today to
take his place as our ruler and leader, to fight our battle." 31 So
Jonathan accepted the leadership at that time in place of his brother
Judas.

320

1 MACCABEES 321

32 When Bacchides learned of this, he tried to kill him. 33 But Jonathan
and his brother Simon and all who were with him heard of it, and they
fled into the wilderness of Tekoa and camped by the water of the pool
of Asphar. 34 Bacchides found this out on the sabbath day, and he with
all his army crossed the Jordan.
35 So Jonathan sent his brother as leader of the multitude and begged
the Nabateans, who were his friends, for permission to store with them
the great amount of baggage that they had. 36 But the family of
Jambri from Medeba came out and seized John and all that he had,
and left with it.
37 After these things it was reported to Jonathan and his brother
Simon, "The family of Jambri are celebrating a great wedding, and are
conducting the bride, a daughter of one of the great nobles of Canaan,
from Nadabath with a large escort." 38 Remembering how their
brother John had been killed, they went up and hid under cover of the
mountain. 39 They looked out and saw a tumultuous procession with a
great amount of baggage; and the bridegroom came out with his
friends and his brothers to meet them with tambourines and musicians
and many weapons. 40 Then they rushed on them from the ambush
and began killing them. Many were wounded and fell, and the rest
fled to the mountain; and the Jews took all their goods. 41 So the
wedding was turned into mourning and the voice of their musicians
into a funeral dirge. 42 After they had fully avenged the blood of their
brother, they returned to the marshes of the Jordan.
43 When Bacchides heard of this, he came with a large force on the
sabbath day to the banks of the Jordan. 44 And Jonathan said to those
with him, "Let us get up now and fight for our lives, for today things
are not as they were before. 45 For look! the battle is in front of us and
behind us; the water of the Jordan is on this side and on that, with
marsh and thicket; there is no place to turn. 46 Cry out now to Heaven
that you may be delivered from the hands of our enemies." 47 So the
battle began, and Jonathan stretched out his hand to strike Bacchides,
but he eluded him and went to the rear. 48 Then Jonathan and the
men with him leaped into the Jordan and swam across to the other

321

1 MACCABEES 322

side, and the enemy did not cross the Jordan to attack them. 49 And
about one thousand of Bacchides' men fell that day.
50 Then Bacchides returned to Jerusalem and built strong cities in
Judea: the fortress in Jericho, and Emmaus, and Beth-horon, and
Bethel, and Timnath, and Pharathon, and Tephon, with high walls and
gates and bars. 51 And he placed garrisons in them to harass Israel. 52
He also fortified the town of Beth-zur, and Gazara, and the citadel,
and in them he put troops and stores of food. 53 And he took the sons
of the leading men of the land as hostages and put them under guard
in the citadel at Jerusalem.
54 In the one hundred and fifty-third year, in the second month,
Alcimus gave orders to tear down the wall of the inner court of the
sanctuary. He tore down the work of the prophets! 55 But he only
began to tear it down, for at that time Alcimus was stricken and his
work was hindered; his mouth was stopped and he was paralyzed, so
that he could no longer say a word or give commands concerning his
house. 56 And Alcimus died at that time in great agony. 57 When
Bacchides saw that Alcimus was dead, he returned to the king, and the
land of Judah had rest for two years.
58 Then all the lawless plotted and said, "See! Jonathan and his men
are living in quiet and confidence. So now let us bring Bacchides back,
and he will capture them all in one night." 59 And they went and
consulted with him. 60 He started to come with a large force, and
secretly sent letters to all his allies in Judea, telling them to seize
Jonathan and his men; but they were unable to do it, because their
plan became known. 61 And Jonathan's men seized about fifty of the
men of the country who were leaders in this treachery, and killed
them.
62 Then Jonathan with his men, and Simon, withdrew to Bethbasi in
the wilderness; he rebuilt the parts of it that had been demolished, and
they fortified it. 63 When Bacchides learned of this, he assembled all
his forces, and sent orders to the men of Judea. 64 Then he came and
encamped against Bethbasi; he fought against it for many days and
made machines of war.

322

1 MACCABEES 323

65 But Jonathan left his brother Simon in the town, while he went out
into the country; and he went with only a few men. 66 He struck down
Odomera and his kindred and the people of Phasiron in their tents. 67
Then he began to attack and went into battle with his forces; and
Simon and his men sallied out from the town and set fire to the
machines of war. 68 They fought with Bacchides, and he was crushed
by them. They pressed him very hard, for his plan and his expedition
had been in vain. 69 So he was very angry at the renegades who had
counseled him to come into the country, and he killed many of them.
Then he decided to go back to his own land.
70 When Jonathan learned of this, he sent ambassadors to him to make
peace with him and obtain release of the captives. 71 He agreed, and
did as he said; and he swore to Jonathan that he would not try to harm
him as long as he lived. 72 He restored to him the captives whom he
had taken previously from the land of Judah; then he turned and went
back to his own land, and did not come again into their territory. 73
Thus the sword ceased from Israel. Jonathan settled in Michmash and
began to judge the people; and he destroyed the godless out of Israel.
[1 Maccabees 10]
Alexander Balas appoints Jonathan high priest
1 In the one hundred sixtieth year Alexander Epiphanes, son of
Antiochus, landed and occupied Ptolemais. They welcomed him, and
there he began to reign. 2 When King Demetrius heard of it, he
assembled a very large army and marched out to meet him in battle. 3
Demetrius sent Jonathan a letter in peaceable words to honor him; 4
for he said to himself, "Let us act first to make peace with him before
he makes peace with Alexander against us, 5 for he will remember all
the wrongs that we did to him and to his brothers and his nation." 6 So
Demetrius gave him authority to recruit troops, to equip them with
arms, and to become his ally; and he commanded that the hostages in
the citadel should be released to him.
7 Then Jonathan came to Jerusalem and read the letter in the hearing
of all the people and of those in the citadel. 8 They were greatly
alarmed when they heard that the king had given him authority to

323

1 MACCABEES 324

recruit troops. 9 But those in the citadel released the hostages to
Jonathan, and he returned them to their parents.
10 And Jonathan took up residence in Jerusalem and began to rebuild
and restore the city. 11 He directed those who were doing the work to
build the walls and encircle Mount Zion with squared stones, for better
fortification; and they did so.
12 Then the foreigners who were in the strongholds that Bacchides had
built fled; 13 all of them left their places and went back to their own
lands. 14 Only in Beth-zur did some remain who had forsaken the law
and the commandments, for it served as a place of refuge.
15 Now King Alexander heard of all the promises that Demetrius had
sent to Jonathan, and he heard of the battles that Jonathan and his
brothers had fought, of the brave deeds that they had done, and of
the troubles that they had endured. 16 So he said, "Shall we find
another such man? Come now, we will make him our friend and ally."
17 And he wrote a letter and sent it to him, in the following words:
Jonathan Becomes High Priest
18 "King Alexander to his brother Jonathan, greetings. 19 We have
heard about you, that you are a mighty warrior and worthy to be our
friend. 20 And so we have appointed you today to be the high priest of
your nation; you are to be called the king's Friend and you are to take
our side and keep friendship with us." He also sent him a purple robe
and a golden crown.
21 So Jonathan put on the sacred vestments in the seventh month of
the one hundred sixtieth year, at the festival of booths, and he
recruited troops and equipped them with arms in abundance. 22 When
Demetrius heard of these things he was distressed and said, 23 "What is
this that we have done? Alexander has gotten ahead of us in forming a
friendship with the Jews to strengthen himself. 24 I also will write them
words of encouragement and promise them honor and gifts, so that I
may have their help." 25 So he sent a message to them in the following
words:

324

1 MACCABEES 325

Demetrius's offer to the Jews; his defeat
"King Demetrius to the nation of the Jews, greetings. 26 Since you
have kept your agreement with us and have continued your friendship
with us, and have not sided with our enemies, we have heard of it and
rejoiced. 27 Now continue still to keep faith with us, and we will repay
you with good for what you do for us. 28 We will grant you many
immunities and give you gifts.
29 "I now free you and exempt all the Jews from payment of tribute
and salt tax and crown levies, 30 and instead of collecting the third of
the grain and the half of the fruit of the trees that I should receive, I
release them from this day and henceforth. I will not collect them from
the land of Judah or from the three districts added to it from Samaria
and Galilee, from this day and for all time. 31 Jerusalem and its
environs, its tithes and its revenues, shall be holy and free from tax. 32 I
release also my control of the citadel in Jerusalem and give it to the
high priest, so that he may station in it men of his own choice to guard
it. 33 And everyone of the Jews taken as a captive from the land of
Judah into any part of my kingdom, I set free without payment; and let
all officials cancel also the taxes on their livestock.
34 "All the festivals and sabbaths and new moons and appointed days,
and the three days before a festival and the three after a festival — let
them all be days of immunity and release for all the Jews who are in
my kingdom. 35 No one shall have authority to exact anything from
them or annoy any of them about any matter.
36 "Let Jews be enrolled in the king's forces to the number of thirty
thousand men, and let the maintenance be given them that is due to
all the forces of the king. 37 Let some of them be stationed in the great
strongholds of the king, and let some of them be put in positions of
trust in the kingdom. Let their officers and leaders be of their own
number, and let them live by their own laws, just as the king has
commanded in the land of Judah.

325

1 MACCABEES 326

38 "As for the three districts that have been added to Judea from the
country of Samaria, let them be annexed to Judea so that they may be
considered to be under one ruler and obey no other authority than the
high priest. 39 Ptolemais and the land adjoining it I have given as a gift
to the sanctuary in Jerusalem, to meet the necessary expenses of the
sanctuary. 40 I also grant fifteen thousand shekels of silver yearly out
of the king's revenues from appropriate places. 41 And all the
additional funds that the government officials have not paid as they
did in the first years, they shall give from now on for the service of the
temple. 42 Moreover, the five thousand shekels of silver that my
officials have received every year from the income of the services of the
temple, this too is canceled, because it belongs to the priests who
minister there. 43 And all who take refuge at the temple in Jerusalem,
or in any of its precincts, because they owe money to the king or are in
debt, let them be released and receive back all their property in my
kingdom.
44 "Let the cost of rebuilding and restoring the structures of the
sanctuary be paid from the revenues of the king. 45 And let the cost of
rebuilding the walls of Jerusalem and fortifying it all around, and the
cost of rebuilding the walls in Judea, also be paid from the revenues of
the king."
46 When Jonathan and the people heard these words, they did not
believe or accept them, because they remembered the great wrongs
that Demetrius had done in Israel and how much he had oppressed
them. 47 They favored Alexander, because he had been the first to
speak peaceable words to them, and they remained his allies all his
days.
48 Now King Alexander assembled large forces and encamped
opposite Demetrius. 49 The two kings met in battle, and the army of
Demetrius fled, and Alexander pursued him and defeated them. 50 He
pressed the battle strongly until the sun set, and on that day Demetrius
fell.

326

1 MACCABEES 327

Alexander's relations with Egypt and Judea
51 Then Alexander sent ambassadors to Ptolemy king of Egypt with the
following message: 52 "Since I have returned to my kingdom and have
taken my seat on the throne of my ancestors, and established my rule
— for I crushed Demetrius and gained control of our country; 53 I met
him in battle, and he and his army were crushed by us, and we have
taken our seat on the throne of his kingdom — 54 now therefore let us
establish friendship with one another; give me now your daughter as
my wife, and I will become your son-in-law, and will make gifts to you
and to her in keeping with your position."
55 Ptolemy the king replied and said, "Happy was the day on which
you returned to the land of your ancestors and took your seat on the
throne of their kingdom. 56 And now I will do for you as you wrote,
but meet me at Ptolemais, so that we may see one another, and I will
become your father-in-law, as you have said."
57 So Ptolemy set out from Egypt, he and his daughter Cleopatra, and
came to Ptolemais in the one hundred sixty-second year. 58 King
Alexander met him, and Ptolemy gave him his daughter Cleopatra in
marriage, and celebrated her wedding at Ptolemais with great pomp,
as kings do.
59 Then King Alexander wrote to Jonathan to come and meet him. 60
So he went with pomp to Ptolemais and met the two kings; he gave
them and their Friends silver and gold and many gifts, and found favor
with them. 61 A group of malcontents from Israel, renegades, gathered
together against him to accuse him; but the king paid no attention to
them. 62 The king gave orders to take off Jonathan's garments and to
clothe him in purple, and they did so. 63 The king also seated him at his
side; and he said to his officers, "Go out with him into the middle of
the city and proclaim that no one is to bring charges against him about
any matter, and let no one annoy him for any reason." 64 When his
accusers saw the honor that was paid him, in accord with the
proclamation, and saw him clothed in purple, they all fled. 65 Thus the
king honored him and enrolled him among his chief Friends, and made

327

1 MACCABEES 328

him general and governor of the province. 66 And Jonathan returned
to Jerusalem in peace and gladness.
Victories of Jonathan
67 In the one hundred sixty-fifth year Demetrius son of Demetrius came
from Crete to the land of his ancestors. 68 When King Alexander heard
of it, he was greatly distressed and returned to Antioch. 69 And
Demetrius appointed Apollonius the governor of Coelesyria, and he
assembled a large force and encamped against Jamnia. Then he sent
the following message to the high priest Jonathan:
70 "You are the only one to rise up against us, and I have fallen into
ridicule and disgrace because of you. Why do you assume authority
against us in the hill country? 71 If you now have confidence in your
forces, come down to the plain to meet us, and let us match strength
with each other there, for I have with me the power of the cities. 72
Ask and learn who I am and who the others are that are helping us.
People will tell you that you cannot stand before us, for your ancestors
were twice put to flight in their own land. 73 And now you will not be
able to withstand my cavalry and such an army in the plain, where
there is no stone or pebble, or place to flee."
74 When Jonathan heard the words of Apollonius, his spirit was
aroused. He chose ten thousand men and set out from Jerusalem, and
his brother Simon met him to help him. 75 He encamped before Joppa,
but the people of the city closed its gates, for Apollonius had a
garrison in Joppa. 76 So they fought against it, and the people of the
city became afraid and opened the gates, and Jonathan gained
possession of Joppa.
77 When Apollonius heard of it, he mustered three thousand cavalry
and a large army, and went to Azotus as though he were going
farther. At the same time he advanced into the plain, for he had a
large troop of cavalry and put confidence in it. 78 Jonathan pursued
him to Azotus, and the armies engaged in battle. 79 Now Apollonius
had secretly left a thousand cavalry behind them. 80 Jonathan learned
that there was an ambush behind him, for they surrounded his army

328

1 MACCABEES 329

and shot arrows at his men from early morning until late afternoon. 81
But his men stood fast, as Jonathan had commanded, and the enemy's
horses grew tired.
82 Then Simon brought forward his force and engaged the phalanx in
battle (for the cavalry was exhausted); they were overwhelmed by him
and fled, 83 and the cavalry was dispersed in the plain. They fled to
Azotus and entered Beth-dagon, the temple of their idol, for safety. 84
But Jonathan burned Azotus and the surrounding towns and
plundered them; and the temple of Dagon, and those who had taken
refuge in it, he burned with fire. 85 The number of those who fell by
the sword, with those burned alive, came to eight thousand.
86 Then Jonathan left there and encamped against Askalon, and the
people of the city came out to meet him with great pomp.
87 He and those with him then returned to Jerusalem with a large
amount of booty. 88 When King Alexander heard of these things, he
honored Jonathan still more; 89 and he sent to him a golden buckle,
such as it is the custom to give to the King's Kinsmen. He also gave him
Ekron and all its environs as his possession.
[1 Maccabees 11]
Invasion of Ptolemy VI and victory of Demetrius II
1 Then the king of Egypt gathered great forces, like the sand by the
seashore, and many ships; and he tried to get possession of Alexander's
kingdom by trickery and add it to his own kingdom. 2 He set out for
Syria with peaceable words, and the people of the towns opened their
gates to him and went to meet him, for King Alexander had
commanded them to meet him, since he was Alexander's father-in-law.
3 But when Ptolemy entered the towns he stationed forces as a
garrison in each town.
4 When he approached Azotus, they showed him the burnt-out temple
of Dagon, and Azotus and its suburbs destroyed, and the corpses lying
about, and the charred bodies of those whom Jonathan had burned in
the war, for they had piled them in heaps along his route. 5 They also

329

1 MACCABEES 330

told the king what Jonathan had done, to throw blame on him; but
the king kept silent. 6 Jonathan met the king at Joppa with pomp, and
they greeted one another and spent the night there. 7 And Jonathan
went with the king as far as the river called Eleutherus; then he
returned to Jerusalem.
8 So King Ptolemy gained control of the coastal cities as far as Seleucia
by the sea, and he kept devising wicked designs against Alexander. 9
He sent envoys to King Demetrius, saying, "Come, let us make a
covenant with each other, and I will give you in marriage my daughter
who was Alexander's wife, and you shall reign over your father's
kingdom. 10 I now regret that I gave him my daughter, for he has tried
to kill me." 11 He threw blame on Alexander because he coveted his
kingdom. 12 So he took his daughter away from him and gave her to
Demetrius. He was estranged from Alexander, and their enmity
became manifest.
13 Then Ptolemy entered Antioch and put on the crown of Asia. Thus
he put two crowns on his head, the crown of Egypt and that of Asia. 14
Now King Alexander was in Cilicia at that time, because the people of
that region were in revolt. 15 When Alexander heard of it, he came
against him in battle. Ptolemy marched out and met him with a strong
force, and put him to flight. 16 So Alexander fled into Arabia to find
protection there, and King Ptolemy was triumphant. 17 Zabdiel the
Arab cut off the head of Alexander and sent it to Ptolemy. 18 But King
Ptolemy died three days later, and his troops in the strongholds were
killed by the inhabitants of the strongholds. 19 So Demetrius became
king in the one hundred sixty-seventh year.
20 In those days Jonathan assembled the Judeans to attack the citadel
in Jerusalem, and he built many engines of war to use against it. 21 But
certain renegades who hated their nation went to the king and
reported to him that Jonathan was besieging the citadel. 22 When he
heard this he was angry, and as soon as he heard it he set out and
came to Ptolemais; and he wrote Jonathan not to continue the siege,
but to meet him for a conference at Ptolemais as quickly as possible.

330

1 MACCABEES 331

23 When Jonathan heard this, he gave orders to continue the siege. He
chose some of the elders of Israel and some of the priests, and put
himself in danger, 24 for he went to the king at Ptolemais, taking silver
and gold and clothing and numerous other gifts. And he won his favor.
25 Although certain renegades of his nation kept making complaints
against him, 26 the king treated him as his predecessors had treated
him; he exalted him in the presence of all his Friends. 27 He confirmed
him in the high priesthood and in as many other honors as he had
formerly had, and caused him to be reckoned among his chief Friends.
28 Then Jonathan asked the king to free Judea and the three districts
of Samaria from tribute, and promised him three hundred talents. 29
The king consented, and wrote a letter to Jonathan about all these
things; its contents were as follows:
30 "King Demetrius to his brother Jonathan and to the nation of the
Jews, greetings. 31 This copy of the letter that we wrote concerning
you to our kinsman Lasthenes we have written to you also, so that you
may know what it says. 32 'King Demetrius to his father Lasthenes,
greetings. 33 We have determined to do good to the nation of the
Jews, who are our friends and fulfill their obligations to us, because of
the goodwill they show toward us. 34 We have confirmed as their
possession both the territory of Judea and the three districts of
Aphairema and Lydda and Rathamin; the latter, with all the region
bordering them, were added to Judea from Samaria. To all those who
offer sacrifice in Jerusalem we have granted release from the royal
taxes that the king formerly received from them each year, from the
crops of the land and the fruit of the trees. 35 And the other payments
henceforth due to us of the tithes, and the taxes due to us, and the salt
pits and the crown taxes due to us — from all these we shall grant
them release. 36 And not one of these grants shall be canceled from
this time on forever. 37 Now therefore take care to make a copy of this,
and let it be given to Jonathan and put up in a conspicuous place on
the holy mountain.'"
Jonathan's aid to Demetrius
38 When King Demetrius saw that the land was quiet before him and
that there was no opposition to him, he dismissed all his troops, all of

331

1 MACCABEES 332

them to their own homes, except the foreign troops that he had
recruited from the islands of the nations. So all the troops who had
served under his predecessors hated him. 39 A certain Trypho had
formerly been one of Alexander's supporters; he saw that all the troops
were grumbling against Demetrius. So he went to Imalkue the Arab,
who was bringing up Antiochus, the young son of Alexander, 40 and
insistently urged him to hand Antiochus over to him, to become king in
place of his father. He also reported to Imalkue what Demetrius had
done and told of the hatred that the troops of Demetrius had for him;
and he stayed there many days.
41 Now Jonathan sent to King Demetrius the request that he remove
the troops of the citadel from Jerusalem, and the troops in the
strongholds; for they kept fighting against Israel. 42 And Demetrius
sent this message back to Jonathan: "Not only will I do these things for
you and your nation, but I will confer great honor on you and your
nation, if I find an opportunity. 43 Now then you will do well to send
me men who will help me, for all my troops have revolted." 44 So
Jonathan sent three thousand stalwart men to him at Antioch, and
when they came to the king, the king rejoiced at their arrival.
45 Then the people of the city assembled within the city, to the
number of a hundred and twenty thousand, and they wanted to kill
the king. 46 But the king fled into the palace. Then the people of the
city seized the main streets of the city and began to fight. 47 So the
king called the Jews to his aid, and they all rallied around him and then
spread out through the city; and they killed on that day about one
hundred thousand. 48 They set fire to the city and seized a large
amount of spoil on that day, and saved the king. 49 When the people
of the city saw that the Jews had gained control of the city as they
pleased, their courage failed and they cried out to the king with this
entreaty: 50 "Grant us peace, and make the Jews stop fighting against
us and our city." 51 And they threw down their arms and made peace.
So the Jews gained glory in the sight of the king and of all the people
in his kingdom, and they returned to Jerusalem with a large amount of
spoil.

332

1 MACCABEES 333

52 So King Demetrius sat on the throne of his kingdom, and the land
was quiet before him.
Estrangement of Demetrius and Jonathan
53 But he broke his word about all that he had promised; he became
estranged from Jonathan and did not repay the favors that Jonathan
had done him, but treated him very harshly.
54 After this Trypho returned, and with him the young boy Antiochus
who began to reign and put on the crown. 55 All the troops that
Demetrius had discharged gathered around him; they fought against
Demetrius, and he fled and was routed. 56 Trypho captured the
elephants and gained control of Antioch. 57 Then the young Antiochus
wrote to Jonathan, saying, "I confirm you in the high priesthood and
set you over the four districts and make you one of the king's Friends."
58 He also sent him gold plate and a table service, and granted him the
right to drink from gold cups and dress in purple and wear a gold
buckle. 59 He appointed Jonathan's brother Simon governor from the
Ladder of Tyre to the borders of Egypt.
60 Then Jonathan set out and traveled beyond the river and among
the towns, and all the army of Syria gathered to him as allies. When he
came to Askalon, the people of the city met him and paid him honor.
61 From there he went to Gaza, but the people of Gaza shut him out.
So he besieged it and burned its suburbs with fire and plundered them.
62 Then the people of Gaza pleaded with Jonathan, and he made
peace with them, and took the sons of their rulers as hostages and sent
them to Jerusalem. And he passed through the country as far as
Damascus.
63 Then Jonathan heard that the officers of Demetrius had come to
Kadesh in Galilee with a large army, intending to remove him from
office. 64 He went to meet them, but left his brother Simon in the
country. 65 Simon encamped before Beth-zur and fought against it for
many days and hemmed it in. 66 Then they asked him to grant them
terms of peace, and he did so. He removed them from there, took
possession of the town, and set a garrison over it.

333

1 MACCABEES 334

67 Jonathan and his army encamped by the waters of Gennesaret. Early
in the morning they marched to the plain of Hazor, 68 and there in the
plain the army of the foreigners met him; they had set an ambush
against him in the mountains, but they themselves met him face to
face. 69 Then the men in ambush emerged from their places and
joined battle. 70 All the men with Jonathan fled; not one of them was
left except Mattathias son of Absalom and Judas son of Chalphi,
commanders of the forces of the army. 71 Jonathan tore his clothes, put
dust on his head, and prayed. 72 Then he turned back to the battle
against the enemy and routed them, and they fled. 73 When his men
who were fleeing saw this, they returned to him and joined him in the
pursuit as far as Kadesh, to their camp, and there they encamped. 74 As
many as three thousand of the foreigners fell that day. And Jonathan
returned to Jerusalem.
[1 Maccabees 12]
Alliances with the Romans and Spartans
1 Now when Jonathan saw that the time was favorable for him, he
chose men and sent them to Rome to confirm and renew the
friendship with them. 2 He also sent letters to the same effect to the
Spartans and to other places. 3 So they went to Rome and entered the
senate chamber and said, "The high priest Jonathan and the Jewish
nation have sent us to renew the former friendship and alliance with
them." 4 And the Romans gave them letters to the people in every
place, asking them to provide for the envoys safe conduct to the land
of Judah.
5 This is a copy of the letter that Jonathan wrote to the Spartans: 6
"The high priest Jonathan, the senate of the nation, the priests, and
the rest of the Jewish people to their brothers the Spartans, greetings.
7 Already in time past a letter was sent to the high priest Onias from
Arius, who was king among you, stating that you are our brothers, as
the appended copy shows. 8 Onias welcomed the envoy with honor,
and received the letter, which contained a clear declaration of alliance
and friendship. 9 Therefore, though we have no need of these things,
since we have as encouragement the holy books that are in our hands,
10 we have undertaken to send to renew our family ties and friendship

334

1 MACCABEES 335

with you, so that we may not become estranged from you, for
considerable time has passed since you sent your letter to us. 11 We
therefore remember you constantly on every occasion, both at our
festivals and on other appropriate days, at the sacrifices that we offer
and in our prayers, as it is right and proper to remember brothers. 12
And we rejoice in your glory. 13 But as for ourselves, many trials and
many wars have encircled us; the kings around us have waged war
against us. 14 We were unwilling to annoy you and our other allies and
friends with these wars, 15 for we have the help that comes from
Heaven for our aid, and so we were delivered from our enemies, and
our enemies were humbled. 16 We therefore have chosen Numenius
son of Antiochus and Antipater son of Jason, and have sent them to
Rome to renew our former friendship and alliance with them. 17 We
have commanded them to go also to you and greet you and deliver to
you this letter from us concerning the renewal of our family ties. 18
And now please send us a reply to this."
19 This is a copy of the letter that they sent to Onias: 20 "King Arius of
the Spartans, to the high priest Onias, greetings. 21 It has been found
in writing concerning the Spartans and the Jews that they are brothers
and are of the family of Abraham. 22 And now that we have learned
this, please write us concerning your welfare; 23 we on our part write
to you that your livestock and your property belong to us, and ours
belong to you. We therefore command that our envoys report to you
accordingly."
Jonathan captured by Trypho
24 Now Jonathan heard that the commanders of Demetrius had
returned, with a larger force than before, to wage war against him. 25
So he marched away from Jerusalem and met them in the region of
Hamath, for he gave them no opportunity to invade his own country.
26 He sent spies to their camp, and they returned and reported to him
that the enemy were being drawn up in formation to attack the Jews
by night. 27 So when the sun had set, Jonathan commanded his troops
to be alert and to keep their arms at hand so as to be ready all night
for battle, and he stationed outposts around the camp. 28 When the
enemy heard that Jonathan and his troops were prepared for battle,

335

1 MACCABEES 336

they were afraid and were terrified at heart; so they kindled fires in
their camp and withdrew. 29 But Jonathan and his troops did not know
it until morning, for they saw the fires burning. 30 Then Jonathan
pursued them, but he did not overtake them, for they had crossed the
Eleutherus river. 31 So Jonathan turned aside against the Arabs who
are called Zabadeans, and he crushed them and plundered them. 32
Then he broke camp and went to Damascus, and marched through all
that region.
33 Simon also went out and marched through the country as far as
Askalon and the neighboring strongholds. He turned aside to Joppa
and took it by surprise, 34 for he had heard that they were ready to
hand over the stronghold to those whom Demetrius had sent. And he
stationed a garrison there to guard it.
35 When Jonathan returned he convened the elders of the people and
planned with them to build strongholds in Judea, 36 to build the walls
of Jerusalem still higher, and to erect a high barrier between the
citadel and the city to separate it from the city, in order to isolate it so
that its garrison could neither buy nor sell. 37 So they gathered
together to rebuild the city; part of the wall on the valley to the east
had fallen, and he repaired the section called Chaphenatha. 38 Simon
also built Adida in the Shephelah; he fortified it and installed gates
with bolts.
39 Then Trypho attempted to become king in Asia and put on the
crown, and to raise his hand against King Antiochus. 40 He feared that
Jonathan might not permit him to do so, but might make war on him,
so he kept seeking to seize and kill him, and he marched out and came
to Beth-shan. 41 Jonathan went out to meet him with forty thousand
picked warriors, and he came to Beth-shan. 42 When Trypho saw that
he had come with a large army, he was afraid to raise his hand against
him. 43 So he received him with honor and commended him to all his
Friends, and he gave him gifts and commanded his Friends and his
troops to obey him as they would himself. 44 Then he said to Jonathan,
"Why have you put all these people to so much trouble when we are
not at war? 45 Dismiss them now to their homes and choose for
yourself a few men to stay with you, and come with me to Ptolemais. I

336

1 MACCABEES 337

will hand it over to you as well as the other strongholds and the
remaining troops and all the officials, and will turn around and go
home. For that is why I am here."
46 Jonathan trusted him and did as he said; he sent away the troops,
and they returned to the land of Judah. 47 He kept with himself three
thousand men, two thousand of whom he left in Galilee, while one
thousand accompanied him. 48 But when Jonathan entered Ptolemais,
the people of Ptolemais closed the gates and seized him, and they
killed with the sword all who had entered with him.
49 Then Trypho sent troops and cavalry into Galilee and the Great Plain
to destroy all Jonathan's soldiers. 50 But they realized that Jonathan
had been seized and had perished along with his men, and they
encouraged one another and kept marching in close formation, ready
for battle. 51 When their pursuers saw that they would fight for their
lives, they turned back. 52 So they all reached the land of Judah safely,
and they mourned for Jonathan and his companions and were in great
fear; and all Israel mourned deeply. 53 All the nations around them
tried to destroy them, for they said, "They have no leader or helper.
Now therefore let us make war on them and blot out the memory of
them from humankind."
[1 Maccabees 13]
Simon becomes leader; death of Jonathan
1 Simon heard that Trypho had assembled a large army to invade the
land of Judah and destroy it, 2 and he saw that the people were
trembling with fear. So he went up to Jerusalem, and gathering the
people together 3 he encouraged them, saying to them, "You
yourselves know what great things my brothers and I and the house of
my father have done for the laws and the sanctuary; you know also the
wars and the difficulties that my brothers and I have seen. 4 By reason
of this all my brothers have perished for the sake of Israel, and I alone
am left. 5 And now, far be it from me to spare my life in any time of
distress, for I am not better than my brothers. 6 But I will avenge my
nation and the sanctuary and your wives and children, for all the
nations have gathered together out of hatred to destroy us."

337

1 MACCABEES 338

7 The spirit of the people was rekindled when they heard these words,
8 and they answered in a loud voice, "You are our leader in place of
Judas and your brother Jonathan. 9 Fight our battles, and all that you
say to us we will do." 10 So he assembled all the warriors and hurried
to complete the walls of Jerusalem, and he fortified it on every side. 11
He sent Jonathan son of Absalom to Joppa, and with him a
considerable army; he drove out its occupants and remained there.
Deceit and Treachery of Trypho
12 Then Trypho left Ptolemais with a large army to invade the land of
Judah, and Jonathan was with him under guard. 13 Simon encamped in
Adida, facing the plain. 14 Trypho learned that Simon had risen up in
place of his brother Jonathan, and that he was about to join battle
with him, so he sent envoys to him and said, 15 "It is for the money
that your brother Jonathan owed the royal treasury, in connection
with the offices he held, that we are detaining him. 16 Send now one
hundred talents of silver and two of his sons as hostages, so that when
released he will not revolt against us, and we will release him."
17 Simon knew that they were speaking deceitfully to him, but he sent
to get the money and the sons, so that he would not arouse great
hostility among the people, who might say, 18 "It was because Simon
did not send him the money and the sons, that Jonathan perished." 19
So he sent the sons and the hundred talents, but Trypho broke his
word and did not release Jonathan.
20 After this Trypho came to invade the country and destroy it, and he
circled around by the way to Adora. But Simon and his army kept
marching along opposite him to every place he went. 21 Now the men
in the citadel kept sending envoys to Trypho urging him to come to
them by way of the wilderness and to send them food. 22 So Trypho
got all his cavalry ready to go, but that night a very heavy snow fell,
and he did not go because of the snow. He marched off and went into
the land of Gilead. 23 When he approached Baskama, he killed
Jonathan, and he was buried there. 24 Then Trypho turned and went
back to his own land.

338

1 MACCABEES 339

25 Simon sent and took the bones of his brother Jonathan, and buried
him in Modein, the city of his ancestors. 26 All Israel bewailed him with
great lamentation, and mourned for him many days. 27 And Simon
built a monument over the tomb of his father and his brothers; he
made it high so that it might be seen, with polished stone at the front
and back. 28 He also erected seven pyramids, opposite one another, for
his father and mother and four brothers. 29 For the pyramids he
devised an elaborate setting, erecting about them great columns, and
on the columns he put suits of armor for a permanent memorial, and
beside the suits of armor he carved ships, so that they could be seen by
all who sail the sea. 30 This is the tomb that he built in Modein; it
remains to this day.
Simon makes Judea independent
31 Trypho dealt treacherously with the young King Antiochus; he killed
him 32 and became king in his place, putting on the crown of Asia; and
he brought great calamity on the land. 33 But Simon built up the
strongholds of Judea and walled them all around, with high towers
and great walls and gates and bolts, and he stored food in the
strongholds. 34 Simon also chose emissaries and sent them to King
Demetrius with a request to grant relief to the country, for all that
Trypho did was to plunder. 35 King Demetrius sent him a favorable
reply to this request, and wrote him a letter as follows, 36 "King
Demetrius to Simon, the high priest and friend of kings, and to the
elders and nation of the Jews, greetings. 37 We have received the gold
crown and the palm branch that you sent, and we are ready to make a
general peace with you and to write to our officials to grant you
release from tribute. 38 All the grants that we have made to you
remain valid, and let the strongholds that you have built be your
possession. 39 We pardon any errors and offenses committed to this
day, and cancel the crown tax that you owe; and whatever other tax
has been collected in Jerusalem shall be collected no longer. 40 And if
any of you are qualified to be enrolled in our bodyguard, let them be
enrolled, and let there be peace between us."

339

1 MACCABEES 340

41 In the one hundred seventieth year the yoke of the Gentiles was
removed from Israel, 42 and the people began to write in their
documents and contracts, "In the first year of Simon the great high
priest and commander and leader of the Jews."
43 In those days Simon encamped against Gazara and surrounded it
with troops. He made a siege engine, brought it up to the city, and
battered and captured one tower. 44 The men in the siege engine
leaped out into the city, and a great tumult arose in the city. 45 The
men in the city, with their wives and children, went up on the wall
with their clothes torn, and they cried out with a loud voice, asking
Simon to make peace with them; 46 they said, "Do not treat us
according to our wicked acts but according to your mercy." 47 So
Simon reached an agreement with them and stopped fighting against
them. But he expelled them from the city and cleansed the houses in
which the idols were located, and then entered it with hymns and
praise. 48 He removed all uncleanness from it, and settled in it those
who observed the law. He also strengthened its fortifications and built
in it a house for himself.
49 Those who were in the citadel at Jerusalem were prevented from
going in and out to buy and sell in the country. So they were very
hungry, and many of them perished from famine. 50 Then they cried to
Simon to make peace with them, and he did so. But he expelled them
from there and cleansed the citadel from its pollutions. 51 On the
twenty-third day of the second month, in the one hundred seventy-first
year, the Jews entered it with praise and palm branches, and with
harps and cymbals and stringed instruments, and with hymns and
songs, because a great enemy had been crushed and removed from
Israel. 52 Simon decreed that every year they should celebrate this day
with rejoicing. He strengthened the fortifications of the temple hill
alongside the citadel, and he and his men lived there. 53 Simon saw
that his son John had reached manhood, and so he made him
commander of all the forces; and he lived at Gazara.

340

1 MACCABEES 341

[1 Maccabees 14]
Capture of Demetrius II
1 In the one hundred seventy-second year King Demetrius assembled
his forces and marched into Media to obtain help, so that he could
make war against Trypho. 2 When King Arsaces of Persia and Media
heard that Demetrius had invaded his territory, he sent one of his
generals to take him alive. 3 The general went and defeated the army
of Demetrius, and seized him and took him to Arsaces, who put him
under guard.
Eulogy of Simon
4 The land had rest all the days of Simon.
He sought the good of his nation;
his rule was pleasing to them,
as was the honor shown him, all his days.
5 To crown all his honors he took Joppa for a harbor,
and opened a way to the isles of the sea.
6 He extended the borders of his nation,
and gained full control of the country.
7 He gathered a host of captives;
he ruled over Gazara and Beth-zur and the citadel,
and he removed its uncleanness from it;
and there was none to oppose him.
8 They tilled their land in peace;
the ground gave its increase,
and the trees of the plains their fruit.
9 Old men sat in the streets;
they all talked together of good things,
and the youths put on splendid military attire.
10 He supplied the towns with food,
and furnished them with the means of defense,
until his renown spread to the ends of the earth.
11 He established peace in the land,
and Israel rejoiced with great joy.
12 All the people sat under their own vines and fig trees,
and there was none to make them afraid.

341

1 MACCABEES 342

13 No one was left in the land to fight them,
and the kings were crushed in those days.
14 He gave help to all the humble among his people;
he sought out the law,
and did away with all the renegades and outlaws.
15 He made the sanctuary glorious,
and added to the vessels of the sanctuary.
Alliances with Rome and Sparta
16 It was heard in Rome, and as far away as Sparta, that Jonathan had
died, and they were deeply grieved. 17 When they heard that his
brother Simon had become high priest in his stead, and that he was
ruling over the country and the towns in it, 18 they wrote to him on
bronze tablets to renew with him the friendship and alliance that they
had established with his brothers Judas and Jonathan. 19 And these
were read before the assembly in Jerusalem.
20 This is a copy of the letter that the Spartans sent:
"The rulers and the city of the Spartans to the high priest Simon and
to the elders and the priests and the rest of the Jewish people, our
brothers, greetings. 21 The envoys who were sent to our people have
told us about your glory and honor, and we rejoiced at their coming.
22 We have recorded what they said in our public decrees, as follows,
'Numenius son of Antiochus and Antipater son of Jason, envoys of the
Jews, have come to us to renew their friendship with us. 23 It has
pleased our people to receive these men with honor and to put a copy
of their words in the public archives, so that the people of the Spartans
may have a record of them. And they have sent a copy of this to the
high priest Simon.'"
24 After this Simon sent Numenius to Rome with a large gold shield
weighing one thousand minas, to confirm the alliance with the
Romans.

342

1 MACCABEES 343

Simon elected high priest, military commander, and ruler
25 When the people heard these things they said, "How shall we thank
Simon and his sons? 26 For he and his brothers and the house of his
father have stood firm; they have fought and repulsed Israel's enemies
and established its freedom." 27 So they made a record on bronze
tablets and put it on pillars on Mount Zion.
This is a copy of what they wrote: "On the eighteenth day of Elul, in
the one hundred seventy-second year, which is the third year of the
great high priest Simon, 28 in Asaramel, in the great assembly of the
priests and the people and the rulers of the nation and the elders of
the country, the following was proclaimed to us:
29 "Since wars often occurred in the country, Simon son of Mattathias,
a priest of the sons of Joarib, and his brothers, exposed themselves to
danger and resisted the enemies of their nation, in order that their
sanctuary and the law might be preserved; and they brought great
glory to their nation. 30 Jonathan rallied the nation, became their high
priest, and was gathered to his people. 31 When their enemies decided
to invade their country and lay hands on their sanctuary, 32 then Simon
rose up and fought for his nation. He spent great sums of his own
money; he armed the soldiers of his nation and paid them wages. 33 He
fortified the towns of Judea, and Beth-zur on the borders of Judea,
where formerly the arms of the enemy had been stored, and he placed
there a garrison of Jews. 34 He also fortified Joppa, which is by the sea,
and Gazara, which is on the borders of Azotus, where the enemy
formerly lived. He settled Jews there, and provided in those towns
whatever was necessary for their restoration.
35 "The people saw Simon's faithfulness and the glory that he had
resolved to win for his nation, and they made him their leader and
high priest, because he had done all these things and because of the
justice and loyalty that he had maintained toward his nation. He
sought in every way to exalt his people. 36 In his days things prospered
in his hands, so that the Gentiles were put out of the country, as were
also those in the city of David in Jerusalem, who had built themselves a
citadel from which they used to sally forth and defile the environs of

343

1 MACCABEES 344

the sanctuary, doing great damage to its purity. 37 He settled Jews in it
and fortified it for the safety of the country and of the city, and built
the walls of Jerusalem higher.
38 "In view of these things King Demetrius confirmed him in the high
priesthood, 39 made him one of his Friends, and paid him high honors.
40 For he had heard that the Jews were addressed by the Romans as
friends and allies and brothers, and that the Romans had received the
envoys of Simon with honor.
41 "The Jews and their priests have resolved that Simon should be their
leader and high priest forever, until a trustworthy prophet should
arise, 42 and that he should be governor over them and that he should
take charge of the sanctuary and appoint officials over its tasks and
over the country and the weapons and the strongholds, and that he
should take charge of the sanctuary, 43 and that he should be obeyed
by all, and that all contracts in the country should be written in his
name, and that he should be clothed in purple and wear gold.
44 "None of the people or priests shall be permitted to nullify any of
these decisions or to oppose what he says, or to convene an assembly
in the country without his permission, or to be clothed in purple or put
on a gold buckle. 45 Whoever acts contrary to these decisions or rejects
any of them shall be liable to punishment."
46 All the people agreed to grant Simon the right to act in accordance
with these decisions. 47 So Simon accepted and agreed to be high
priest, to be commander and ethnarch of the Jews and priests, and to
be protector of them all. 48 And they gave orders to inscribe this
decree on bronze tablets, to put them up in a conspicuous place in the
precincts of the sanctuary, 49 and to deposit copies of them in the
treasury, so that Simon and his sons might have them.
[1 Maccabees 15]
Arrival of Antiochus VII
1 Antiochus, son of King Demetrius, sent a letter from the islands of the
sea to Simon, the priest and ethnarch of the Jews, and to all the

344

1 MACCABEES 345

nation; 2 its contents were as follows: "King Antiochus to Simon the
high priest and ethnarch and to the nation of the Jews, greetings. 3
Whereas certain scoundrels have gained control of the kingdom of our
ancestors, and I intend to lay claim to the kingdom so that I may
restore it as it formerly was, and have recruited a host of mercenary
troops and have equipped warships, 4 and intend to make a landing in
the country so that I may proceed against those who have destroyed
our country and those who have devastated many cities in my
kingdom, 5 now therefore I confirm to you all the tax remissions that
the kings before me have granted you, and a release from all the other
payments from which they have released you. 6 I permit you to mint
your own coinage as money for your country, 7 and I grant freedom to
Jerusalem and the sanctuary. All the weapons that you have prepared
and the strongholds that you have built and now hold shall remain
yours. 8 Every debt you owe to the royal treasury and any such future
debts shall be canceled for you from henceforth and for all time. 9
When we gain control of our kingdom, we will bestow great honor on
you and your nation and the temple, so that your glory will become
manifest in all the earth."
10 In the one hundred seventy-fourth year Antiochus set out and
invaded the land of his ancestors. All the troops rallied to him, so that
there were only a few with Trypho. 11 Antiochus pursued him, and
Trypho came in his flight to Dor, which is by the sea; 12 for he knew
that troubles had converged on him, and his troops had deserted him.
13 So Antiochus encamped against Dor, and with him were one
hundred twenty thousand warriors and eight thousand cavalry. 14 He
surrounded the town, and the ships joined battle from the sea; he
pressed the town hard from land and sea, and permitted no one to
leave or enter it.
Renewal of alliance with Rome
15 Then Numenius and his companions arrived from Rome, with letters
to the kings and countries, in which the following was written: 16
"Lucius, consul of the Romans, to King Ptolemy, greetings. 17 The
envoys of the Jews have come to us as our friends and allies to renew
our ancient friendship and alliance. They had been sent by the high

345

1 MACCABEES 346

priest Simon and by the Jewish people 18 and have brought a gold
shield weighing one thousand minas. 19 We therefore have decided to
write to the kings and countries that they should not seek their harm
or make war against them and their cities and their country, or make
alliance with those who war against them. 20 And it has seemed good
to us to accept the shield from them. 21 Therefore if any scoundrels
have fled to you from their country, hand them over to the high priest
Simon, so that he may punish them according to their law."
22 The consul wrote the same thing to King Demetrius and to Attalus
and Ariarathes and Arsaces, 23 and to all the countries, and to
Sampsames, and to the Spartans, and to Delos, and to Myndos, and to
Sicyon, and to Caria, and to Samos, and to Pamphylia, and to Lycia, and
to Halicarnassus, and to Rhodes, and to Phaselis, and to Cos, and to
Side, and to Aradus and Gortyna and Cnidus and Cyprus and Cyrene. 24
They also sent a copy of these things to the high priest Simon.
War with Antiochus VII
25 King Antiochus besieged Dor for the second time, continually
throwing his forces against it and making engines of war; and he shut
Trypho up and kept him from going out or in. 26 And Simon sent to
Antiochus two thousand picked troops, to fight for him, and silver and
gold and a large amount of military equipment. 27 But he refused to
receive them, and broke all the agreements he formerly had made with
Simon, and became estranged from him. 28 He sent to him Athenobius,
one of his Friends, to confer with him, saying, "You hold control of
Joppa and Gazara and the citadel in Jerusalem; they are cities of my
kingdom. 29 You have devastated their territory, you have done great
damage in the land, and you have taken possession of many places in
my kingdom. 30 Now then, hand over the cities that you have seized
and the tribute money of the places that you have conquered outside
the borders of Judea; 31 or else pay me five hundred talents of silver
for the destruction that you have caused and five hundred talents
more for the tribute money of the cities. Otherwise we will come and
make war on you."

346

1 MACCABEES 347

32 So Athenobius, the king's Friend, came to Jerusalem, and when he
saw the splendor of Simon, and the sideboard with its gold and silver
plate, and his great magnificence, he was amazed. When he reported
to him the king's message, 33 Simon said to him in reply: "We have
neither taken foreign land nor seized foreign property, but only the
inheritance of our ancestors, which at one time had been unjustly
taken by our enemies. 34 Now that we have the opportunity, we are
firmly holding the inheritance of our ancestors. 35 As for Joppa and
Gazara, which you demand, they were causing great damage among
the people and to our land; for them we will give you one hundred
talents."
Athenobius did not answer him a word, 36 but returned in wrath to
the king and reported to him these words, and also the splendor of
Simon and all that he had seen. And the king was very angry.
37 Meanwhile Trypho embarked on a ship and escaped to Orthosia. 38
Then the king made Cendebeus commander-in-chief of the coastal
country, and gave him troops of infantry and cavalry. 39 He
commanded him to encamp against Judea, to build up Kedron and
fortify its gates, and to make war on the people; but the king pursued
Trypho. 40 So Cendebeus came to Jamnia and began to provoke the
people and invade Judea and take the people captive and kill them. 41
He built up Kedron and stationed horsemen and troops there, so that
they might go out and make raids along the highways of Judea, as the
king had ordered him.
[1 Maccabees 16]
Death of Simon and accession of John Hyrcanus I
1 John went up from Gazara and reported to his father Simon what
Cendebeus had done. 2 And Simon called in his two eldest sons Judas
and John, and said to them: "My brothers and I and my father's house
have fought the wars of Israel from our youth until this day, and things
have prospered in our hands so that we have delivered Israel many
times. 3 But now I have grown old, and you by Heaven's mercy are
mature in years. Take my place and my brother's, and go out and fight

347

1 MACCABEES 348

for our nation, and may the help that comes from Heaven be with
you."
4 So John chose out of the country twenty thousand warriors and
cavalry, and they marched against Cendebeus and camped for the
night in Modein. 5 Early in the morning they started out and marched
into the plain, where a large force of infantry and cavalry was coming
to meet them; and a stream lay between them. 6 Then he and his army
lined up against them. He saw that the soldiers were afraid to cross the
stream, so he crossed over first; and when his troops saw him, they
crossed over after him. 7 Then he divided the army and placed the
cavalry in the center of the infantry, for the cavalry of the enemy were
very numerous. 8 They sounded the trumpets, and Cendebeus and his
army were put to flight; many of them fell wounded and the rest fled
into the stronghold. 9 At that time Judas the brother of John was
wounded, but John pursued them until Cendebeus reached Kedron,
which he had built. 10 They also fled into the towers that were in the
fields of Azotus, and John burned it with fire, and about two thousand
of them fell. He then returned to Judea safely.
11 Now Ptolemy son of Abubus had been appointed governor over the
plain of Jericho; he had a large store of silver and gold, 12 for he was
son-in-law of the high priest. 13 His heart was lifted up; he determined
to get control of the country, and made treacherous plans against
Simon and his sons, to do away with them. 14 Now Simon was visiting
the towns of the country and attending to their needs, and he went
down to Jericho with his sons Mattathias and Judas, in the one
hundred seventy-seventh year, in the eleventh month, which is the
month of Shebat. 15 The son of Abubus received them treacherously in
the little stronghold called Dok, which he had built; he gave them a
great banquet, and hid men there. 16 When Simon and his sons were
drunk, Ptolemy and his men rose up, took their weapons, rushed in
against Simon in the banquet hall and killed him and his two sons, as
well as some of his servants. 17 So he committed an act of great
treachery and returned evil for good.

348

1 MACCABEES 349

18 Then Ptolemy wrote a report about these things and sent it to the
king, asking him to send troops to aid him and to turn over to him the
towns and the country. 19 He sent other troops to Gazara to do away
with John; he sent letters to the captains asking them to come to him
so that he might give them silver and gold and gifts; 20 and he sent
other troops to take possession of Jerusalem and the temple hill. 21 But
someone ran ahead and reported to John at Gazara that his father and
brothers had perished, and that "he has sent men to kill you also." 22
When he heard this, he was greatly shocked; he seized the men who
came to destroy him and killed them, for he had found out that they
were seeking to destroy him.
23 The rest of the acts of John and his wars and the brave deeds that
he did, and the building of the walls that he completed, and his
achievements, 24 are written in the annals of his high priesthood, from
the time that he became high priest after his father.

349

2 MACCABEES 350

2 MACCABEES
Introduction
Second Maccabees narrates the story of the Maccabean revolt. Like 1
Maccabees and the book of Daniel, 2 Maccabees interprets the
religious persecution suffered by the Jews under Antiochus Epiphanes
from 168 164 BCE. Each of the three books offers a different model of
faithfulness in response to persecution as well as distinctive theological
reflection on the sources of hope in times of crisis. First Maccabees
highlights the military activity of the Maccabees and the subsequent
establishment of the Hasmonean dynasty, taking the story down to the
third generation in 134 BCE. Second Maccabees, in contrast, keeps its
focus on the fate of the Temple in Jerusalem, ending its story when the
Temple is secure in 161 BCE.
The literary style is lively, relying on dramatic narration and vivid
portrayals of characters to evoke emotions in the reader. Following the
style of Greek historiography, the author composes substantive
speeches for his characters in order to entertain and instruct the
reader. Written in Greek sometime between 124 and 63 BCE, the work
skillfully combines Jewish theology with Greek stylistics. The author's
introduction (2.19-32), using conventions of Greek literature, highlights
his purposes and summarizes what is in store for the reader in the
pages ahead. He reveals that his work is an epitome, condensing the
five-volume history of Jason of Cyrene. The epitomist tells the reader
that his story will be about Judas Maccabeus and his battles to regain
the Temple from Antiochus, free Jerusalem and restore Jewish law to
Judea.
Prefixed to the introduction are two letters exhorting the Jews in Egypt
to observe the new festival of Hannukah, which had originated in
Judea just over forty years earlier (1.1-2.18). The second letter is of
particular interest because it includes stories about Jeremiah and
350

2 MACCABEES 351

Nehemiah not found in the biblical books. Although it is not known
how the letters came to be attached to the work of the epitomist, their
focus on the purification of the Temple, like the introduction, helps
prepare the reader for the story ahead.
The main body of the work (chs 3-15) recounts three successive attacks
on the Temple, heroically repelled by brave Jewish fighters who are
supported by heavenly warriors. Within this broad framework another,
more explicitly theological structure unfolds. The epitomist has
adopted the interpretation of history found in the biblical books of
Judges, Samuel, and Kings, clearly laid out in Judg 2.6-23. Israel's
history is a recurring cycle of blessing, when the people are faithful to
the Lord; sin, when they forsake the Law; punishment when foreign
enemies oppress Israel; and deliverance, when they cry out and the
Lord shows mercy by intervening to save them. In 2 Maccabees the
history of the Temple, reflecting the fortunes of the Jewish people,
follows this cycle.
The history begins with the blessings brought by the good priest Onias
(ch 3). The arresting story of the attack on the Temple treasury by
Heliodorus and the angelic intervention that saved it highlights the
importance of the Temple as the locus of the divine presence when the
people are faithful. The sins of the people are ominously introduced in
ch 4 with a description of the Hellenization that occurred under Jason,
the brother of Onias. The rich details of this chapter provide a useful
historical picture of the conflict in Jerusalem over accommodation to
Greek culture, as well as the strife over the high priesthood, during the
years before the persecutions of Antiochus. Modern historians have
been guided by this nuanced account to view the Maccabean revolt as
a mix of civil war and rebellion against a foreign tyrant. In chs 3 and 4,
as throughout the book, the epitomist shows that the attack of
Seleucid kings on Jerusalem was precipitated by the intrigues of
Hellenizers in Jerusalem.
The wrenching stories of the persecutions endured when Antiochus IV
swept into Jerusalem to quell civil unrest occupy chs 508, the
centerpiece of the book. So skilled a historian is the epitomist that the
reader that the reader understands the actions of Antiochus to be

351

2 MACCABEES 352

politically inevitable (5.11-14) and theologically predictable (4.16-17;
5.18-20). Antiochus occupied Jerusalem in order to eliminate the
religious traditions of the Jews and to force assimilation of Greek ways.
His edict prohibited the Jews from keeping the sabbath, observing
their laws of purity, and circumcising their sons. Historians believe he
was attempting to remove what he saw as the cause of political
disturbances in Judea. In this context the author tells the powerful
stories of the first martyrs. The old man Eleazar chooses to die rather
than eat pork, which is forbidden by the Torah. Like Socrates before his
death, Eleazar delivers an eloquent speech describing his desire to
leave a noble example to the young. The longest and most memorable
story is the martyrdom of the mother and her seven sons. In the
dramatic speeches made as the brothers go one by one to their deaths,
the author illustrates some of the most profound and influential
religious ideas of the book.
These stories of Jewish faithfulness are set in bold relief against the
impious deeds of the Hellenizers. As their abandoning the law for
Greek culture brought on the desecration of the Temple, so the prayers
of the martyrs make possible the next part of the epitomist's story, the
purification of the Temple. The book's theology is expressed in the last
words of the seventh brother (7.37-38) as he goes willingly to his death
"to bring to an end the wrath of the Almighty that has justly fallen on
our whole nation." The introduction of Judas Maccabeus is the sign
that God has heard the prayer of the martyrs and has seen their
faithfulness. The stunning account of the revolt of Judas Maccabeus,
his victory over Antiochus, and his purification of the Temple (8.1-10.9)
weaves military history together with the language of theology.
Similarly, the graphic account of Antiochus's death in ch 9 is designed
to illustrate divine justice and the vindication of the martyrs.
The final section makes use of diplomatic correspondence and
historical records to tell the history of Judea from 164 to 161 BCE under
the Seleucid kings Antiochus Eupator and Demetrius I. In spite of royal
permission for the Jews to live in peace according to their own laws,
local rulers of neighboring regions were constantly stirring up conflict.
As in earlier parts of the book, the epitomist frequently alludes to
Hellenizers as the initiators of the trouble. Woven throughout these

352

2 MACCABEES 353

detailed historical accounts are the prayers of Judas and the people.
For the epitomist the military victories are signs that God hears the
prayers of the faithful. The vivid account of three heavenly rescues
signal to the reader that God was acting through Judas Maccabeus
(10.29-31; 12.22; 15.12-16).
A constellation of important theological ideas not found in the Hebrew
scriptures but important in Judaism and Christianity appears in 2
Maccabees. Chief among these are the two related ideas of the
creation of the world out of nothing ("creatio ex nihilo," 7.28) and the
resurrection of the dead (hinted at in Dan 12.2 but explicitly stated in 2
Macc 7). The relation between these two beliefs is clearly articulated in
the speeches of the mother and her seven sons (ch 7), which provide
the most closely reasoned arguments in the Bible about the
resurrection of the dead. This story of the mother encouraging her
seven sons to die for their faith in certain hope of resurrection,
together with the companion story of the aged Eleazar going willingly
to his death rather than eat food forbidden by the Torah (ch 6),
become the models for later authors writing Jewish and Christian
martyrologies. The intrinsic link between the ideas of resurrection and
martyrdom is evident as well in the story of Razis (13.37-45).
The belief in resurrection gives rise to the practice of praying for the
dead. When Judas Maccabeus discovers that his fallen companions are
wearing sacred tokens of the idols of Jamnia, he makes a sin offering
and prays that their sin might be blotted out (12.39-43a). The epitomist
interprets this as a prayer on behalf of the dead, justified by the hope
of the resurrection (12.43b-45). Related to the idea of resurrection is the
certainty that God's justice will punish the wicked as it rewards the
righteous (3.27-28; 9.28; 13.8; 15.32-33), expressed later in the rabbinic
principle of measure for measure. The deaths of Andronicus (4.30-38),
Menelaus (13.1-8), and Nicanor (15.1-28) are described with explicit
reference to divine justice. The story of the death of Antiochus (ch 9),
borrowing themes from Isa 14, provides the most expressive teaching of
this principle.
The theological idea that dominates the book is the assurance that the
history of Antiochene persecution and the Maccabean revolt reveals

353

2 MACCABEES 354

God's care for his people and the holy Temple. Through engaging
storytelling and instructive speeches by the characters, the authors
guides the reader to see the events of this history with the eyes of
faith.

[2 Maccabees 1]
Letter to the Jews in Egypt
1 The Jews in Jerusalem and those in the land of Judea,
To their Jewish kindred in Egypt,
Greetings and true peace.
2 May God do good to you, and may he remember his covenant with
Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, his faithful servants. 3 May he give you
all a heart to worship him and to do his will with a strong heart and a
willing spirit. 4 May he open your heart to his law and his
commandments, and may he bring peace. 5 May he hear your prayers
and be reconciled to you, and may he not forsake you in time of evil. 6
We are now praying for you here.
7 In the reign of Demetrius, in the one hundred sixty-ninth year, we
Jews wrote to you, in the critical distress that came upon us in those
years after Jason and his company revolted from the holy land and the
kingdom 8 and burned the gate and shed innocent blood. We prayed
to the Lord and were heard, and we offered sacrifice and grain
offering, and we lit the lamps and set out the loaves. 9 And now see
that you keep the festival of booths in the month of Chislev, in the one
hundred eighty-eighth year.
Letter to Aristobulus
10 The people of Jerusalem and of Judea and the senate and Judas,
To Aristobulus, who is of the family of the anointed priests, teacher of
King Ptolemy, and to the Jews in Egypt,
Greetings and good health.

354

2 MACCABEES 355

11 Having been saved by God out of grave dangers we thank him
greatly for taking our side against the king, 12 for he drove out those
who fought against the holy city. 13 When the leader reached Persia
with a force that seemed irresistible, they were cut to pieces in the
temple of Nanea by a deception employed by the priests of the
goddess Nanea. 14 On the pretext of intending to marry her, Antiochus
came to the place together with his Friends, to secure most of its
treasures as a dowry. 15 When the priests of the temple of Nanea had
set out the treasures and Antiochus had come with a few men inside
the wall of the sacred precinct, they closed the temple as soon as he
entered it. 16 Opening a secret door in the ceiling, they threw stones
and struck down the leader and his men; they dismembered them and
cut off their heads and threw them to the people outside. 17 Blessed in
every way be our God, who has brought judgment on those who have
behaved impiously.
18 Since on the twenty-fifth day of Chislev we shall celebrate the
purification of the temple, we thought it necessary to notify you, in
order that you also may celebrate the festival of booths and the
festival of the fire given when Nehemiah, who built the temple and
the altar, offered sacrifices.
19 For when our ancestors were being led captive to Persia, the pious
priests of that time took some of the fire of the altar and secretly hid it
in the hollow of a dry cistern, where they took such precautions that
the place was unknown to anyone. 20 But after many years had passed,
when it pleased God, Nehemiah, having been commissioned by the
king of Persia, sent the descendants of the priests who had hidden the
fire to get it. And when they reported to us that they had not found
fire but only a thick liquid, he ordered them to dip it out and bring it.
21 When the materials for the sacrifices were presented, Nehemiah
ordered the priests to sprinkle the liquid on the wood and on the
things laid upon it. 22 When this had been done and some time had
passed, and when the sun, which had been clouded over, shone out, a
great fire blazed up, so that all marveled. 23 And while the sacrifice
was being consumed, the priests offered prayer — the priests and
everyone. Jonathan led, and the rest responded, as did Nehemiah. 24
The prayer was to this effect:

355

2 MACCABEES 356

"O Lord, Lord God, Creator of all things, you are awe-inspiring and
strong and just and merciful, you alone are king and are kind, 25 you
alone are bountiful, you alone are just and almighty and eternal. You
rescue Israel from every evil; you chose the ancestors and consecrated
them. 26 Accept this sacrifice on behalf of all your people Israel and
preserve your portion and make it holy. 27 Gather together our
scattered people, set free those who are slaves among the Gentiles,
look on those who are rejected and despised, and let the Gentiles
know that you are our God. 28 Punish those who oppress and are
insolent with pride. 29 Plant your people in your holy place, as Moses
promised."
30 Then the priests sang the hymns. 31 After the materials of the
sacrifice had been consumed, Nehemiah ordered that the liquid that
was left should be poured on large stones. 32 When this was done, a
flame blazed up; but when the light from the altar shone back, it went
out. 33 When this matter became known, and it was reported to the
king of the Persians that, in the place where the exiled priests had
hidden the fire, the liquid had appeared with which Nehemiah and his
associates had burned the materials of the sacrifice, 34 the king
investigated the matter, and enclosed the place and made it sacred. 35
And with those persons whom the king favored he exchanged many
excellent gifts. 36 Nehemiah and his associates called this "nephthar,"
which means purification, but by most people it is called naphtha.
[2 Maccabees 2]
1 One finds in the records that the prophet Jeremiah ordered those
who were being deported to take some of the fire, as has been
mentioned, 2 and that the prophet, after giving them the law,
instructed those who were being deported not to forget the
commandments of the Lord, or to be led astray in their thoughts on
seeing the gold and silver statues and their adornment. 3 And with
other similar words he exhorted them that the law should not depart
from their hearts.
4 It was also in the same document that the prophet, having received
an oracle, ordered that the tent and the ark should follow with him,

356

2 MACCABEES 357

and that he went out to the mountain where Moses had gone up and
had seen the inheritance of God. 5 Jeremiah came and found a cavedwelling, and he brought there the tent and the ark and the altar of
incense; then he sealed up the entrance. 6 Some of those who followed
him came up intending to mark the way, but could not find it. 7 When
Jeremiah learned of it, he rebuked them and declared: "The place shall
remain unknown until God gathers his people together again and
shows his mercy. 8 Then the Lord will disclose these things, and the
glory of the Lord and the cloud will appear, as they were shown in the
case of Moses, and as Solomon asked that the place should be specially
consecrated."
9 It was also made clear that being possessed of wisdom Solomon
offered sacrifice for the dedication and completion of the temple. 10
Just as Moses prayed to the Lord, and fire came down from heaven and
consumed the sacrifices, so also Solomon prayed, and the fire came
down and consumed the whole burnt offerings. 11 And Moses said,
"They were consumed because the sin offering had not been eaten." 12
Likewise Solomon also kept the eight days.
13 The same things are reported in the records and in the memoirs of
Nehemiah, and also that he founded a library and collected the books
about the kings and prophets, and the writings of David, and letters of
kings about votive offerings. 14 In the same way Judas also collected all
the books that had been lost on account of the war that had come
upon us, and they are in our possession. 15 So if you have need of
them, send people to get them for you.
16 Since, therefore, we are about to celebrate the purification, we
write to you. Will you therefore please keep the days? 17 It is God who
has saved all his people, and has returned the inheritance to all, and
the kingship and the priesthood and the consecration, 18 as he
promised through the law. We have hope in God that he will soon
have mercy on us and will gather us from everywhere under heaven
into his holy place, for he has rescued us from great evils and has
purified the place.

357

2 MACCABEES 358

The epitomist's preface
19 The story of Judas Maccabeus and his brothers, and the purification
of the great temple, and the dedication of the altar, 20 and further the
wars against Antiochus Epiphanes and his son Eupator, 21 and the
appearances that came from heaven to those who fought bravely for
Judaism, so that though few in number they seized the whole land and
pursued the barbarian hordes, 22 and regained possession of the
temple famous throughout the world, and liberated the city, and reestablished the laws that were about to be abolished, while the Lord
with great kindness became gracious to them — 23 all this, which has
been set forth by Jason of Cyrene in five volumes, we shall attempt to
condense into a single book. 24 For considering the flood of statistics
involved and the difficulty there is for those who wish to enter upon
the narratives of history because of the mass of material, 25 we have
aimed to please those who wish to read, to make it easy for those who
are inclined to memorize, and to profit all readers. 26 For us who have
undertaken the toil of abbreviating, it is no light matter but calls for
sweat and loss of sleep, 27 just as it is not easy for one who prepares a
banquet and seeks the benefit of others. Nevertheless, to secure the
gratitude of many we will gladly endure the uncomfortable toil, 28
leaving the responsibility for exact details to the compiler, while
devoting our effort to arriving at the outlines of the condensation. 29
For as the master builder of a new house must be concerned with the
whole construction, while the one who undertakes its painting and
decoration has to consider only what is suitable for its adornment, such
in my judgment is the case with us. 30 It is the duty of the original
historian to occupy the ground, to discuss matters from every side, and
to take trouble with details, 31 but the one who recasts the narrative
should be allowed to strive for brevity of expression and to forego
exhaustive treatment. 32 At this point therefore let us begin our
narrative, without adding any more to what has already been said; for
it would be foolish to lengthen the preface while cutting short the
history itself.

358

2 MACCABEES 359

[2 Maccabees 3]
Simon's plot against Onias
1 While the holy city was inhabited in unbroken peace and the laws
were strictly observed because of the piety of the high priest Onias and
his hatred of wickedness, 2 it came about that the kings themselves
honored the place and glorified the temple with the finest presents, 3
even to the extent that King Seleucus of Asia defrayed from his own
revenues all the expenses connected with the service of the sacrifices.
4 But a man named Simon, of the tribe of Benjamin, who had been
made captain of the temple, had a disagreement with the high priest
about the administration of the city market. 5 Since he could not
prevail over Onias, he went to Apollonius of Tarsus, who at that time
was governor of Coelesyria and Phoenicia, 6 and reported to him that
the treasury in Jerusalem was full of untold sums of money, so that the
amount of the funds could not be reckoned, and that they did not
belong to the account of the sacrifices, but that it was possible for
them to fall under the control of the king. 7 When Apollonius met the
king, he told him of the money about which he had been informed.
The king chose Heliodorus, who was in charge of his affairs, and sent
him with commands to effect the removal of the reported wealth. 8
Heliodorus at once set out on his journey, ostensibly to make a tour of
inspection of the cities of Coelesyria and Phoenicia, but in fact to carry
out the king's purpose.
9 When he had arrived at Jerusalem and had been kindly welcomed by
the high priest of the city, he told about the disclosure that had been
made and stated why he had come, and he inquired whether this really
was the situation. 10 The high priest explained that there were some
deposits belonging to widows and orphans, 11 and also some money of
Hyrcanus son of Tobias, a man of very prominent position, and that it
totaled in all four hundred talents of silver and two hundred of gold.
To such an extent the impious Simon had misrepresented the facts. 12
And he said that it was utterly impossible that wrong should be done
to those people who had trusted in the holiness of the place and in the
sanctity and inviolability of the temple that is honored throughout the
whole world.

359

2 MACCABEES 360

13 But Heliodorus, because of the orders he had from the king, said
that this money must in any case be confiscated for the king's treasury.
14 So he set a day and went in to direct the inspection of these funds.
There was no little distress throughout the whole city. 15 The priests
prostrated themselves before the altar in their priestly vestments and
called toward heaven upon him who had given the law about deposits,
that he should keep them safe for those who had deposited them. 16
To see the appearance of the high priest was to be wounded at heart,
for his face and the change in his color disclosed the anguish of his
soul. 17 For terror and bodily trembling had come over the man, which
plainly showed to those who looked at him the pain lodged in his
heart. 18 People also hurried out of their houses in crowds to make a
general supplication because the holy place was about to be brought
into dishonor. 19 Women, girded with sackcloth under their breasts,
thronged the streets. Some of the young women who were kept
indoors ran together to the gates, and some to the walls, while others
peered out of the windows. 20 And holding up their hands to heaven,
they all made supplication. 21 There was something pitiable in the
prostration of the whole populace and the anxiety of the high priest in
his great anguish.
22 While they were calling upon the Almighty Lord that he would keep
what had been entrusted safe and secure for those who had entrusted
it, 23 Heliodorus went on with what had been decided. 24 But when he
arrived at the treasury with his bodyguard, then and there the
Sovereign of spirits and of all authority caused so great a manifestation
that all who had been so bold as to accompany him were astounded by
the power of God, and became faint with terror. 25 For there appeared
to them a magnificently caparisoned horse, with a rider of frightening
mien; it rushed furiously at Heliodorus and struck at him with its front
hoofs. Its rider was seen to have armor and weapons of gold. 26 Two
young men also appeared to him, remarkably strong, gloriously
beautiful and splendidly dressed, who stood on either side of him and
flogged him continuously, inflicting many blows on him. 27 When he
suddenly fell to the ground and deep darkness came over him, his men
took him up, put him on a stretcher, 28 and carried him away — this
man who had just entered the aforesaid treasury with a great retinue

360

2 MACCABEES 361

and all his bodyguard but was now unable to help himself. They
recognized clearly the sovereign power of God.
29 While he lay prostrate, speechless because of the divine intervention
and deprived of any hope of recovery, 30 they praised the Lord who
had acted marvelously for his own place. And the temple, which a little
while before was full of fear and disturbance, was filled with joy and
gladness, now that the Almighty Lord had appeared.
31 Some of Heliodorus's friends quickly begged Onias to call upon the
Most High to grant life to one who was lying quite at his last breath. 32
So the high priest, fearing that the king might get the notion that
some foul play had been perpetrated by the Jews with regard to
Heliodorus, offered sacrifice for the man's recovery. 33 While the high
priest was making an atonement, the same young men appeared again
to Heliodorus dressed in the same clothing, and they stood and said,
"Be very grateful to the high priest Onias, since for his sake the Lord
has granted you your life. 34 And see that you, who have been flogged
by heaven, report to all people the majestic power of God." Having
said this they vanished.
35 Then Heliodorus offered sacrifice to the Lord and made very great
vows to the Savior of his life, and having bidden Onias farewell, he
marched off with his forces to the king. 36 He bore testimony to all
concerning the deeds of the supreme God, which he had seen with his
own eyes. 37 When the king asked Heliodorus what sort of person
would be suitable to send on another mission to Jerusalem, he replied,
38 "If you have any enemy or plotter against your government, send
him there, for you will get him back thoroughly flogged, if he survives
at all; for there is certainly some power of God about the place. 39 For
he who has his dwelling in heaven watches over that place himself and
brings it aid, and he strikes and destroys those who come to do it
injury." 40 This was the outcome of the episode of Heliodorus and the
protection of the treasury.

361

2 MACCABEES 362

[2 Maccabees 4]
1 The previously mentioned Simon, who had informed about the
money against his own country, slandered Onias, saying that it was he
who had incited Heliodorus and had been the real cause of the
misfortune. 2 He dared to designate as a plotter against the
government the man who was the benefactor of the city, the protector
of his compatriots, and a zealot for the laws. 3 When his hatred
progressed to such a degree that even murders were committed by one
of Simon's approved agents, 4 Onias recognized that the rivalry was
serious and that Apollonius son of Menestheus, and governor of
Coelesyria and Phoenicia, was intensifying the malice of Simon. 5 So he
appealed to the king, not accusing his compatriots but having in view
the welfare, both public and private, of all the people. 6 For he saw
that without the king's attention public affairs could not again reach a
peaceful settlement, and that Simon would not stop his folly.
Jason as high priest
7 When Seleucus died and Antiochus, who was called Epiphanes,
succeeded to the kingdom, Jason the brother of Onias obtained the
high priesthood by corruption, 8 promising the king at an interview
three hundred sixty talents of silver, and from another source of
revenue eighty talents. 9 In addition to this he promised to pay one
hundred fifty more if permission were given to establish by his
authority a gymnasium and a body of youth for it, and to enroll the
people of Jerusalem as citizens of Antioch. 10 When the king assented
and Jason came to office, he at once shifted his compatriots over to the
Greek way of life.
11 He set aside the existing royal concessions to the Jews, secured
through John the father of Eupolemus, who went on the mission to
establish friendship and alliance with the Romans; and he destroyed
the lawful ways of living and introduced new customs contrary to the
law. 12 He took delight in establishing a gymnasium right under the
citadel, and he induced the noblest of the young men to wear the
Greek hat. 13 There was such an extreme of Hellenization and increase
in the adoption of foreign ways because of the surpassing wickedness

362

2 MACCABEES 363

of Jason, who was ungodly and no true high priest, 14 that the priests
were no longer intent upon their service at the altar. Despising the
sanctuary and neglecting the sacrifices, they hurried to take part in the
unlawful proceedings in the wrestling arena after the signal for the
discus-throwing, 15 disdaining the honors prized by their ancestors and
putting the highest value upon Greek forms of prestige. 16 For this
reason heavy disaster overtook them, and those whose ways of living
they admired and wished to imitate completely became their enemies
and punished them. 17 It is no light thing to show irreverence to the
divine laws — a fact that later events will make clear.
18 When the quadrennial games were being held at Tyre and the king
was present, 19 the vile Jason sent envoys, chosen as being Antiochian
citizens from Jerusalem, to carry three hundred silver drachmas for the
sacrifice to Hercules. Those who carried the money, however, thought
best not to use it for sacrifice, because that was inappropriate, but to
expend it for another purpose. 20 So this money was intended by the
sender for the sacrifice to Hercules, but by the decision of its carriers it
was applied to the construction of triremes.
21 When Apollonius son of Menestheus was sent to Egypt for the
coronation of Philometor as king, Antiochus learned that Philometor
had become hostile to his government, and he took measures for his
own security. Therefore upon arriving at Joppa he proceeded to
Jerusalem. 22 He was welcomed magnificently by Jason and the city,
and ushered in with a blaze of torches and with shouts. Then he
marched his army into Phoenicia.
Menelaus as high priest
23 After a period of three years Jason sent Menelaus, the brother of
the previously mentioned Simon, to carry the money to the king and to
complete the records of essential business. 24 But he, when presented
to the king, extolled him with an air of authority, and secured the high
priesthood for himself, outbidding Jason by three hundred talents of
silver. 25 After receiving the king's orders he returned, possessing no
qualification for the high priesthood, but having the hot temper of a
cruel tyrant and the rage of a savage wild beast. 26 So Jason, who after

363

2 MACCABEES 364

supplanting his own brother was supplanted by another man, was
driven as a fugitive into the land of Ammon. 27 Although Menelaus
continued to hold the office, he did not pay regularly any of the
money promised to the king. 28 When Sostratus the captain of the
citadel kept requesting payment — for the collection of the revenue
was his responsibility — the two of them were summoned by the king
on account of this issue. 29 Menelaus left his own brother Lysimachus
as deputy in the high priesthood, while Sostratus left Crates, the
commander of the Cyprian troops.
30 While such was the state of affairs, it happened that the people of
Tarsus and of Mallus revolted because their cities had been given as a
present to Antiochis, the king's concubine. 31 So the king went
hurriedly to settle the trouble, leaving Andronicus, a man of high rank,
to act as his deputy. 32 But Menelaus, thinking he had obtained a
suitable opportunity, stole some of the gold vessels of the temple and
gave them to Andronicus; other vessels, as it happened, he had sold to
Tyre and the neighboring cities. 33 When Onias became fully aware of
these acts, he publicly exposed them, having first withdrawn to a place
of sanctuary at Daphne near Antioch. 34 Therefore Menelaus, taking
Andronicus aside, urged him to kill Onias. Andronicus came to Onias,
and resorting to treachery, offered him sworn pledges and gave him
his right hand; he persuaded him, though still suspicious, to come out
from the place of sanctuary; then, with no regard for justice, he
immediately put him out of the way.
35 For this reason not only Jews, but many also of other nations, were
grieved and displeased at the unjust murder of the man. 36 When the
king returned from the region of Cilicia, the Jews in the city appealed
to him with regard to the unreasonable murder of Onias, and the
Greeks shared their hatred of the crime. 37 Therefore Antiochus was
grieved at heart and filled with pity, and wept because of the
moderation and good conduct of the deceased. 38 Inflamed with
anger, he immediately stripped off the purple robe from Andronicus,
tore off his clothes, and led him around the whole city to that very
place where he had committed the outrage against Onias, and there
he dispatched the bloodthirsty fellow. The Lord thus repaid him with

364

2 MACCABEES 365

the punishment he deserved.
39 When many acts of sacrilege had been committed in the city by
Lysimachus with the connivance of Menelaus, and when report of them
had spread abroad, the populace gathered against Lysimachus, because
many of the gold vessels had already been stolen. 40 Since the crowds
were becoming aroused and filled with anger, Lysimachus armed about
three thousand men and launched an unjust attack, under the
leadership of a certain Auranus, a man advanced in years and no less
advanced in folly. 41 But when the Jews became aware that Lysimachus
was attacking them, some picked up stones, some blocks of wood, and
others took handfuls of the ashes that were lying around, and threw
them in wild confusion at Lysimachus and his men. 42 As a result, they
wounded many of them, and killed some, and put all the rest to flight;
the temple robber himself they killed close by the treasury.
43 Charges were brought against Menelaus about this incident. 44
When the king came to Tyre, three men sent by the senate presented
the case before him. 45 But Menelaus, already as good as beaten,
promised a substantial bribe to Ptolemy son of Dorymenes to win over
the king. 46 Therefore Ptolemy, taking the king aside into a colonnade
as if for refreshment, induced the king to change his mind. 47
Menelaus, the cause of all the trouble, he acquitted of the charges
against him, while he sentenced to death those unfortunate men, who
would have been freed uncondemned if they had pleaded even before
Scythians. 48 And so those who had spoken for the city and the villages
and the holy vessels quickly suffered the unjust penalty. 49 Therefore
even the Tyrians, showing their hatred of the crime, provided
magnificently for their funeral. 50 But Menelaus, because of the greed
of those in power, remained in office, growing in wickedness, having
become the chief plotter against his compatriots.
[2 Maccabees 5]
Antiochus IV desecrates the Temple
1 About this time Antiochus made his second invasion of Egypt. 2 And it
happened that, for almost forty days, there appeared over all the city
golden-clad cavalry charging through the air, in companies fully armed

365

2 MACCABEES 366

with lances and drawn swords — 3 troops of cavalry drawn up, attacks
and counterattacks made on this side and on that, brandishing of
shields, massing of spears, hurling of missiles, the flash of golden
trappings, and armor of all kinds. 4 Therefore everyone prayed that the
apparition might prove to have been a good omen.
5 When a false rumor arose that Antiochus was dead, Jason took no
fewer than a thousand men and suddenly made an assault on the city.
When the troops on the wall had been forced back and at last the city
was being taken, Menelaus took refuge in the citadel. 6 But Jason kept
relentlessly slaughtering his compatriots, not realizing that success at
the cost of one's kindred is the greatest misfortune, but imagining that
he was setting up trophies of victory over enemies and not over
compatriots. 7 He did not, however, gain control of the government; in
the end he got only disgrace from his conspiracy, and fled again into
the country of the Ammonites. 8 Finally he met a miserable end.
Accused before Aretas the ruler of the Arabs, fleeing from city to city,
pursued by everyone, hated as a rebel against the laws, and abhorred
as the executioner of his country and his compatriots, he was cast
ashore in Egypt. 9 There he who had driven many from their own
country into exile died in exile, having embarked to go to the
Lacedaemonians in hope of finding protection because of their kinship.
10 He who had cast out many to lie unburied had no one to mourn for
him; he had no funeral of any sort and no place in the tomb of his
ancestors.
11 When news of what had happened reached the king, he took it to
mean that Judea was in revolt. So, raging inwardly, he left Egypt and
took the city by storm. 12 He commanded his soldiers to cut down
relentlessly everyone they met and to kill those who went into their
houses. 13 Then there was massacre of young and old, destruction of
boys, women, and children, and slaughter of young girls and infants. 14
Within the total of three days eighty thousand were destroyed, forty
thousand in hand-to-hand fighting, and as many were sold into slavery
as were killed.
15 Not content with this, Antiochus dared to enter the most holy
temple in all the world, guided by Menelaus, who had become a traitor

366

2 MACCABEES 367

both to the laws and to his country. 16 He took the holy vessels with his
polluted hands, and swept away with profane hands the votive
offerings that other kings had made to enhance the glory and honor of
the place. 17 Antiochus was elated in spirit, and did not perceive that
the Lord was angered for a little while because of the sins of those
who lived in the city, and that this was the reason he was disregarding
the holy place. 18 But if it had not happened that they were involved in
many sins, this man would have been flogged and turned back from his
rash act as soon as he came forward, just as Heliodorus had been,
whom King Seleucus sent to inspect the treasury. 19 But the Lord did
not choose the nation for the sake of the holy place, but the place for
the sake of the nation. 20 Therefore the place itself shared in the
misfortunes that befell the nation and afterward participated in its
benefits; and what was forsaken in the wrath of the Almighty was
restored again in all its glory when the great Lord became reconciled.
21 So Antiochus carried off eighteen hundred talents from the temple,
and hurried away to Antioch, thinking in his arrogance that he could
sail on the land and walk on the sea, because his mind was elated. 22
He left governors to oppress the people: at Jerusalem, Philip, by birth a
Phrygian and in character more barbarous than the man who
appointed him; 23 and at Gerizim, Andronicus; and besides these
Menelaus, who lorded it over his compatriots worse than the others
did. In his malice toward the Jewish citizens, 24 Antiochus sent
Apollonius, the captain of the Mysians, with an army of twenty-two
thousand, and commanded him to kill all the grown men and to sell
the women and boys as slaves. 25 When this man arrived in Jerusalem,
he pretended to be peaceably disposed and waited until the holy
sabbath day; then, finding the Jews not at work, he ordered his troops
to parade under arms. 26 He put to the sword all those who came out
to see them, then rushed into the city with his armed warriors and
killed great numbers of people.
27 But Judas Maccabeus, with about nine others, got away to the
wilderness, and kept himself and his companions alive in the
mountains as wild animals do; they continued to live on what grew
wild, so that they might not share in the defilement.

367

2 MACCABEES 368

[2 Maccabees 6]
Campaign against Judaism
1 Not long after this, the king sent an Athenian senator to compel the
Jews to forsake the laws of their ancestors and no longer to live by the
laws of God; 2 also to pollute the temple in Jerusalem and to call it the
temple of Olympian Zeus, and to call the one in Gerizim the temple of
Zeus-the-Friend-of-Strangers, as did the people who lived in that place.
3 Harsh and utterly grievous was the onslaught of evil. 4 For the temple
was filled with debauchery and reveling by the Gentiles, who dallied
with prostitutes and had intercourse with women within the sacred
precincts, and besides brought in things for sacrifice that were unfit. 5
The altar was covered with abominable offerings that were forbidden
by the laws. 6 People could neither keep the sabbath, nor observe the
festivals of their ancestors, nor so much as confess themselves to be
Jews.
The first martyrdoms
7 On the monthly celebration of the king's birthday, the Jews were
taken, under bitter constraint, to partake of the sacrifices; and when a
festival of Dionysus was celebrated, they were compelled to wear
wreaths of ivy and to walk in the procession in honor of Dionysus. 8 At
the suggestion of the people of Ptolemais a decree was issued to the
neighboring Greek cities that they should adopt the same policy
toward the Jews and make them partake of the sacrifices, 9 and should
kill those who did not choose to change over to Greek customs. One
could see, therefore, the misery that had come upon them. 10 For
example, two women were brought in for having circumcised their
children. They publicly paraded them around the city, with their babies
hanging at their breasts, and then hurled them down headlong from
the wall. 11 Others who had assembled in the caves nearby, in order to
observe the seventh day secretly, were betrayed to Philip and were all
burned together, because their piety kept them from defending
themselves, in view of their regard for that most holy day.

368

2 MACCABEES 369

12 Now I urge those who read this book not to be depressed by such
calamities, but to recognize that these punishments were designed not
to destroy but to discipline our people. 13 In fact, it is a sign of great
kindness not to let the impious alone for long, but to punish them
immediately. 14 For in the case of the other nations the Lord waits
patiently to punish them until they have reached the full measure of
their sins; but he does not deal in this way with us, 15 in order that he
may not take vengeance on us afterward when our sins have reached
their height. 16 Therefore he never withdraws his mercy from us.
Although he disciplines us with calamities, he does not forsake his own
people. 17 Let what we have said serve as a reminder; we must go on
briefly with the story.
Martyrdom of Eleazar
18 Eleazar, one of the scribes in high position, a man now advanced in
age and of noble presence, was being forced to open his mouth to eat
swine's flesh. 19 But he, welcoming death with honor rather than life
with pollution, went up to the rack of his own accord, spitting out the
flesh, 20 as all ought to go who have the courage to refuse things that
it is not right to taste, even for the natural love of life.
21 Those who were in charge of that unlawful sacrifice took the man
aside because of their long acquaintance with him, and privately urged
him to bring meat of his own providing, proper for him to use, and to
pretend that he was eating the flesh of the sacrificial meal that had
been commanded by the king, 22 so that by doing this he might be
saved from death, and be treated kindly on account of his old
friendship with them. 23 But making a high resolve, worthy of his years
and the dignity of his old age and the gray hairs that he had reached
with distinction and his excellent life even from childhood, and
moreover according to the holy God-given law, he declared himself
quickly, telling them to send him to Hades.
24 "Such pretense is not worthy of our time of life," he said, "for many
of the young might suppose that Eleazar in his ninetieth year had gone
over to an alien religion, 25 and through my pretense, for the sake of
living a brief moment longer, they would be led astray because of me,

369

2 MACCABEES 370

while I defile and disgrace my old age. 26 Even if for the present I
would avoid the punishment of mortals, yet whether I live or die I will
not escape the hands of the Almighty. 27 Therefore, by bravely giving
up my life now, I will show myself worthy of my old age 28 and leave
to the young a noble example of how to die a good death willingly
and nobly for the revered and holy laws."
When he had said this, he went at once to the rack. 29 Those who a
little before had acted toward him with goodwill now changed to ill
will, because the words he had uttered were in their opinion sheer
madness. 30 When he was about to die under the blows, he groaned
aloud and said: "It is clear to the Lord in his holy knowledge that,
though I might have been saved from death, I am enduring terrible
sufferings in my body under this beating, but in my soul I am glad to
suffer these things because I fear him."
31 So in this way he died, leaving in his death an example of nobility
and a memorial of courage, not only to the young but to the great
body of his nation.
[2 Maccabees 7]
Martyrdom of seven brothers and their mother
1 It happened also that seven brothers and their mother were arrested
and were being compelled by the king, under torture with whips and
thongs, to partake of unlawful swine's flesh. 2 One of them, acting as
their spokesman, said, "What do you intend to ask and learn from us?
For we are ready to die rather than transgress the laws of our
ancestors."
3 The king fell into a rage, and gave orders to have pans and caldrons
heated. 4 These were heated immediately, and he commanded that
the tongue of their spokesman be cut out and that they scalp him and
cut off his hands and feet, while the rest of the brothers and the
mother looked on. 5 When he was utterly helpless, the king ordered
them to take him to the fire, still breathing, and to fry him in a pan.
The smoke from the pan spread widely, but the brothers and their
mother encouraged one another to die nobly, saying, 6 "The Lord God

370

2 MACCABEES 371

is watching over us and in truth has compassion on us, as Moses
declared in his song that bore witness against the people to their faces,
when he said, 'And he will have compassion on his servants.'"
7 After the first brother had died in this way, they brought forward the
second for their sport. They tore off the skin of his head with the hair,
and asked him, "Will you eat rather than have your body punished
limb by limb?" 8 He replied in the language of his ancestors and said to
them, "No." Therefore he in turn underwent tortures as the first
brother had done. 9 And when he was at his last breath, he said, "You
accursed wretch, you dismiss us from this present life, but the King of
the universe will raise us up to an everlasting renewal of life, because
we have died for his laws."
10 After him, the third was the victim of their sport. When it was
demanded, he quickly put out his tongue and courageously stretched
forth his hands, 11 and said nobly, "I got these from Heaven, and
because of his laws I disdain them, and from him I hope to get them
back again." 12 As a result the king himself and those with him were
astonished at the young man's spirit, for he regarded his sufferings as
nothing.
13 After he too had died, they maltreated and tortured the fourth in
the same way. 14 When he was near death, he said, "One cannot but
choose to die at the hands of mortals and to cherish the hope God
gives of being raised again by him. But for you there will be no
resurrection to life!"
15 Next they brought forward the fifth and maltreated him. 16 But he
looked at the king, and said, "Because you have authority among
mortals, though you also are mortal, you do what you please. But do
not think that God has forsaken our people. 17 Keep on, and see how
his mighty power will torture you and your descendants!"
18 After him they brought forward the sixth. And when he was about
to die, he said, "Do not deceive yourself in vain. For we are suffering
these things on our own account, because of our sins against our own

371

2 MACCABEES 372

God. Therefore astounding things have happened. 19 But do not think
that you will go unpunished for having tried to fight against God!"
20 The mother was especially admirable and worthy of honorable
memory. Although she saw her seven sons perish within a single day,
she bore it with good courage because of her hope in the Lord. 21 She
encouraged each of them in the language of their ancestors. Filled
with a noble spirit, she reinforced her woman's reasoning with a man's
courage, and said to them, 22 "I do not know how you came into being
in my womb. It was not I who gave you life and breath, nor I who set in
order the elements within each of you. 23 Therefore the Creator of the
world, who shaped the beginning of humankind and devised the
origin of all things, will in his mercy give life and breath back to you
again, since you now forget yourselves for the sake of his laws."
24 Antiochus felt that he was being treated with contempt, and he was
suspicious of her reproachful tone. The youngest brother being still
alive, Antiochus not only appealed to him in words, but promised with
oaths that he would make him rich and enviable if he would turn from
the ways of his ancestors, and that he would take him for his Friend
and entrust him with public affairs. 25 Since the young man would not
listen to him at all, the king called the mother to him and urged her to
advise the youth to save himself. 26 After much urging on his part, she
undertook to persuade her son. 27 But, leaning close to him, she spoke
in their native language as follows, deriding the cruel tyrant: "My son,
have pity on me. I carried you nine months in my womb, and nursed
you for three years, and have reared you and brought you up to this
point in your life, and have taken care of you. 28 I beg you, my child, to
look at the heaven and the earth and see everything that is in them,
and recognize that God did not make them out of things that existed.
And in the same way the human race came into being. 29 Do not fear
this butcher, but prove worthy of your brothers. Accept death, so that
in God's mercy I may get you back again along with your brothers."
30 While she was still speaking, the young man said, "What are you
waiting for? I will not obey the king's command, but I obey the
command of the law that was given to our ancestors through Moses. 31
But you, who have contrived all sorts of evil against the Hebrews, will

372

2 MACCABEES 373

certainly not escape the hands of God. 32 For we are suffering because
of our own sins. 33 And if our living Lord is angry for a little while, to
rebuke and discipline us, he will again be reconciled with his own
servants. 34 But you, unholy wretch, you most defiled of all mortals, do
not be elated in vain and puffed up by uncertain hopes, when you
raise your hand against the children of heaven. 35 You have not yet
escaped the judgment of the almighty, all-seeing God. 36 For our
brothers after enduring a brief suffering have drunk of ever-flowing
life, under God's covenant; but you, by the judgment of God, will
receive just punishment for your arrogance. 37 I, like my brothers, give
up body and life for the laws of our ancestors, appealing to God to
show mercy soon to our nation and by trials and plagues to make you
confess that he alone is God, 38 and through me and my brothers to
bring to an end the wrath of the Almighty that has justly fallen on our
whole nation."
39 The king fell into a rage, and handled him worse than the others,
being exasperated at his scorn. 40 So he died in his integrity, putting
his whole trust in the Lord.
41 Last of all, the mother died, after her sons.
42 Let this be enough, then, about the eating of sacrifices and the
extreme tortures.
[2 Maccabees 8]
Judas Maccabeus begins the revolt
1 Meanwhile Judas, who was also called Maccabeus, and his
companions secretly entered the villages and summoned their kindred
and enlisted those who had continued in the Jewish faith, and so they
gathered about six thousand. 2 They implored the Lord to look upon
the people who were oppressed by all; and to have pity on the temple
that had been profaned by the godless; 3 to have mercy on the city
that was being destroyed and about to be leveled to the ground; to
hearken to the blood that cried out to him; 4 to remember also the
lawless destruction of the innocent babies and the blasphemies
committed against his name; and to show his hatred of evil.

373

2 MACCABEES 374

5 As soon as Maccabeus got his army organized, the Gentiles could not
withstand him, for the wrath of the Lord had turned to mercy. 6
Coming without warning, he would set fire to towns and villages. He
captured strategic positions and put to flight not a few of the enemy. 7
He found the nights most advantageous for such attacks. And talk of
his valor spread everywhere.
First victory over Nicanor
8 When Philip saw that the man was gaining ground little by little, and
that he was pushing ahead with more frequent successes, he wrote to
Ptolemy, the governor of Coelesyria and Phoenicia, to come to the aid
of the king's government. 9 Then Ptolemy promptly appointed Nicanor
son of Patroclus, one of the king's chief Friends, and sent him, in
command of no fewer than twenty thousand Gentiles of all nations, to
wipe out the whole race of Judea. He associated with him Gorgias, a
general and a man of experience in military service. 10 Nicanor
determined to make up for the king the tribute due to the Romans,
two thousand talents, by selling the captured Jews into slavery. 11 So he
immediately sent to the towns on the seacoast, inviting them to buy
Jewish slaves and promising to hand over ninety slaves for a talent, not
expecting the judgment from the Almighty that was about to overtake
him.
12 Word came to Judas concerning Nicanor's invasion; and when he
told his companions of the arrival of the army, 13 those who were
cowardly and distrustful of God's justice ran off and got away. 14
Others sold all their remaining property, and at the same time
implored the Lord to rescue those who had been sold by the ungodly
Nicanor before he ever met them, 15 if not for their own sake, then for
the sake of the covenants made with their ancestors, and because he
had called them by his holy and glorious name. 16 But Maccabeus
gathered his forces together, to the number six thousand, and
exhorted them not to be frightened by the enemy and not to fear the
great multitude of Gentiles who were wickedly coming against them,
but to fight nobly, 17 keeping before their eyes the lawless outrage
that the Gentiles had committed against the holy place, and the
torture of the derided city, and besides, the overthrow of their

374

2 MACCABEES 375

ancestral way of life. 18 "For they trust to arms and acts of daring," he
said, "but we trust in the Almighty God, who is able with a single nod
to strike down those who are coming against us, and even, if necessary,
the whole world."
19 Moreover, he told them of the occasions when help came to their
ancestors; how, in the time of Sennacherib, when one hundred eightyfive thousand perished, 20 and the time of the battle against the
Galatians that took place in Babylonia, when eight thousand Jews
fought along with four thousand Macedonians; yet when the
Macedonians were hard pressed, the eight thousand, by the help that
came to them from heaven, destroyed one hundred twenty thousand
Galatians and took a great amount of booty.
21 With these words he filled them with courage and made them ready
to die for their laws and their country; then he divided his army into
four parts. 22 He appointed his brothers also, Simon and Joseph and
Jonathan, each to command a division, putting fifteen hundred men
under each. 23 Besides, he appointed Eleazar to read aloud from the
holy book, and gave the watchword, "The help of God"; then, leading
the first division himself, he joined battle with Nicanor.
24 With the Almighty as their ally, they killed more than nine thousand
of the enemy, and wounded and disabled most of Nicanor's army, and
forced them all to flee. 25 They captured the money of those who had
come to buy them as slaves. After pursuing them for some distance,
they were obliged to return because the hour was late. 26 It was the
day before the sabbath, and for that reason they did not continue their
pursuit. 27 When they had collected the arms of the enemy and
stripped them of their spoils, they kept the sabbath, giving great praise
and thanks to the Lord, who had preserved them for that day and
allotted it to them as the beginning of mercy. 28 After the sabbath
they gave some of the spoils to those who had been tortured and to
the widows and orphans, and distributed the rest among themselves
and their children. 29 When they had done this, they made common
supplication and implored the merciful Lord to be wholly reconciled
with his servants.

375

2 MACCABEES 376

Other victories
30 In encounters with the forces of Timothy and Bacchides they killed
more than twenty thousand of them and got possession of some
exceedingly high strongholds, and they divided a very large amount of
plunder, giving to those who had been tortured and to the orphans
and widows, and also to the aged, shares equal to their own. 31 They
collected the arms of the enemy, and carefully stored all of them in
strategic places; the rest of the spoils they carried to Jerusalem. 32 They
killed the commander of Timothy's forces, a most wicked man, and one
who had greatly troubled the Jews. 33 While they were celebrating the
victory in the city of their ancestors, they burned those who had set fire
to the sacred gates, Callisthenes and some others, who had fled into
one little house; so these received the proper reward for their impiety.
34 The thrice-accursed Nicanor, who had brought the thousand
merchants to buy the Jews, 35 having been humbled with the help of
the Lord by opponents whom he regarded as of the least account, took
off his splendid uniform and made his way alone like a runaway slave
across the country until he reached Antioch, having succeeded chiefly
in the destruction of his own army! 36 So he who had undertaken to
secure tribute for the Romans by the capture of the people of
Jerusalem proclaimed that the Jews had a Defender, and that
therefore the Jews were invulnerable, because they followed the laws
ordained by him.
[2 Maccabees 9]
The illness of Antiochus
1 About that time, as it happened, Antiochus had retreated in disorder
from the region of Persia. 2 He had entered the city called Persepolis
and attempted to rob the temples and control the city. Therefore the
people rushed to the rescue with arms, and Antiochus and his army
were defeated, with the result that Antiochus was put to flight by the
inhabitants and beat a shameful retreat. 3 While he was in Ecbatana,
news came to him of what had happened to Nicanor and the forces of
Timothy. 4 Transported with rage, he conceived the idea of turning
upon the Jews the injury done by those who had put him to flight; so

376

2 MACCABEES 377

he ordered his charioteer to drive without stopping until he completed
the journey. But the judgment of heaven rode with him! For in his
arrogance he said, "When I get there I will make Jerusalem a cemetery
of Jews."
5 But the all-seeing Lord, the God of Israel, struck him with an
incurable and invisible blow. As soon as he stopped speaking he was
seized with a pain in his bowels, for which there was no relief, and
with sharp internal tortures — 6 and that very justly, for he had
tortured the bowels of others with many and strange inflictions. 7 Yet
he did not in any way stop his insolence, but was even more filled with
arrogance, breathing fire in his rage against the Jews, and giving
orders to drive even faster. And so it came about that he fell out of his
chariot as it was rushing along, and the fall was so hard as to torture
every limb of his body. 8 Thus he who only a little while before had
thought in his superhuman arrogance that he could command the
waves of the sea, and had imagined that he could weigh the high
mountains in a balance, was brought down to earth and carried in a
litter, making the power of God manifest to all. 9 And so the ungodly
man's body swarmed with worms, and while he was still living in
anguish and pain, his flesh rotted away, and because of the stench the
whole army felt revulsion at his decay. 10 Because of his intolerable
stench no one was able to carry the man who a little while before had
thought that he could touch the stars of heaven. 11 Then it was that,
broken in spirit, he began to lose much of his arrogance and to come
to his senses under the scourge of God, for he was tortured with pain
every moment. 12 And when he could not endure his own stench, he
uttered these words, "It is right to be subject to God; mortals should
not think that they are equal to God."
Repentance and death of Antiochus
13 Then the abominable fellow made a vow to the Lord, who would no
longer have mercy on him, stating 14 that the holy city, which he was
hurrying to level to the ground and to make a cemetery, he was now
declaring to be free; 15 and the Jews, whom he had not considered
worth burying but had planned to throw out with their children for
the wild animals and for the birds to eat, he would make, all of them,

377

2 MACCABEES 378

equal to citizens of Athens; 16 and the holy sanctuary, which he had
formerly plundered, he would adorn with the finest offerings; and all
the holy vessels he would give back, many times over; and the expenses
incurred for the sacrifices he would provide from his own revenues; 17
and in addition to all this he also would become a Jew and would visit
every inhabited place to proclaim the power of God. 18 But when his
sufferings did not in any way abate, for the judgment of God had justly
come upon him, he gave up all hope for himself and wrote to the Jews
the following letter, in the form of a supplication. This was its content:
19 "To his worthy Jewish citizens, Antiochus their king and general
sends hearty greetings and good wishes for their health and prosperity.
20 If you and your children are well and your affairs are as you wish, I
am glad. As my hope is in heaven, 21 I remember with affection your
esteem and goodwill. On my way back from the region of Persia I
suffered an annoying illness, and I have deemed it necessary to take
thought for the general security of all. 22 I do not despair of my
condition, for I have good hope of recovering from my illness, 23 but I
observed that my father, on the occasions when he made expeditions
into the upper country, appointed his successor, 24 so that, if anything
unexpected happened or any unwelcome news came, the people
throughout the realm would not be troubled, for they would know to
whom the government was left. 25 Moreover, I understand how the
princes along the borders and the neighbors of my kingdom keep
watching for opportunities and waiting to see what will happen. So I
have appointed my son Antiochus to be king, whom I have often
entrusted and commended to most of you when I hurried off to the
upper provinces; and I have written to him what is written here. 26 I
therefore urge and beg you to remember the public and private
services rendered to you and to maintain your present goodwill, each
of you, toward me and my son. 27 For I am sure that he will follow my
policy and will treat you with moderation and kindness."
28 So the murderer and blasphemer, having endured the more intense
suffering, such as he had inflicted on others, came to the end of his life
by a most pitiable fate, among the mountains in a strange land. 29 And
Philip, one of his courtiers, took his body home; then, fearing the son
of Antiochus, he withdrew to Ptolemy Philometor in Egypt.

378

2 MACCABEES 379

[2 Maccabees 10]
Purification of the Temple
1 Now Maccabeus and his followers, the Lord leading them on,
recovered the temple and the city; 2 they tore down the altars that had
been built in the public square by the foreigners, and also destroyed
the sacred precincts. 3 They purified the sanctuary, and made another
altar of sacrifice; then, striking fire out of flint, they offered sacrifices,
after a lapse of two years, and they offered incense and lighted lamps
and set out the bread of the Presence. 4 When they had done this, they
fell prostrate and implored the Lord that they might never again fall
into such misfortunes, but that, if they should ever sin, they might be
disciplined by him with forbearance and not be handed over to
blasphemous and barbarous nations. 5 It happened that on the same
day on which the sanctuary had been profaned by the foreigners, the
purification of the sanctuary took place, that is, on the twenty-fifth day
of the same month, which was Chislev. 6 They celebrated it for eight
days with rejoicing, in the manner of the festival of booths,
remembering how not long before, during the festival of booths, they
had been wandering in the mountains and caves like wild animals. 7
Therefore, carrying ivy-wreathed wands and beautiful branches and
also fronds of palm, they offered hymns of thanksgiving to him who
had given success to the purifying of his own holy place. 8 They
decreed by public edict, ratified by vote, that the whole nation of the
Jews should observe these days every year.
9 Such then was the end of Antiochus, who was called Epiphanes.
Accession of Antiochus V Eupator and Ptolemy Macron
10 Now we will tell what took place under Antiochus Eupator, who was
the son of that ungodly man, and will give a brief summary of the
principal calamities of the wars. 11 This man, when he succeeded to the
kingdom, appointed one Lysias to have charge of the government and
to be chief governor of Coelesyria and Phoenicia. 12 Ptolemy, who was
called Macron, took the lead in showing justice to the Jews because of
the wrong that had been done to them, and attempted to maintain
peaceful relations with them. 13 As a result he was accused before

379

2 MACCABEES 380

Eupator by the king's Friends. He heard himself called a traitor at every
turn, because he had abandoned Cyprus, which Philometor had
entrusted to him, and had gone over to Antiochus Epiphanes. Unable
to command the respect due his office, he took poison and ended his
life.
Attacks on the Idumeans
14 When Gorgias became governor of the region, he maintained a
force of mercenaries, and at every turn kept attacking the Jews. 15
Besides this, the Idumeans, who had control of important strongholds,
were harassing the Jews; they received those who were banished from
Jerusalem, and endeavored to keep up the war. 16 But Maccabeus and
his forces, after making solemn supplication and imploring God to
fight on their side, rushed to the strongholds of the Idumeans. 17
Attacking them vigorously, they gained possession of the places, and
beat off all who fought upon the wall, and slaughtered those whom
they encountered, killing no fewer than twenty thousand.
18 When at least nine thousand took refuge in two very strong towers
well equipped to withstand a siege, 19 Maccabeus left Simon and
Joseph, and also Zacchaeus and his troops, a force sufficient to besiege
them; and he himself set off for places where he was more urgently
needed. 20 But those with Simon, who were money-hungry, were
bribed by some of those who were in the towers, and on receiving
seventy thousand drachmas let some of them slip away. 21 When word
of what had happened came to Maccabeus, he gathered the leaders of
the people, and accused these men of having sold their kindred for
money by setting their enemies free to fight against them. 22 Then he
killed these men who had turned traitor, and immediately captured
the two towers. 23 Having success at arms in everything he undertook,
he destroyed more than twenty thousand in the two strongholds.
Victory over Timothy
24 Now Timothy, who had been defeated by the Jews before, gathered
a tremendous force of mercenaries and collected the cavalry from Asia
in no small number. He came on, intending to take Judea by storm. 25

380

2 MACCABEES 381

As he drew near, Maccabeus and his men sprinkled dust on their heads
and girded their loins with sackcloth, in supplication to God. 26 Falling
upon the steps before the altar, they implored him to be gracious to
them and to be an enemy to their enemies and an adversary to their
adversaries, as the law declares. 27 And rising from their prayer they
took up their arms and advanced a considerable distance from the city;
and when they came near the enemy they halted. 28 Just as dawn was
breaking, the two armies joined battle, the one having as pledge of
success and victory not only their valor but also their reliance on the
Lord, while the other made rage their leader in the fight.
29 When the battle became fierce, there appeared to the enemy from
heaven five resplendent men on horses with golden bridles, and they
were leading the Jews. 30 Two of them took Maccabeus between
them, and shielding him with their own armor and weapons, they kept
him from being wounded. They showered arrows and thunderbolts on
the enemy, so that, confused and blinded, they were thrown into
disorder and cut to pieces. 31 Twenty thousand five hundred were
slaughtered, besides six hundred cavalry.
32 Timothy himself fled to a stronghold called Gazara, especially well
garrisoned, where Chaereas was commander. 33 Then Maccabeus and
his men were glad, and they besieged the fort for four days. 34 The
men within, relying on the strength of the place, kept blaspheming
terribly and uttering wicked words. 35 But at dawn of the fifth day,
twenty young men in the army of Maccabeus, fired with anger because
of the blasphemies, bravely stormed the wall and with savage fury cut
down everyone they met. 36 Others who came up in the same way
wheeled around against the defenders and set fire to the towers; they
kindled fires and burned the blasphemers alive. Others broke open the
gates and let in the rest of the force, and they occupied the city. 37
They killed Timothy, who was hiding in a cistern, and his brother
Chaereas, and Apollophanes. 38 When they had accomplished these
things, with hymns and thanksgivings they blessed the Lord who shows
great kindness to Israel and gives them the victory.

381

2 MACCABEES 382

[2 Maccabees 11]
Victory over Lysias at Beth-zur
1 Very soon after this, Lysias, the king's guardian and kinsman, who
was in charge of the government, being vexed at what had happened,
2 gathered about eighty thousand infantry and all his cavalry and came
against the Jews. He intended to make the city a home for Greeks, 3
and to levy tribute on the temple as he did on the sacred places of the
other nations, and to put up the high priesthood for sale every year. 4
He took no account whatever of the power of God, but was elated
with his ten thousands of infantry, and his thousands of cavalry, and
his eighty elephants. 5 Invading Judea, he approached Beth-zur, which
was a fortified place about five stadia from Jerusalem, and pressed it
hard.
6 When Maccabeus and his men got word that Lysias was besieging the
strongholds, they and all the people, with lamentations and tears,
prayed the Lord to send a good angel to save Israel. 7 Maccabeus
himself was the first to take up arms, and he urged the others to risk
their lives with him to aid their kindred. Then they eagerly rushed off
together. 8 And there, while they were still near Jerusalem, a
horseman appeared at their head, clothed in white and brandishing
weapons of gold. 9 And together they all praised the merciful God,
and were strengthened in heart, ready to assail not only humans but
the wildest animals or walls of iron. 10 They advanced in battle order,
having their heavenly ally, for the Lord had mercy on them. 11 They
hurled themselves like lions against the enemy, and laid low eleven
thousand of them and sixteen hundred cavalry, and forced all the rest
to flee. 12 Most of them got away stripped and wounded, and Lysias
himself escaped by disgraceful flight.
13 As he was not without intelligence, he pondered over the defeat
that had befallen him, and realized that the Hebrews were invincible
because the mighty God fought on their side. So he sent to them 14
and persuaded them to settle everything on just terms, promising that
he would persuade the king, constraining him to be their friend. 15
Maccabeus, having regard for the common good, agreed to all that

382

2 MACCABEES 383

Lysias urged. For the king granted every request in behalf of the Jews
which Maccabeus delivered to Lysias in writing.
Letters of Lysias, Antiochus V, and the Romans
16 The letter written to the Jews by Lysias was to this effect:
"Lysias to the people of the Jews, greetings. 17 John and Absalom,
who were sent by you, have delivered your signed communication and
have asked about the matters indicated in it. 18 I have informed the
king of everything that needed to be brought before him, and he has
agreed to what was possible. 19 If you will maintain your goodwill
toward the government, I will endeavor in the future to help promote
your welfare. 20 And concerning such matters and their details, I have
ordered these men and my representatives to confer with you. 21
Farewell. The one hundred forty-eighth year, Dioscorinthius twentyfourth."
22 The king's letter ran thus:
"King Antiochus to his brother Lysias, greetings. 23 Now that our
father has gone on to the gods, we desire that the subjects of the
kingdom be undisturbed in caring for their own affairs. 24 We have
heard that the Jews do not consent to our father's change to Greek
customs, but prefer their own way of living and ask that their own
customs be allowed them. 25 Accordingly, since we choose that this
nation also should be free from disturbance, our decision is that their
temple be restored to them and that they shall live according to the
customs of their ancestors. 26 You will do well, therefore, to send word
to them and give them pledges of friendship, so that they may know
our policy and be of good cheer and go on happily in the conduct of
their own affairs."
27 To the nation the king's letter was as follows:
"King Antiochus to the senate of the Jews and to the other Jews,
greetings. 28 If you are well, it is as we desire. We also are in good
health. 29 Menelaus has informed us that you wish to return home and
look after your own affairs. 30 Therefore those who go home by the
thirtieth of Xanthicus will have our pledge of friendship and full
permission 31 for the Jews to enjoy their own food and laws, just as

383

2 MACCABEES 384

formerly, and none of them shall be molested in any way for what may
have been done in ignorance. 32 And I have also sent Menelaus to
encourage you. 33 Farewell. The one hundred forty-eighth year,
Xanthicus fifteenth."
34 The Romans also sent them a letter, which read thus:
"Quintus Memmius and Titus Manius, envoys of the Romans, to the
people of the Jews, greetings. 35 With regard to what Lysias the
kinsman of the king has granted you, we also give consent. 36 But as to
the matters that he decided are to be referred to the king, as soon as
you have considered them, send some one promptly so that we may
make proposals appropriate for you. For we are on our way to Antioch.
37 Therefore make haste and send messengers so that we may have
your judgment. 38 Farewell. The one hundred forty-eighth year,
Xanthicus fifteenth."
[2 Maccabees 12]
Attacks on Joppa, Jamnia, and Caspin
1 When this agreement had been reached, Lysias returned to the king,
and the Jews went about their farming.
2 But some of the governors in various places, Timothy and Apollonius
son of Gennaeus, as well as Hieronymus and Demophon, and in
addition to these Nicanor the governor of Cyprus, would not let them
live quietly and in peace. 3 And the people of Joppa did so ungodly a
deed as this: they invited the Jews who lived among them to embark,
with their wives and children, on boats that they had provided, as
though there were no ill will to the Jews; 4 and this was done by public
vote of the city. When they accepted, because they wished to live
peaceably and suspected nothing, the people of Joppa took them out
to sea and drowned them, at least two hundred. 5 When Judas heard
of the cruelty visited on his compatriots, he gave orders to his men 6
and, calling upon God, the righteous judge, attacked the murderers of
his kindred. He set fire to the harbor by night, burned the boats, and
massacred those who had taken refuge there. 7 Then, because the
city's gates were closed, he withdrew, intending to come again and
root out the whole community of Joppa. 8 But learning that the

384

2 MACCABEES 385

people in Jamnia meant in the same way to wipe out the Jews who
were living among them, 9 he attacked the Jamnites by night and set
fire to the harbor and the fleet, so that the glow of the light was seen
in Jerusalem, thirty miles distant.
10 When they had gone more than a mile from there, on their march
against Timothy, at least five thousand Arabs with five hundred cavalry
attacked them. 11 After a hard fight, Judas and his companions, with
God's help, were victorious. The defeated nomads begged Judas to
grant them pledges of friendship, promising to give him livestock and
to help his people in all other ways. 12 Judas, realizing that they might
indeed be useful in many ways, agreed to make peace with them; and
after receiving his pledges they went back to their tents.
13 He also attacked a certain town that was strongly fortified with
earthworks and walls, and inhabited by all sorts of Gentiles. Its name
was Caspin. 14 Those who were within, relying on the strength of the
walls and on their supply of provisions, behaved most insolently
toward Judas and his men, railing at them and even blaspheming and
saying unholy things. 15 But Judas and his men, calling upon the great
Sovereign of the world, who without battering rams or engines of war
overthrew Jericho in the days of Joshua, rushed furiously upon the
walls. 16 They took the town by the will of God, and slaughtered
untold numbers, so that the adjoining lake, a quarter of a mile wide,
appeared to be running over with blood.
Battles in the northeast
17 When they had gone ninety-five miles from there, they came to
Charax, to the Jews who are called Toubiani. 18 They did not find
Timothy in that region, for he had by then left there without
accomplishing anything, though in one place he had left a very strong
garrison. 19 Dositheus and Sosipater, who were captains under
Maccabeus, marched out and destroyed those whom Timothy had left
in the stronghold, more than ten thousand men. 20 But Maccabeus
arranged his army in divisions, set men in command of the divisions,
and hurried after Timothy, who had with him one hundred twenty
thousand infantry and two thousand five hundred cavalry. 21 When

385

2 MACCABEES 386

Timothy learned of the approach of Judas, he sent off the women and
the children and also the baggage to a place called Carnaim; for that
place was hard to besiege and difficult of access because of the
narrowness of all the approaches. 22 But when Judas's first division
appeared, terror and fear came over the enemy at the manifestation to
them of him who sees all things. In their flight they rushed headlong in
every direction, so that often they were injured by their own men and
pierced by the points of their own swords. 23 Judas pressed the pursuit
with the utmost vigor, putting the sinners to the sword, and destroyed
as many as thirty thousand.
24 Timothy himself fell into the hands of Dositheus and Sosipater and
their men. With great guile he begged them to let him go in safety,
because he held the parents of most of them, and the brothers of
some, to whom no consideration would be shown. 25 And when with
many words he had confirmed his solemn promise to restore them
unharmed, they let him go, for the sake of saving their kindred.
26 Then Judas marched against Carnaim and the temple of Atargatis,
and slaughtered twenty-five thousand people. 27 After the rout and
destruction of these, he marched also against Ephron, a fortified town
where Lysias lived with multitudes of people of all nationalities.
Stalwart young men took their stand before the walls and made a
vigorous defense; and great stores of war engines and missiles were
there. 28 But the Jews called upon the Sovereign who with power
shatters the might of his enemies, and they got the town into their
hands, and killed as many as twenty-five thousand of those who were
in it.
29 Setting out from there, they hastened to Scythopolis, which is
seventy-five miles from Jerusalem. 30 But when the Jews who lived
there bore witness to the goodwill that the people of Scythopolis had
shown them and their kind treatment of them in times of misfortune,
31 they thanked them and exhorted them to be well disposed to their
race in the future also. Then they went up to Jerusalem, as the festival
of weeks was close at hand.

386

2 MACCABEES 387

Battle with Gorgias
32 After the festival called Pentecost, they hurried against Gorgias, the
governor of Idumea, 33 who came out with three thousand infantry
and four hundred cavalry. 34 When they joined battle, it happened
that a few of the Jews fell. 35 But a certain Dositheus, one of Bacenor's
men, who was on horseback and was a strong man, caught hold of
Gorgias, and grasping his cloak was dragging him off by main strength,
wishing to take the accursed man alive, when one of the Thracian
cavalry bore down on him and cut off his arm; so Gorgias escaped and
reached Marisa.
36 As Esdris and his men had been fighting for a long time and were
weary, Judas called upon the Lord to show himself their ally and leader
in the battle. 37 In the language of their ancestors he raised the battle
cry, with hymns; then he charged against Gorgias's troops when they
were not expecting it, and put them to flight.
Prayers for the dead
38 Then Judas assembled his army and went to the city of Adullam. As
the seventh day was coming on, they purified themselves according to
the custom, and kept the sabbath there.
39 On the next day, as had now become necessary, Judas and his men
went to take up the bodies of the fallen and to bring them back to lie
with their kindred in the sepulchres of their ancestors. 40 Then under
the tunic of each one of the dead they found sacred tokens of the idols
of Jamnia, which the law forbids the Jews to wear. And it became clear
to all that this was the reason these men had fallen. 41 So they all
blessed the ways of the Lord, the righteous judge, who reveals the
things that are hidden; 42 and they turned to supplication, praying
that the sin that had been committed might be wholly blotted out. The
noble Judas exhorted the people to keep themselves free from sin, for
they had seen with their own eyes what had happened as the result of
the sin of those who had fallen. 43 He also took up a collection, man by
man, to the amount of two thousand drachmas of silver, and sent it to
Jerusalem to provide for a sin offering. In doing this he acted very well

387

2 MACCABEES 388

and honorably, taking account of the resurrection. 44 For if he were
not expecting that those who had fallen would rise again, it would
have been superfluous and foolish to pray for the dead. 45 But if he
was looking to the splendid reward that is laid up for those who fall
asleep in godliness, it was a holy and pious thought. Therefore he
made atonement for the dead, so that they might be delivered from
their sin.
[2 Maccabees 13]
Death of Menelaus
1 In the one hundred forty-ninth year word came to Judas and his men
that Antiochus Eupator was coming with a great army against Judea, 2
and with him Lysias, his guardian, who had charge of the government.
Each of them had a Greek force of one hundred ten thousand infantry,
five thousand three hundred cavalry, twenty-two elephants, and three
hundred chariots armed with scythes.
3 Menelaus also joined them and with utter hypocrisy urged Antiochus
on, not for the sake of his country's welfare, but because he thought
that he would be established in office. 4 But the King of kings aroused
the anger of Antiochus against the scoundrel; and when Lysias
informed him that this man was to blame for all the trouble, he
ordered them to take him to Beroea and to put him to death by the
method that is customary in that place. 5 For there is a tower there,
fifty cubits high, full of ashes, and it has a rim running around it that
on all sides inclines precipitously into the ashes. 6 There they all push to
destruction anyone guilty of sacrilege or notorious for other crimes. 7
By such a fate it came about that Menelaus the lawbreaker died,
without even burial in the earth. 8 And this was eminently just;
because he had committed many sins against the altar whose fire and
ashes were holy, he met his death in ashes.
Preliminary skirmish
9 The king with barbarous arrogance was coming to show the Jews
things far worse than those that had been done in his father's time. 10
But when Judas heard of this, he ordered the people to call upon the

388

2 MACCABEES 389

Lord day and night, now if ever to help those who were on the point
of being deprived of the law and their country and the holy temple, 11
and not to let the people who had just begun to revive fall into the
hands of the blasphemous Gentiles. 12 When they had all joined in the
same petition and had implored the merciful Lord with weeping and
fasting and lying prostrate for three days without ceasing, Judas
exhorted them and ordered them to stand ready.
13 After consulting privately with the elders, he determined to march
out and decide the matter by the help of God before the king's army
could enter Judea and get possession of the city. 14 So, committing the
decision to the Creator of the world and exhorting his troops to fight
bravely to the death for the laws, temple, city, country, and
commonwealth, he pitched his camp near Modein. 15 He gave his
troops the watchword, "God's victory," and with a picked force of the
bravest young men, he attacked the king's pavilion at night and killed
as many as two thousand men in the camp. He stabbed the leading
elephant and its rider. 16 In the end they filled the camp with terror
and confusion and withdrew in triumph. 17 This happened, just as day
was dawning, because the LORD's help protected him.
Attack on Beth-zur
18 The king, having had a taste of the daring of the Jews, tried strategy
in attacking their positions. 19 He advanced against Beth-zur, a strong
fortress of the Jews, was turned back, attacked again, and was
defeated. 20 Judas sent in to the garrison whatever was necessary. 21
But Rhodocus, a man from the ranks of the Jews, gave secret
information to the enemy; he was sought for, caught, and put in
prison. 22 The king negotiated a second time with the people in Bethzur, gave pledges, received theirs, withdrew, attacked Judas and his
men, was defeated; 23 he got word that Philip, who had been left in
charge of the government, had revolted in Antioch; he was dismayed,
called in the Jews, yielded and swore to observe all their rights, settled
with them and offered sacrifice, honored the sanctuary and showed
generosity to the holy place. 24 He received Maccabeus, left
Hegemonides as governor from Ptolemais to Gerar, 25 and went to
Ptolemais. The people of Ptolemais were indignant over the treaty; in

389

2 MACCABEES 390

fact they were so angry that they wanted to annul its terms. 26 Lysias
took the public platform, made the best possible defense, convinced
them, appeased them, gained their goodwill, and set out for Antioch.
This is how the king's attack and withdrawal turned out.
[2 Maccabees 14]
Accession of Demtrius I
1 Three years later, word came to Judas and his men that Demetrius son
of Seleucus had sailed into the harbor of Tripolis with a strong army
and a fleet, 2 and had taken possession of the country, having made
away with Antiochus and his guardian Lysias.
3 Now a certain Alcimus, who had formerly been high priest but had
willfully defiled himself in the times of separation, realized that there
was no way for him to be safe or to have access again to the holy altar,
4 and went to King Demetrius in about the one hundred fifty-first year,
presenting to him a crown of gold and a palm, and besides these some
of the customary olive branches from the temple. During that day he
kept quiet. 5 But he found an opportunity that furthered his mad
purpose when he was invited by Demetrius to a meeting of the council
and was asked about the attitude and intentions of the Jews. He
answered:
6 "Those of the Jews who are called Hasideans, whose leader is Judas
Maccabeus, are keeping up war and stirring up sedition, and will not
let the kingdom attain tranquility. 7 Therefore I have laid aside my
ancestral glory — I mean the high priesthood — and have now come
here, 8 first because I am genuinely concerned for the interests of the
king, and second because I have regard also for my compatriots. For
through the folly of those whom I have mentioned our whole nation is
now in no small misfortune. 9 Since you are acquainted, O king, with
the details of this matter, may it please you to take thought for our
country and our hard-pressed nation with the gracious kindness that
you show to all. 10 For as long as Judas lives, it is impossible for the
government to find peace."

390

2 MACCABEES 391

Appointment of Nicanor and Alcimus
11 When he had said this, the rest of the king's Friends, who were
hostile to Judas, quickly inflamed Demetrius still more. 12 He
immediately chose Nicanor, who had been in command of the
elephants, appointed him governor of Judea, and sent him off 13 with
orders to kill Judas and scatter his troops, and to install Alcimus as high
priest of the great temple. 14 And the Gentiles throughout Judea, who
had fled before Judas, flocked to join Nicanor, thinking that the
misfortunes and calamities of the Jews would mean prosperity for
themselves.
Nicanor seeks friendship with Judas
15 When the Jews heard of Nicanor's coming and the gathering of the
Gentiles, they sprinkled dust on their heads and prayed to him who
established his own people forever and always upholds his own
heritage by manifesting himself. 16 At the command of the leader, they
set out from there immediately and engaged them in battle at a village
called Dessau. 17 Simon, the brother of Judas, had encountered
Nicanor, but had been temporarily checked because of the sudden
consternation created by the enemy.
18 Nevertheless Nicanor, hearing of the valor of Judas and his troops
and their courage in battle for their country, shrank from deciding the
issue by bloodshed. 19 Therefore he sent Posidonius, Theodotus, and
Mattathias to give and receive pledges of friendship. 20 When the
terms had been fully considered, and the leader had informed the
people, and it had appeared that they were of one mind, they agreed
to the covenant. 21 The leaders set a day on which to meet by
themselves. A chariot came forward from each army; seats of honor
were set in place; 22 Judas posted armed men in readiness at key places
to prevent sudden treachery on the part of the enemy; so they duly
held the consultation.
23 Nicanor stayed on in Jerusalem and did nothing out of the way, but
dismissed the flocks of people that had gathered. 24 And he kept Judas
always in his presence; he was warmly attached to the man. 25 He

391

2 MACCABEES 392

urged him to marry and have children; so Judas married, settled down,
and shared the common life.
26 But when Alcimus noticed their goodwill for one another, he took
the covenant that had been made and went to Demetrius. He told him
that Nicanor was disloyal to the government, since he had appointed
that conspirator against the kingdom, Judas, to be his successor. 27 The
king became excited and, provoked by the false accusations of that
depraved man, wrote to Nicanor, stating that he was displeased with
the covenant and commanding him to send Maccabeus to Antioch as a
prisoner without delay.
28 When this message came to Nicanor, he was troubled and grieved
that he had to annul their agreement when the man had done no
wrong. 29 Since it was not possible to oppose the king, he watched for
an opportunity to accomplish this by a stratagem. 30 But Maccabeus,
noticing that Nicanor was more austere in his dealings with him and
was meeting him more rudely than had been his custom, concluded
that this austerity did not spring from the best motives. So he gathered
not a few of his men, and went into hiding from Nicanor. 31 When the
latter became aware that he had been cleverly outwitted by the man,
he went to the great and holy temple while the priests were offering
the customary sacrifices, and commanded them to hand the man over.
32 When they declared on oath that they did not know where the man
was whom he wanted, 33 he stretched out his right hand toward the
sanctuary, and swore this oath: "If you do not hand Judas over to me
as a prisoner, I will level this shrine of God to the ground and tear
down the altar, and build here a splendid temple to Dionysus."
34 Having said this, he went away. Then the priests stretched out their
hands toward heaven and called upon the constant Defender of our
nation, in these words: 35 "O Lord of all, though you have need of
nothing, you were pleased that there should be a temple for your
habitation among us; 36 so now, O holy One, Lord of all holiness, keep
undefiled forever this house that has been so recently purified."

392

2 MACCABEES 393

Death of Razis
37 A certain Razis, one of the elders of Jerusalem, was denounced to
Nicanor as a man who loved his compatriots and was very well thought
of and for his goodwill was called father of the Jews. 38 In former
times, when there was no mingling with the Gentiles, he had been
accused of Judaism, and he had most zealously risked body and life for
Judaism. 39 Nicanor, wishing to exhibit the enmity that he had for the
Jews, sent more than five hundred soldiers to arrest him; 40 for he
thought that by arresting him he would do them an injury. 41 When
the troops were about to capture the tower and were forcing the door
of the courtyard, they ordered that fire be brought and the doors
burned. Being surrounded, Razis fell upon his own sword, 42 preferring
to die nobly rather than to fall into the hands of sinners and suffer
outrages unworthy of his noble birth. 43 But in the heat of the struggle
he did not hit exactly, and the crowd was now rushing in through the
doors. He courageously ran up on the wall, and bravely threw himself
down into the crowd. 44 But as they quickly drew back, a space opened
and he fell in the middle of the empty space. 45 Still alive and aflame
with anger, he rose, and though his blood gushed forth and his
wounds were severe he ran through the crowd; and standing upon a
steep rock, 46 with his blood now completely drained from him, he
tore out his entrails, took them in both hands and hurled them at the
crowd, calling upon the Lord of life and spirit to give them back to him
again. This was the manner of his death.
[2 Maccabees 15]
Death of Nicanor
1 When Nicanor heard that Judas and his troops were in the region of
Samaria, he made plans to attack them with complete safety on the
day of rest. 2 When the Jews who were compelled to follow him said,
"Do not destroy so savagely and barbarously, but show respect for the
day that he who sees all things has honored and hallowed above other
days," 3 the thrice-accursed wretch asked if there were a sovereign in
heaven who had commanded the keeping of the sabbath day. 4 When
they declared, "It is the living Lord himself, the Sovereign in heaven,
who ordered us to observe the seventh day," 5 he replied, "But I am a

393

2 MACCABEES 394

sovereign also, on earth, and I command you to take up arms and
finish the king's business." Nevertheless, he did not succeed in carrying
out his abominable design.
6 This Nicanor in his utter boastfulness and arrogance had determined
to erect a public monument of victory over Judas and his forces. 7 But
Maccabeus did not cease to trust with all confidence that he would get
help from the Lord. 8 He exhorted his troops not to fear the attack of
the Gentiles, but to keep in mind the former times when help had
come to them from heaven, and so to look for the victory that the
Almighty would give them. 9 Encouraging them from the law and the
prophets, and reminding them also of the struggles they had won, he
made them the more eager. 10 When he had aroused their courage, he
issued his orders, at the same time pointing out the perfidy of the
Gentiles and their violation of oaths. 11 He armed each of them not so
much with confidence in shields and spears as with the inspiration of
brave words, and he cheered them all by relating a dream, a sort of
vision, which was worthy of belief.
12 What he saw was this: Onias, who had been high priest, a noble and
good man, of modest bearing and gentle manner, one who spoke
fittingly and had been trained from childhood in all that belongs to
excellence, was praying with outstretched hands for the whole body of
the Jews. 13 Then in the same fashion another appeared, distinguished
by his gray hair and dignity, and of marvelous majesty and authority. 14
And Onias spoke, saying, "This is a man who loves the family of Israel
and prays much for the people and the holy city — Jeremiah, the
prophet of God." 15 Jeremiah stretched out his right hand and gave to
Judas a golden sword, and as he gave it he addressed him thus: 16
"Take this holy sword, a gift from God, with which you will strike down
your adversaries."
17 Encouraged by the words of Judas, so noble and so effective in
arousing valor and awaking courage in the souls of the young, they
determined not to carry on a campaign but to attack bravely, and to
decide the matter by fighting hand to hand with all courage, because
the city and the sanctuary and the temple were in danger. 18 Their
concern for wives and children, and also for brothers and sisters and

394

2 MACCABEES 395

relatives, lay upon them less heavily; their greatest and first fear was
for the consecrated sanctuary. 19 And those who had to remain in the
city were in no little distress, being anxious over the encounter in the
open country.
20 When all were now looking forward to the coming issue, and the
enemy was already close at hand with their army drawn up for battle,
the elephants strategically stationed and the cavalry deployed on the
flanks, 21 Maccabeus, observing the masses that were in front of him
and the varied supply of arms and the savagery of the elephants,
stretched out his hands toward heaven and called upon the Lord who
works wonders; for he knew that it is not by arms, but as the Lord
decides, that he gains the victory for those who deserve it. 22 He called
upon him in these words: "O Lord, you sent your angel in the time of
King Hezekiah of Judea, and he killed fully one hundred eighty-five
thousand in the camp of Sennacherib. 23 So now, O Sovereign of the
heavens, send a good angel to spread terror and trembling before us.
24 By the might of your arm may these blasphemers who come against
your holy people be struck down." With these words he ended his
prayer.
25 Nicanor and his troops advanced with trumpets and battle songs, 26
but Judas and his troops met the enemy in battle with invocations to
God and prayers. 27 So, fighting with their hands and praying to God
in their hearts, they laid low at least thirty-five thousand, and were
greatly gladdened by God's manifestation.
28 When the action was over and they were returning with joy, they
recognized Nicanor, lying dead, in full armor. 29 Then there was
shouting and tumult, and they blessed the Sovereign Lord in the
language of their ancestors. 30 Then the man who was ever in body
and soul the defender of his people, the man who maintained his
youthful goodwill toward his compatriots, ordered them to cut off
Nicanor's head and arm and carry them to Jerusalem. 31 When he
arrived there and had called his compatriots together and stationed
the priests before the altar, he sent for those who were in the citadel.
32 He showed them the vile Nicanor's head and that profane man's
arm, which had been boastfully stretched out against the holy house of

395

2 MACCABEES 396

the Almighty. 33 He cut out the tongue of the ungodly Nicanor and
said that he would feed it piecemeal to the birds and would hang up
these rewards of his folly opposite the sanctuary. 34 And they all,
looking to heaven, blessed the Lord who had manifested himself,
saying, "Blessed is he who has kept his own place undefiled!" 35 Judas
hung Nicanor's head from the citadel, a clear and conspicuous sign to
everyone of the help of the Lord. 36 And they all decreed by public
vote never to let this day go unobserved, but to celebrate the
thirteenth day of the twelfth month — which is called Adar in the
Aramaic language — the day before Mordecai's day.
Epilogue
37 This, then, is how matters turned out with Nicanor, and from that
time the city has been in the possession of the Hebrews. So I will here
end my story.
38 If it is well told and to the point, that is what I myself desired; if it is
poorly done and mediocre, that was the best I could do. 39 For just as it
is harmful to drink wine alone, or, again, to drink water alone, while
wine mixed with water is sweet and delicious and enhances one's
enjoyment, so also the style of the story delights the ears of those who
read the work. And here will be the end.

396

1 ESDRAS 397

1 ESDRAS
Introduction
NOTE: The books from 1 Esdras through 3 Maccabees are recognized as
Deuterocanonical Scripture by the Greek and Russian Orthodox
Churches. They are not so recognized by the Roman Catholic Church,
but 1 Esdras and the Prayer of Manasseh (together with 2 Esdras) are
placed in an appendix to the Latin Vulgate Bible.
First Esdras is one of several books bearing the name of Ezra (see EzraNehemiah). Known in the Apocrypha as 1 Esdras, the book is called 3
Esdras in the Latin Vulgate Bible where (since the Council of Trent) it
has been placed in an appendix after the New Testament. With one
significant exception, the book repeats, with minor variations, sections
from 2 Chronicles and Ezra-Nehemiah (see Introduction to Chronicles
and Introduction to Ezra-Nehemiah). First Esdras begins with King
Josiah's Passover celebration in Jerusalem in 622 BCE, reproducing the
substance of 2 Chr 35.1-36.21. It continues directly with Ezra 1-10 (all of
Ezra), followed with Nehemiah 8, which describes events that
ostensibly transpired in 458. The only material unique to 1 Esdras is the
story of the three young bodyguards in the court of King Darius (3.15.6). Although the book is largely copied from earlier biblical books,
through its selection and organization of material, it offers a distinct
perspective on the history it recounts. It traces a trajectory between
two feasts (1.1-24 and 9.49-55), and thereby seems more upbeat than
Ezra-Nehemiah's longer report about the difficulties of the return to
the land and the restoration of worship and community.
HT

HT

TH

397

TH

1 ESDRAS 398

The divisions of the books are:
• 1.1-24: An ideal state of affairs: Josiah's Passover celebration
(=2 Chr 35.1-27)
• 1.25-58: Decline and destruction (=2 Chr 36.1-21)
• 2.1-9.55: Stages of return and restoration (=Ezra 1-10 and
Nehemiah 8)
The book begins and concludes with a feast in Jerusalem in front of the
Temple — suggesting that the Temple, significant in other postexilic
writings, is a central issue of 1 Esdras. The decline between the feasts is
brief, followed immediately with a gradual but effective restoration of
altar, Temple, and community. Whereas Ezra-Nehemiah highlights
disjunctions between the past and the return, 1 Esdras, like Chronicles,
underscores continuities, sometimes by conflating events.
First Esdras also contrasts with Ezra-Nehemiah in glorifying leaders,
especially the Davidic heir Zerubbabel, whose role it expands
significantly. In particular, the lengthy story of the three young men in
Darius's court focuses the book upon Zerubbabel's achievements. This
story portrays Zerubbabel as the wise hero who wins Darius's support
and initiates the construction of the Temple. Ezra the priest also rises
to a higher level, being called explicitly a high priest (Chief Priest may
refer to Ezra as well). Ezra's prominence is further increased by the
absence of collaboration with Nehemiah in the book. This enhances his
prominence in the restoration and the climax of the entire story (8.199.55).
This book has been preserved in Greek and reflects Hellenistic values
and vocabulary. Although the latest events it narrates are from the
mid-fifth century, it probably dates in its current form from the second
century BCE. It is unclear whether the book is a translation of an earlier
Hebrew or Aramaic version (possibly as ancient as Ezra-Nehemiah) or a
late adaptation of 2 Chronicles and Ezra-Nehemiah composed
originally in Greek. The work in Greek was used by Josephus in his
Antiquities, written around 90 CE.
Since the book closely parallels Ezra-Nehemiah, see those books for
more comments and parallel material.

398

1 ESDRAS 399

[1 Esdras 1]
An ideal state of affairs: Josiah's Passover celebration
1 Josiah kept the passover to his Lord in Jerusalem; he killed the
passover lamb on the fourteenth day of the first month, 2 having
placed the priests according to their divisions, arrayed in their
vestments, in the temple of the Lord. 3 He told the Levites, the temple
servants of Israel, that they should sanctify themselves to the Lord and
put the holy ark of the Lord in the house that King Solomon, son of
David, had built; 4 and he said, "You need no longer carry it on your
shoulders. Now worship the Lord your God and serve his people Israel;
prepare yourselves by your families and kindred, 5 in accordance with
the directions of King David of Israel and the magnificence of his son
Solomon. Stand in order in the temple according to the groupings of
the ancestral houses of you Levites, who minister before your kindred
the people of Israel, 6 and kill the passover lamb and prepare the
sacrifices for your kindred, and keep the passover according to the
commandment of the Lord that was given to Moses."
7 To the people who were present Josiah gave thirty thousand lambs
and kids, and three thousand calves; these were given from the king's
possessions, as he promised, to the people and the priests and Levites.
8 Hilkiah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, the chief officers of the temple, gave
to the priests for the passover two thousand six hundred sheep and
three hundred calves. 9 And Jeconiah and Shemaiah and his brother
Nethanel, and Hashabiah and Ochiel and Joram, captains over
thousands, gave the Levites for the passover five thousand sheep and
seven hundred calves.
10 This is what took place. The priests and the Levites, having the
unleavened bread, stood in proper order according to kindred 11 and
the grouping of the ancestral houses, before the people, to make the
offering to the Lord as it is written in the book of Moses; this they did
in the morning. 12 They roasted the passover lamb with fire, as
required; and they boiled the sacrifices in bronze pots and caldrons,
with a pleasing odor, 13 and carried them to all the people. Afterward
they prepared the passover for themselves and for their kindred the
priests, the sons of Aaron, 14 because the priests were offering the fat

399

1 ESDRAS 400

until nightfall; so the Levites prepared it for themselves and for their
kindred the priests, the sons of Aaron. 15 The temple singers, the sons
of Asaph, were in their place according to the arrangement made by
David, and also Asaph, Zechariah, and Eddinus, who represented the
king. 16 The gatekeepers were at each gate; no one needed to
interrupt his daily duties, for their kindred the Levites prepared the
passover for them.
17 So the things that had to do with the sacrifices to the Lord were
accomplished that day: the passover was kept 18 and the sacrifices
were offered on the altar of the Lord, according to the command of
King Josiah. 19 And the people of Israel who were present at that time
kept the passover and the festival of unleavened bread seven days. 20
No passover like it had been kept in Israel since the times of the
prophet Samuel; 21 none of the kings of Israel had kept such a passover
as was kept by Josiah and the priests and Levites and the people of
Judah and all of Israel who were living in Jerusalem. 22 In the
eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah this passover was kept.
23 And the deeds of Josiah were upright in the sight of the Lord, for his
heart was full of godliness. 24 In ancient times the events of his reign
have been recorded — concerning those who sinned and acted
wickedly toward the Lord beyond any other people or kingdom, and
how they grieved the Lord deeply, so that the words of the Lord fell
upon Israel.
Decline and destruction
25 After all these acts of Josiah, it happened that Pharaoh, king of
Egypt, went to make war at Carchemish on the Euphrates, and Josiah
went out against him. 26 And the king of Egypt sent word to him
saying, "What have we to do with each other, O king of Judea? 27 I
was not sent against you by the Lord God, for my war is at the
Euphrates. And now the Lord is with me! The Lord is with me, urging
me on! Stand aside, and do not oppose the Lord."
28 Josiah, however, did not turn back to his chariot, but tried to fight
with him, and did not heed the words of the prophet Jeremiah from

400

1 ESDRAS 401

the mouth of the Lord. 29 He joined battle with him in the plain of
Megiddo, and the commanders came down against King Josiah. 30 The
king said to his servants, "Take me away from the battle, for I am very
weak." And immediately his servants took him out of the line of battle.
31 He got into his second chariot; and after he was brought back to
Jerusalem he died, and was buried in the tomb of his ancestors.
32 In all Judea they mourned for Josiah. The prophet Jeremiah
lamented for Josiah, and the principal men, with the women, have
made lamentation for him to this day; it was ordained that this should
always be done throughout the whole nation of Israel. 33 These things
are written in the book of the histories of the kings of Judea; and every
one of the acts of Josiah, and his splendor, and his understanding of
the law of the Lord, and the things that he had done before, and these
that are now told, are recorded in the book of the kings of Israel and
Judah.
The last kings of Judah
34 The men of the nation took Jeconiah son of Josiah, who was
twenty-three years old, and made him king in succession to his father
Josiah. 35 He reigned three months in Judah and Jerusalem. Then the
king of Egypt deposed him from reigning in Jerusalem, 36 and fined
the nation one hundred talents of silver and one talent of gold. 37 The
king of Egypt made his brother Jehoiakim king of Judea and Jerusalem.
38 Jehoiakim put the nobles in prison, and seized his brother Zarius
and brought him back from Egypt.
39 Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he began to reign in
Judea and Jerusalem; he did what was evil in the sight of the Lord. 40
King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon came up against him; he bound him
with a chain of bronze and took him away to Babylon. 41
Nebuchadnezzar also took some holy vessels of the Lord, and carried
them away, and stored them in his temple in Babylon. 42 But the
things that are reported about Jehoiakim, and his uncleanness and
impiety, are written in the annals of the kings.

401

1 ESDRAS 402

43 His son Jehoiachin became king in his place; when he was made king
he was eighteen years old, 44 and he reigned three months and ten
days in Jerusalem. He did what was evil in the sight of the Lord. 45 A
year later Nebuchadnezzar sent and removed him to Babylon, with the
holy vessels of the Lord, 46 and made Zedekiah king of Judea and
Jerusalem.
Zedekiah was twenty-one years old, and he reigned eleven years. 47 He
also did what was evil in the sight of the Lord, and did not heed the
words that were spoken by the prophet Jeremiah from the mouth of
the Lord. 48 Although King Nebuchadnezzar had made him swear by
the name of the Lord, he broke his oath and rebelled; he stiffened his
neck and hardened his heart and transgressed the laws of the Lord, the
God of Israel. 49 Even the leaders of the people and of the priests
committed many acts of sacrilege and lawlessness beyond all the
unclean deeds of all the nations, and polluted the temple of the Lord
in Jerusalem — the temple that God had made holy.
Jerusalem falls to the Babylonians
50 The God of their ancestors sent his messenger to call them back,
because he would have spared them and his dwelling place. 51 But they
mocked his messengers, and whenever the Lord spoke, they scoffed at
his prophets, 52 until in his anger against his people because of their
ungodly acts he gave command to bring against them the kings of the
Chaldeans. 53 These killed their young men with the sword around
their holy temple, and did not spare young man or young woman, old
man or child, for he gave them all into their hands. 54 They took all the
holy vessels of the Lord, great and small, the treasure chests of the
Lord, and the royal stores, and carried them away to Babylon. 55 They
burned the house of the Lord, broke down the walls of Jerusalem,
burned their towers with fire, 56 and utterly destroyed all its glorious
things. The survivors he led away to Babylon with the sword, 57 and
they were servants to him and to his sons until the Persians began to
reign, in fulfillment of the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah,
58 saying, "Until the land has enjoyed its sabbaths, it shall keep
sabbath all the time of its desolation until the completion of seventy
years."

402

1 ESDRAS 403

[1 Esdras 2]
Stages of return and restoration
1 In the first year of Cyrus as king of the Persians, so that the word of
the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished — 2 the
Lord stirred up the spirit of King Cyrus of the Persians, and he made a
proclamation throughout all his kingdom and also put it in writing:
3 "Thus says Cyrus king of the Persians: The Lord of Israel, the Lord
Most High, has made me king of the world, 4 and he has commanded
me to build him a house at Jerusalem, which is in Judea. 5 If any of
you, therefore, are of his people, may your Lord be with you; go up to
Jerusalem, which is in Judea, and build the house of the Lord of Israel
— he is the Lord who dwells in Jerusalem — 6 and let each of you,
wherever you may live, be helped by the people of your place with
gold and silver, 7 with gifts and with horses and cattle, besides the
other things added as votive offerings for the temple of the Lord that
is in Jerusalem."
8 Then arose the heads of families of the tribes of Judah and Benjamin,
and the priests and the Levites, and all whose spirit the Lord had stirred
to go up to build the house in Jerusalem for the Lord; 9 their neighbors
helped them with everything, with silver and gold, with horses and
cattle, and with a very great number of votive offerings from many
whose hearts were stirred.
10 King Cyrus also brought out the holy vessels of the Lord that
Nebuchadnezzar had carried away from Jerusalem and stored in his
temple of idols. 11 When King Cyrus of the Persians brought these out,
he gave them to Mithridates, his treasurer, 12 and by him they were
given to Sheshbazzar, the governor of Judea. 13 The number of these
was: one thousand gold cups, one thousand silver cups, twenty-nine
silver censers, thirty gold bowls, two thousand four hundred ten silver
bowls, and one thousand other vessels. 14 All the vessels were handed
over, gold and silver, five thousand four hundred sixty-nine, 15 and
they were carried back by Sheshbazzar with the returning exiles from
Babylon to Jerusalem.

403

1 ESDRAS 404

Opposition to the rebuilding of the Temple and the walls of Jerusalem;
The opponents' letter
16 In the time of King Artaxerxes of the Persians, Bishlam, Mithridates,
Tabeel, Rehum, Beltethmus, the scribe Shimshai, and the rest of their
associates, living in Samaria and other places, wrote him the following
letter, against those who were living in Judea and Jerusalem:
17 "To King Artaxerxes our lord, your servants the recorder Rehum and
the scribe Shimshai and the other members of their council, and the
judges in Coelesyria and Phoenicia: 18 Let it now be known to our lord
the king that the Jews who came up from you to us have gone to
Jerusalem and are building that rebellious and wicked city, repairing its
market places and walls and laying the foundations for a temple. 19
Now if this city is built and the walls finished, they will not only refuse
to pay tribute but will even resist kings. 20 Since the building of the
temple is now going on, we think it best not to neglect such a matter,
21 but to speak to our lord the king, in order that, if it seems good to
you, search may be made in the records of your ancestors. 22 You will
find in the annals what has been written about them, and will learn
that this city was rebellious, troubling both kings and other cities, 23
and that the Jews were rebels and kept setting up blockades in it from
of old. That is why this city was laid waste. 24 Therefore we now make
known to you, O lord and king, that if this city is built and its walls
finished, you will no longer have access to Coelesyria and Phoenicia."
25 Then the king, in reply to the recorder Rehum, Beltethmus, the
scribe Shimshai, and the others associated with them and living in
Samaria and Syria and Phoenicia, wrote as follows:
26 "I have read the letter that you sent me. So I ordered search to be
made, and it has been found that this city from of old has fought
against kings, 27 that the people in it were given to rebellion and war,
and that mighty and cruel kings ruled in Jerusalem and exacted tribute
from Coelesyria and Phoenicia. 28 Therefore I have now issued orders
to prevent these people from building the city and to take care that
nothing more be done 29 and that such wicked proceedings go no
further to the annoyance of kings."

404

1 ESDRAS 405

30 Then, when the letter from King Artaxerxes was read, Rehum and
the scribe Shimshai and their associates went quickly to Jerusalem, with
cavalry and a large number of armed troops, and began to hinder the
builders. And the building of the temple in Jerusalem stopped until the
second year of the reign of King Darius of the Persians.
[1 Esdras 3]
Return and restoration under Darius and Zerubbabel; The three young
bodyguards in the court of Darius; The contest planned
1 Now King Darius gave a great banquet for all that were under him,
all that were born in his house, and all the nobles of Media and Persia,
2 and all the satraps and generals and governors that were under him
in the hundred twenty-seven satrapies from India to Ethiopia. 3 They
ate and drank, and when they were satisfied they went away, and King
Darius went to his bedroom; he went to sleep, but woke up again.
4 Then the three young men of the bodyguard, who kept guard over
the person of the king, said to one another, 5 "Let each of us state
what one thing is strongest; and to the one whose statement seems
wisest, King Darius will give rich gifts and great honors of victory. 6 He
shall be clothed in purple, and drink from gold cups, and sleep on a
gold bed, and have a chariot with gold bridles, and a turban of fine
linen, and a necklace around his neck; 7 and because of his wisdom he
shall sit next to Darius and shall be called Kinsman of Darius."
8 Then each wrote his own statement, and they sealed them and put
them under the pillow of King Darius, 9 and said, "When the king
wakes, they will give him the writing; and to the one whose statement
the king and the three nobles of Persia judge to be wisest the victory
shall be given according to what is written." 10 The first wrote, "Wine
is strongest." 11 The second wrote, "The king is strongest." 12 The third
wrote, "Women are strongest, but above all things truth is victor."
13 When the king awoke, they took the writing and gave it to him, and
he read it. 14 Then he sent and summoned all the nobles of Persia and
Media and the satraps and generals and governors and prefects, 15 and
he took his seat in the council chamber, and the writing was read in

405

1 ESDRAS 406

their presence. 16 He said, "Call the young men, and they shall explain
their statements." So they were summoned, and came in. 17 They said
to them, "Explain to us what you have written."
In praise of the strength of wine
Then the first, who had spoken of the strength of wine, began and
said: 18 "Gentlemen, how is wine the strongest? It leads astray the
minds of all who drink it. 19 It makes equal the mind of the king and
the orphan, of the slave and the free, of the poor and the rich. 20 It
turns every thought to feasting and mirth, and forgets all sorrow and
debt. 21 It makes all hearts feel rich, forgets kings and satraps, and
makes everyone talk in millions. 22 When people drink they forget to
be friendly with friends and kindred, and before long they draw their
swords. 23 And when they recover from the wine, they do not
remember what they have done. 24 Gentlemen, is not wine the
strongest, since it forces people to do these things?" When he had said
this, he stopped speaking.
[1 Esdras 4]
In praise of the strength of kings
1 Then the second, who had spoken of the strength of the king, began
to speak: 2 "Gentlemen, are not men strongest, who rule over land and
sea and all that is in them? 3 But the king is stronger; he is their lord
and master, and whatever he says to them they obey. 4 If he tells them
to make war on one another, they do it; and if he sends them out
against the enemy, they go, and conquer mountains, walls, and towers.
5 They kill and are killed, and do not disobey the king's command; if
they win the victory, they bring everything to the king — whatever
spoil they take and everything else. 6 Likewise those who do not serve
in the army or make war but till the soil; whenever they sow and reap,
they bring some to the king; and they compel one another to pay taxes
to the king. 7 And yet he is only one man! If he tells them to kill, they
kill; if he tells them to release, they release; 8 if he tells them to attack,
they attack; if he tells them to lay waste, they lay waste; if he tells
them to build, they build; 9 if he tells them to cut down, they cut
down; if he tells them to plant, they plant. 10 All his people and his

406

1 ESDRAS 407

armies obey him. Furthermore, he reclines, he eats and drinks and
sleeps, 11 but they keep watch around him, and no one may go away to
attend to his own affairs, nor do they disobey him. 12 Gentlemen, why
is not the king the strongest, since he is to be obeyed in this fashion?"
And he stopped speaking.
In praise of the strength of women
13 Then the third, who had spoken of women and truth (and this was
Zerubbabel), began to speak: 14 "Gentlemen, is not the king great, and
are not men many, and is not wine strong? Who is it, then, that rules
them, or has the mastery over them? Is it not women? 15 Women gave
birth to the king and to every people that rules over sea and land. 16
From women they came; and women brought up the very men who
plant the vineyards from which comes wine. 17 Women make men's
clothes; they bring men glory; men cannot exist without women. 18 If
men gather gold and silver or any other beautiful thing, and then see a
woman lovely in appearance and beauty, 19 they let all those things
go, and gape at her, and with open mouths stare at her, and all prefer
her to gold or silver or any other beautiful thing. 20 A man leaves his
own father, who brought him up, and his own country, and clings to
his wife. 21 With his wife he ends his days, with no thought of his
father or his mother or his country. 22 Therefore you must realize that
women rule over you!
"Do you not labor and toil, and bring everything and give it to
women? 23 A man takes his sword, and goes out to travel and rob and
steal and to sail the sea and rivers; 24 he faces lions, and he walks in
darkness, and when he steals and robs and plunders, he brings it back
to the woman he loves. 25 A man loves his wife more than his father or
his mother. 26 Many men have lost their minds because of women, and
have become slaves because of them. 27 Many have perished, or
stumbled, or sinned because of women. 28 And now do you not
believe me?
"Is not the king great in his power? Do not all lands fear to touch him?
29 Yet I have seen him with Apame, the king's concubine, the daughter
of the illustrious Bartacus; she would sit at the king's right hand 30 and

407

1 ESDRAS 408

take the crown from the king's head and put it on her own, and slap
the king with her left hand. 31 At this the king would gaze at her with
mouth agape. If she smiles at him, he laughs; if she loses her temper
with him, he flatters her, so that she may be reconciled to him. 32
Gentlemen, why are not women strong, since they do such things?"
In praise of the strength of truth
33 Then the king and the nobles looked at one another; and he began
to speak about truth: 34 "Gentlemen, are not women strong? The
earth is vast, and heaven is high, and the sun is swift in its course, for it
makes the circuit of the heavens and returns to its place in one day. 35
Is not the one who does these things great? But truth is great, and
stronger than all things. 36 The whole earth calls upon truth, and
heaven blesses it. All God's works quake and tremble, and with him
there is nothing unrighteous. 37 Wine is unrighteous, the king is
unrighteous, women are unrighteous, all human beings are
unrighteous, all their works are unrighteous, and all such things. There
is no truth in them and in their unrighteousness they will perish. 38 But
truth endures and is strong forever, and lives and prevails forever and
ever. 39 With it there is no partiality or preference, but it does what is
righteous instead of anything that is unrighteous or wicked. Everyone
approves its deeds, 40 and there is nothing unrighteous in its
judgment. To it belongs the strength and the kingship and the power
and the majesty of all the ages. Blessed be the God of truth!" 41 When
he stopped speaking, all the people shouted and said, "Great is truth,
and strongest of all!"
Zerubbabel's reward
42 Then the king said to him, "Ask what you wish, even beyond what is
written, and we will give it to you, for you have been found to be the
wisest. You shall sit next to me, and be called my Kinsman." 43 Then he
said to the king, "Remember the vow that you made on the day when
you became king, to build Jerusalem, 44 and to send back all the
vessels that were taken from Jerusalem, which Cyrus set apart when he
began to destroy Babylon, and vowed to send them back there. 45 You
also vowed to build the temple, which the Edomites burned when

408

1 ESDRAS 409

Judea was laid waste by the Chaldeans. 46 And now, O lord the king,
this is what I ask and request of you, and this befits your greatness. I
pray therefore that you fulfill the vow whose fulfillment you vowed to
the King of heaven with your own lips."
47 Then King Darius got up and kissed him, and wrote letters for him
to all the treasurers and governors and generals and satraps, that they
should give safe conduct to him and to all who were going up with
him to build Jerusalem. 48 And he wrote letters to all the governors in
Coelesyria and Phoenicia and to those in Lebanon, to bring cedar
timber from Lebanon to Jerusalem, and to help him build the city. 49
He wrote in behalf of all the Jews who were going up from his
kingdom to Judea, in the interest of their freedom, that no officer or
satrap or governor or treasurer should forcibly enter their doors; 50
that all the country that they would occupy should be theirs without
tribute; that the Idumeans should give up the villages of the Jews that
they held; 51 that twenty talents a year should be given for the
building of the temple until it was completed, 52 and an additional ten
talents a year for burnt offerings to be offered on the altar every day,
in accordance with the commandment to make seventeen offerings; 53
and that all who came from Babylonia to build the city should have
their freedom, they and their children and all the priests who came. 54
He wrote also concerning their support and the priests' vestments in
which they were to minister. 55 He wrote that the support for the
Levites should be provided until the day when the temple would be
finished and Jerusalem built. 56 He wrote that land and wages should
be provided for all who guarded the city. 57 And he sent back from
Babylon all the vessels that Cyrus had set apart; everything that Cyrus
had ordered to be done, he also commanded to be done and to be
sent to Jerusalem.
Zerubbabel's prayer
58 When the young man went out, he lifted up his face to heaven
toward Jerusalem, and praised the King of heaven, saying, 59 "From
you comes the victory; from you comes wisdom, and yours is the glory. I
am your servant. 60 Blessed are you, who have given me wisdom; I give
you thanks, O Lord of our ancestors."

409

1 ESDRAS 410

Preparations for the return
61 So he took the letters, and went to Babylon and told this to all his
kindred. 62 And they praised the God of their ancestors, because he
had given them release and permission 63 to go up and build
Jerusalem and the temple that is called by his name; and they feasted,
with music and rejoicing, for seven days.
[1 Esdras 5]
1 After this the heads of ancestral houses were chosen to go up,
according to their tribes, with their wives and sons and daughters, and
their male and female servants, and their livestock. 2 And Darius sent
with them a thousand cavalry to take them back to Jerusalem in safety,
with the music of drums and flutes; 3 all their kindred were making
merry. And he made them go up with them.
4 These are the names of the men who went up, according to their
ancestral houses in the tribes, over their groups: 5 the priests, the
descendants of Phinehas son of Aaron; Jeshua son of Jozadak son of
Seraiah and Joakim son of Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, of the house of
David, of the lineage of Phares, of the tribe of Judah, 6 who spoke wise
words before King Darius of the Persians, in the second year of his
reign, in the month of Nisan, the first month.
A list of the returning exiles
7 These are the Judeans who came up out of their sojourn in exile,
whom King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon had carried away to Babylon 8
and who returned to Jerusalem and the rest of Judea, each to his own
town. They came with Zerubbabel and Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah,
Resaiah, Eneneus, Mordecai, Beelsarus, Aspharasus, Reeliah, Rehum,
and Baanah, their leaders.
9 The number of those of the nation and their leaders: the descendants
of Parosh, two thousand one hundred seventy-two. The descendants of
Shephatiah, four hundred seventy-two. 10 The descendants of Arah,
seven hundred fifty-six. 11 The descendants of Pahath-moab, of the

410

1 ESDRAS 411

descendants of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand eight hundred twelve.
12 The descendants of Elam, one thousand two hundred fifty-four. The
descendants of Zattu, nine hundred forty-five. The descendants of
Chorbe, seven hundred five. The descendants of Bani, six hundred
forty-eight. 13 The descendants of Bebai, six hundred twenty-three. The
descendants of Azgad, one thousand three hundred twenty-two. 14
The descendants of Adonikam, six hundred sixty-seven. The
descendants of Bigvai, two thousand sixty-six. The descendants of Adin,
four hundred fifty-four. 15 The descendants of Ater, namely of
Hezekiah, ninety-two. The descendants of Kilan and Azetas, sixtyseven. The descendants of Azaru, four hundred thirty-two. 16 The
descendants of Annias, one hundred one. The descendants of Arom.
The descendants of Bezai, three hundred twenty-three. The
descendants of Arsiphurith, one hundred twelve. 17 The descendants of
Baiterus, three thousand five. The descendants of Bethlomon, one
hundred twenty-three. 18 Those from Netophah, fifty-five. Those from
Anathoth, one hundred fifty-eight. Those from Bethasmoth, forty-two.
19 Those from Kiriatharim, twenty-five. Those from Chephirah and
Beeroth, seven hundred forty-three. 20 The Chadiasans and
Ammidians, four hundred twenty-two. Those from Kirama and Geba,
six hundred twenty-one. 21 Those from Macalon, one hundred twentytwo. Those from Betolio, fifty-two. The descendants of Niphish, one
hundred fifty-six. 22 The descendants of the other Calamolalus and
Ono, seven hundred twenty-five. The descendants of Jerechus, three
hundred forty-five. 23 The descendants of Senaah, three thousand
three hundred thirty.
24 The priests: the descendants of Jedaiah son of Jeshua, of the
descendants of Anasib, nine hundred seventy-two. The descendants of
Immer, one thousand and fifty-two. 25 The descendants of Pashhur,
one thousand two hundred forty-seven. The descendants of Charme,
one thousand seventeen.
26 The Levites: the descendants of Jeshua and Kadmiel and Bannas and
Sudias, seventy-four. 27 The temple singers: the descendants of Asaph,
one hundred twenty-eight. 28 The gatekeepers: the descendants of
Shallum, the descendants of Ater, the descendants of Talmon, the

411

1 ESDRAS 412

descendants of Akkub, the descendants of Hatita, the descendants of
Shobai, in all one hundred thirty-nine.
29 The temple servants: the descendants of Esau, the descendants of
Hasupha, the descendants of Tabbaoth, the descendants of Keros, the
descendants of Sua, the descendants of Padon, the descendants of
Lebanah, the descendants of Hagabah, 30 the descendants of Akkub,
the descendants of Uthai, the descendants of Ketab, the descendants
of Hagab, the descendants of Subai, the descendants of Hana, the
descendants of Cathua, the descendants of Geddur, 31 the descendants
of Jairus, the descendants of Daisan, the descendants of Noeba, the
descendants of Chezib, the descendants of Gazera, the descendants of
Uzza, the descendants of Phinoe, the descendants of Hasrah, the
descendants of Basthai, the descendants of Asnah, the descendants of
Maani, the descendants of Nephisim, the descendants of Acuph, the
descendants of Hakupha, the descendants of Asur, the descendants of
Pharakim, the descendants of Bazluth, 32 the descendants of Mehida,
the descendants of Cutha, the descendants of Charea, the descendants
of Barkos, the descendants of Serar, the descendants of Temah, the
descendants of Neziah, the descendants of Hatipha.
33 The descendants of Solomon's servants: the descendants of
Assaphioth, the descendants of Peruda, the descendants of Jaalah, the
descendants of Lozon, the descendants of Isdael, the descendants of
Shephatiah, 34 the descendants of Agia, the descendants of Pocherethhazzebaim, the descendants of Sarothie, the descendants of Masiah,
the descendants of Gas, the descendants of Addus, the descendants of
Subas, the descendants of Apherra, the descendants of Barodis, the
descendants of Shaphat, the descendants of Allon.
35 All the temple servants and the descendants of Solomon's servants
were three hundred seventy-two.
36 The following are those who came up from Tel-melah and Telharsha, under the leadership of Cherub, Addan, and Immer, 37 though
they could not prove by their ancestral houses or lineage that they
belonged to Israel: the descendants of Delaiah son of Tobiah, and the
descendants of Nekoda, six hundred fifty-two.

412

1 ESDRAS 413

38 Of the priests the following had assumed the priesthood but were
not found registered: the descendants of Habaiah, the descendants of
Hakkoz, and the descendants of Jaddus who had married Agia, one of
the daughters of Barzillai, and was called by his name. 39 When a
search was made in the register and the genealogy of these men was
not found, they were excluded from serving as priests. 40 And
Nehemiah and Attharias told them not to share in the holy things until
a high priest should appear wearing Urim and Thummim.
41 All those of Israel, twelve or more years of age, besides male and
female servants, were forty-two thousand three hundred sixty; 42 their
male and female servants were seven thousand three hundred thirtyseven; there were two hundred forty-five musicians and singers. 43
There were four hundred thirty-five camels, and seven thousand thirtysix horses, two hundred forty-five mules, and five thousand five
hundred twenty-five donkeys.
44 Some of the heads of families, when they came to the temple of
God that is in Jerusalem, vowed that, to the best of their ability, they
would erect the house on its site, 45 and that they would give to the
sacred treasury for the work a thousand minas of gold, five thousand
minas of silver, and one hundred priests' vestments.
46 The priests, the Levites, and some of the people settled in Jerusalem
and its vicinity; and the temple singers, the gatekeepers, and all Israel
in their towns.
Work on the Temple commences and is interrupted; Building the altar
and resumption of sacrifices
47 When the seventh month came, and the Israelites were all in their
own homes, they gathered with a single purpose in the square before
the first gate toward the east. 48 Then Jeshua son of Jozadak, with his
fellow priests, and Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, with his kinsmen, took
their places and prepared the altar of the God of Israel, 49 to offer
burnt offerings upon it, in accordance with the directions in the book
of Moses the man of God. 50 And some joined them from the other
peoples of the land. And they erected the altar in its place, for all the

413

1 ESDRAS 414

peoples of the land were hostile to them and were stronger than they;
and they offered sacrifices at the proper times and burnt offerings to
the Lord morning and evening. 51 They kept the festival of booths, as it
is commanded in the law, and offered the proper sacrifices every day,
52 and thereafter the regular offerings and sacrifices on sabbaths and
at new moons and at all the consecrated feasts. 53 And all who had
made any vow to God began to offer sacrifices to God, from the new
moon of the seventh month, though the temple of God was not yet
built. 54 They gave money to the masons and the carpenters, and food
and drink 55 and carts to the Sidonians and the Tyrians, to bring cedar
logs from Lebanon and convey them in rafts to the harbor of Joppa,
according to the decree that they had in writing from King Cyrus of the
Persians.
The Temple's foundation is laid
56 In the second year after their coming to the temple of God in
Jerusalem, in the second month, Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and
Jeshua son of Jozadak made a beginning, together with their kindred
and the levitical priests and all who had come back to Jerusalem from
exile; 57 and they laid the foundation of the temple of God on the new
moon of the second month in the second year after they came to Judea
and Jerusalem. 58 They appointed the Levites who were twenty or
more years of age to have charge of the work of the Lord. And Jeshua
arose, and his sons and kindred and his brother Kadmiel and the sons
of Jeshua Emadabun and the sons of Joda son of Iliadun, with their
sons and kindred, all the Levites, pressing forward the work on the
house of God with a single purpose.
So the builders built the temple of the Lord. 59 And the priests stood
arrayed in their vestments, with musical instruments and trumpets, and
the Levites, the sons of Asaph, with cymbals, 60 praising the Lord and
blessing him, according to the directions of King David of Israel; 61 they
sang hymns, giving thanks to the Lord, "For his goodness and his glory
are forever upon all Israel." 62 And all the people sounded trumpets
and shouted with a great shout, praising the Lord for the erection of
the house of the Lord. 63 Some of the levitical priests and heads of
ancestral houses, old men who had seen the former house, came to the

414

1 ESDRAS 415

building of this one with outcries and loud weeping, 64 while many
came with trumpets and a joyful noise, 65 so that the people could not
hear the trumpets because of the weeping of the people.
Enemies interrupt the work of the returned exiles
For the multitude sounded the trumpets loudly, so that the sound was
heard far away; 66 and when the enemies of the tribe of Judah and
Benjamin heard it, they came to find out what the sound of the
trumpets meant. 67 They learned that those who had returned from
exile were building the temple for the Lord God of Israel. 68 So they
approached Zerubbabel and Jeshua and the heads of the ancestral
houses and said to them, "We will build with you. 69 For we obey your
Lord just as you do and we have been sacrificing to him ever since the
days of King Esar-haddon of the Assyrians, who brought us here." 70
But Zerubbabel and Jeshua and the heads of the ancestral houses in
Israel said to them, "You have nothing to do with us in building the
house for the Lord our God, 71 for we alone will build it for the Lord of
Israel, as Cyrus, the king of the Persians, has commanded us." 72 But
the peoples of the land pressed hard upon those in Judea, cut off their
supplies, and hindered their building; 73 and by plots and
demagoguery and uprisings they prevented the completion of the
building as long as King Cyrus lived. They were kept from building for
two years, until the reign of Darius.
[1 Esdras 6]
Temple work resumes
1 Now in the second year of the reign of Darius, the prophets Haggai
and Zechariah son of Iddo prophesied to the Jews who were in Judea
and Jerusalem; they prophesied to them in the name of the Lord God
of Israel. 2 Then Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and Jeshua son of Jozadak
began to build the house of the Lord that is in Jerusalem, with the help
of the prophets of the Lord who were with them.
3 At the same time Sisinnes the governor of Syria and Phoenicia and
Sathrabuzanes and their associates came to them and said, 4 "By
whose order are you building this house and this roof and finishing all

415

1 ESDRAS 416

the other things? And who are the builders that are finishing these
things?" 5 Yet the elders of the Jews were dealt with kindly, for the
providence of the Lord was over the captives; 6 they were not
prevented from building until word could be sent to Darius concerning
them and a report made.
7 A copy of the letter that Sisinnes the governor of Syria and Phoenicia,
and Sathrabuzanes, and their associates the local rulers in Syria and
Phoenicia, wrote and sent to Darius:
8 "To King Darius, greetings. Let it be fully known to our lord the king
that, when we went to the country of Judea and entered the city of
Jerusalem, we found the elders of the Jews, who had been in exile, 9
building in the city of Jerusalem a great new house for the Lord, of
hewn stone, with costly timber laid in the walls. 10 These operations
are going on rapidly, and the work is prospering in their hands and
being completed with all splendor and care. 11 Then we asked these
elders, 'At whose command are you building this house and laying the
foundations of this structure?' 12 In order that we might inform you in
writing who the leaders are, we questioned them and asked them for a
list of the names of those who are at their head. 13 They answered us,
'We are the servants of the Lord who created the heaven and the
earth. 14 The house was built many years ago by a king of Israel who
was great and strong, and it was finished. 15 But when our ancestors
sinned against the Lord of Israel who is in heaven, and provoked him,
he gave them over into the hands of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon,
king of the Chaldeans; 16 and they pulled down the house, and burned
it, and carried the people away captive to Babylon. 17 But in the first
year that Cyrus reigned over the country of Babylonia, King Cyrus
wrote that this house should be rebuilt. 18 And the holy vessels of gold
and of silver, which Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the house in
Jerusalem and stored in his own temple, these King Cyrus took out
again from the temple in Babylon, and they were delivered to
Zerubbabel and Sheshbazzar the governor 19 with the command that
he should take all these vessels back and put them in the temple at
Jerusalem, and that this temple of the Lord should be rebuilt on its site.
20 Then this Sheshbazzar, after coming here, laid the foundations of
the house of the Lord that is in Jerusalem. Although it has been in

416

1 ESDRAS 417

process of construction from that time until now, it has not yet reached
completion.' 21 Now therefore, O king, if it seems wise to do so, let
search be made in the royal archives of our lord the king that are in
Babylon; 22 if it is found that the building of the house of the Lord in
Jerusalem was done with the consent of King Cyrus, and if it is
approved by our lord the king, let him send us directions concerning
these things."
23 Then Darius commanded that search be made in the royal archives
that were deposited in Babylon. And in Ecbatana, the fortress that is in
the country of Media, a scroll was found in which this was recorded: 24
"In the first year of the reign of King Cyrus, he ordered the building of
the house of the Lord in Jerusalem, where they sacrifice with perpetual
fire; 25 its height to be sixty cubits and its width sixty cubits, with three
courses of hewn stone and one course of new native timber; the cost to
be paid from the treasury of King Cyrus; 26 and that the holy vessels of
the house of the Lord, both of gold and of silver, which
Nebuchadnezzar took out of the house in Jerusalem and carried away
to Babylon, should be restored to the house in Jerusalem, to be placed
where they had been."
27 So Darius commanded Sisinnes the governor of Syria and Phoenicia,
and Sathrabuzanes, and their associates, and those who were
appointed as local rulers in Syria and Phoenicia, to keep away from the
place, and to permit Zerubbabel, the servant of the Lord and governor
of Judea, and the elders of the Jews to build this house of the Lord on
its site. 28 "And I command that it be built completely, and that full
effort be made to help those who have returned from the exile of
Judea, until the house of the Lord is finished; 29 and that out of the
tribute of Coelesyria and Phoenicia a portion be scrupulously given to
these men, that is, to Zerubbabel the governor, for sacrifices to the
Lord, for bulls and rams and lambs, 30 and likewise wheat and salt and
wine and oil, regularly every year, without quibbling, for daily use as
the priests in Jerusalem may indicate, 31 in order that libations may be
made to the Most High God for the king and his children, and prayers
be offered for their lives."

417

1 ESDRAS 418

32 He commanded that if anyone should transgress or nullify any of the
things herein written, a beam should be taken out of the house of the
perpetrator, who then should be impaled upon it, and all property
forfeited to the king.
33 "Therefore may the Lord, whose name is there called upon, destroy
every king and nation that shall stretch out their hands to hinder or
damage that house of the Lord in Jerusalem.
34 "I, King Darius, have decreed that it be done with all diligence as
here prescribed."
[1 Esdras 7]
The Temple completed
1 Then Sisinnes the governor of Coelesyria and Phoenicia, and
Sathrabuzanes, and their associates, following the orders of King
Darius, 2 supervised the holy work with very great care, assisting the
elders of the Jews and the chief officers of the temple. 3 The holy work
prospered, while the prophets Haggai and Zechariah prophesied; 4 and
they completed it by the command of the Lord God of Israel. So with
the consent of Cyrus and Darius and Artaxerxes, kings of the Persians, 5
the holy house was finished by the twenty-third day of the month of
Adar, in the sixth year of King Darius. 6 And the people of Israel, the
priests, the Levites, and the rest of those who returned from exile who
joined them, did according to what was written in the book of Moses.
7 They offered at the dedication of the temple of the Lord one
hundred bulls, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs, 8 and twelve
male goats for the sin of all Israel, according to the number of the
twelve leaders of the tribes of Israel; 9 and the priests and the Levites
stood arrayed in their vestments, according to kindred, for the services
of the Lord God of Israel in accordance with the book of Moses; and
the gatekeepers were at each gate.

418

1 ESDRAS 419

The Passover celebration
10 The people of Israel who came from exile kept the passover on the
fourteenth day of the first month, after the priests and the Levites
were purified together. 11 Not all of the returned captives were
purified, but the Levites were all purified together, 12 and they
sacrificed the passover lamb for all the returned captives and for their
kindred the priests and for themselves. 13 The people of Israel who had
returned from exile ate it, all those who had separated themselves
from the abominations of the peoples of the land and sought the Lord.
14 They also kept the festival of unleavened bread seven days, rejoicing
before the Lord, 15 because he had changed the will of the king of the
Assyrians concerning them, to strengthen their hands for the service of
the Lord God of Israel.
[1 Esdras 8 ]
Final return and restoration under Ezra; Ezra's credentials and mission
1 After these things, when Artaxerxes, the king of the Persians, was
reigning, Ezra came, the son of Seraiah, son of Azariah, son of Hilkiah,
son of Shallum, 2 son of Zadok, son of Ahitub, son of Amariah, son of
Uzzi, son of Bukki, son of Abishua, son of Phineas, son of Eleazar, son
of Aaron the high priest. 3 This Ezra came up from Babylon as a scribe
skilled in the law of Moses, which was given by the God of Israel; 4 and
the king showed him honor, for he found favor before the king in all
his requests. 5 There came up with him to Jerusalem some of the
people of Israel and some of the priests and Levites and temple singers
and gatekeepers and temple servants, 6 in the seventh year of the
reign of Artaxerxes, in the fifth month (this was the king's seventh
year); for they left Babylon on the new moon of the first month and
arrived in Jerusalem on the new moon of the fifth month, by the
prosperous journey that the Lord gave them. 7 For Ezra possessed great
knowledge, so that he omitted nothing from the law of the Lord or the
commandments, but taught all Israel all the ordinances and judgments.

419

1 ESDRAS 420

The letter of Artaxerxes authorizing Ezra
8 The following is a copy of the written commission from King
Artaxerxes that was delivered to Ezra the priest and reader of the law
of the Lord:
9 "King Artaxerxes to Ezra the priest and reader of the law of the Lord,
greeting. 10 In accordance with my gracious decision, I have given
orders that those of the Jewish nation and of the priests and Levites
and others in our realm, those who freely choose to do so, may go with
you to Jerusalem. 11 Let as many as are so disposed, therefore, leave
with you, just as I and the seven Friends who are my counselors have
decided, 12 in order to look into matters in Judea and Jerusalem, in
accordance with what is in the law of the Lord, 13 and to carry to
Jerusalem the gifts for the Lord of Israel that I and my Friends have
vowed, and to collect for the Lord in Jerusalem all the gold and silver
that may be found in the country of Babylonia, 14 together with what
is given by the nation for the temple of their Lord that is in Jerusalem,
both gold and silver for bulls and rams and lambs and what goes with
them, 15 so as to offer sacrifices on the altar of their Lord that is in
Jerusalem. 16 Whatever you and your kindred are minded to do with
the gold and silver, perform it in accordance with the will of your God;
17 deliver the holy vessels of the Lord that are given you for the use of
the temple of your God that is in Jerusalem. 18 And whatever else
occurs to you as necessary for the temple of your God, you may provide
out of the royal treasury.
19 "I, King Artaxerxes, have commanded the treasurers of Syria and
Phoenicia that whatever Ezra the priest and reader of the law of the
Most High God sends for, they shall take care to give him, 20 up to a
hundred talents of silver, and likewise up to a hundred cors of wheat, a
hundred baths of wine, and salt in abundance. 21 Let all things
prescribed in the law of God be scrupulously fulfilled for the Most High
God, so that wrath may not come upon the kingdom of the king and
his sons. 22 You are also informed that no tribute or any other tax is to
be laid on any of the priests or Levites or temple singers or gatekeepers
or temple servants or persons employed in this temple, and that no one
has authority to impose any tax on them.

420

1 ESDRAS 421

23 "And you, Ezra, according to the wisdom of God, appoint judges
and justices to judge all those who know the law of your God,
throughout all Syria and Phoenicia; and you shall teach it to those who
do not know it. 24 All who transgress the law of your God or the law of
the kingdom shall be strictly punished, whether by death or some
other punishment, either fine or imprisonment."
Ezra report: leading the exiles to Jerusalem
25 Then Ezra the scribe said, "Blessed be the Lord alone, who put this
into the heart of the king, to glorify his house that is in Jerusalem, 26
and who honored me in the sight of the king and his counselors and all
his Friends and nobles. 27 I was encouraged by the help of the Lord my
God, and I gathered men from Israel to go up with me."
28 These are the leaders, according to their ancestral houses and their
groups, who went up with me from Babylon, in the reign of King
Artaxerxes: 29 Of the descendants of Phineas, Gershom. Of the
descendants of Ithamar, Gamael. Of the descendants of David, Hattush
son of Shecaniah. 30 Of the descendants of Parosh, Zechariah, and with
him a hundred fifty men enrolled. 31 Of the descendants of Pahathmoab, Eliehoenai son of Zerahiah, and with him two hundred men. 32
Of the descendants of Zattu, Shecaniah son of Jahaziel, and with him
three hundred men. Of the descendants of Adin, Obed son of
Jonathan, and with him two hundred fifty men. 33 Of the descendants
of Elam, Jeshaiah son of Gotholiah, and with him seventy men. 34 Of
the descendants of Shephatiah, Zeraiah son of Michael, and with him
seventy men. 35 Of the descendants of Joab, Obadiah son of Jehiel,
and with him two hundred twelve men. 36 Of the descendants of Bani,
Shelomith son of Josiphiah, and with him a hundred sixty men. 37 Of
the descendants of Bebai, Zechariah son of Bebai, and with him
twenty-eight men. 38 Of the descendants of Azgad, Johanan son of
Hakkatan, and with him a hundred ten men. 39 Of the descendants of
Adonikam, the last ones, their names being Eliphelet, Jeuel, and
Shemaiah, and with them seventy men. 40 Of the descendants of
Bigvai, Uthai son of Istalcurus, and with him seventy men.

421

1 ESDRAS 422

41 I assembled them at the river called Theras, and we encamped there
three days, and I inspected them. 42 When I found there none of the
descendants of the priests or of the Levites, 43 I sent word to Eliezar,
Iduel, Maasmas, 44 Elnathan, Shemaiah, Jarib, Nathan, Elnathan,
Zechariah, and Meshullam, who were leaders and men of
understanding; 45 I told them to go to Iddo, who was the leading man
at the place of the treasury, 46 and ordered them to tell Iddo and his
kindred and the treasurers at that place to send us men to serve as
priests in the house of our Lord. 47 And by the mighty hand of our
Lord they brought us competent men of the descendants of Mahli son
of Levi, son of Israel, namely Sherebiah with his descendants and
kinsmen, eighteen; 48 also Hashabiah and Annunus and his brother
Jeshaiah, of the descendants of Hananiah, and their descendants,
twenty men; 49 and of the temple servants, whom David and the
leaders had given for the service of the Levites, two hundred twenty
temple servants; the list of all their names was reported.
50 There I proclaimed a fast for the young men before our Lord, to
seek from him a prosperous journey for ourselves and for our children
and the livestock that were with us. 51 For I was ashamed to ask the
king for foot soldiers and cavalry and an escort to keep us safe from
our adversaries; 52 for we had said to the king, "The power of our Lord
will be with those who seek him, and will support them in every way."
53 And again we prayed to our Lord about these things, and we found
him very merciful.
54 Then I set apart twelve of the leaders of the priests, Sherebiah and
Hashabiah, and ten of their kinsmen with them; 55 and I weighed out
to them the silver and the gold and the holy vessels of the house of our
Lord, which the king himself and his counselors and the nobles and all
Israel had given. 56 I weighed and gave to them six hundred fifty
talents of silver, and silver vessels worth a hundred talents, and a
hundred talents of gold, 57 and twenty golden bowls, and twelve
bronze vessels of fine bronze that glittered like gold. 58 And I said to
them, "You are holy to the Lord, and the vessels are holy, and the silver
and the gold are vowed to the Lord, the Lord of our ancestors. 59 Be
watchful and on guard until you deliver them to the leaders of the
priests and the Levites, and to the heads of the ancestral houses of

422

1 ESDRAS 423

Israel, in Jerusalem, in the chambers of the house of our Lord." 60 So
the priests and the Levites who took the silver and the gold and the
vessels that had been in Jerusalem carried them to the temple of the
Lord.
Arrival in Jerusalem
61 We left the river Theras on the twelfth day of the first month; and
we arrived in Jerusalem by the mighty hand of our Lord, which was
upon us; he delivered us from every enemy on the way, and so we
came to Jerusalem. 62 When we had been there three days, the silver
and the gold were weighed and delivered in the house of our Lord to
the priest Meremoth son of Uriah; 63 with him was Eleazar son of
Phinehas, and with them were Jozabad son of Jeshua and Moeth son
of Binnui, the Levites. 64 The whole was counted and weighed, and the
weight of everything was recorded at that very time. 65 And those
who had returned from exile offered sacrifices to the Lord, the God of
Israel, twelve bulls for all Israel, ninety-six rams, 66 seventy-two lambs,
and as a thank offering twelve male goats — all as a sacrifice to the
Lord. 67 They delivered the king's orders to the royal stewards and to
the governors of Coelesyria and Phoenicia; and these officials honored
the people and the temple of the Lord.
The crisis of mixed marriages in Judah
68 After these things had been done, the leaders came to me and said,
69 "The people of Israel and the rulers and the priests and the Levites
have not put away from themselves the alien peoples of the land and
their pollutions, the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the
Jebusites, the Moabites, the Egyptians, and the Edomites. 70 For they
and their descendants have married the daughters of these people,
and the holy race has been mixed with the alien peoples of the land;
and from the beginning of this matter the leaders and the nobles have
been sharing in this iniquity."

423

1 ESDRAS 424

Ezra's response to the crisis: mourning and prayer
71 As soon as I heard these things I tore my garments and my holy
mantle, and pulled out hair from my head and beard, and sat down in
anxiety and grief. 72 And all who were ever moved at the word of the
Lord of Israel gathered around me, as I mourned over this iniquity, and
I sat grief-stricken until the evening sacrifice. 73 Then I rose from my
fast, with my garments and my holy mantle torn, and kneeling down
and stretching out my hands to the Lord 74 I said,
"O Lord, I am ashamed and confused before your face. 75 For our sins
have risen higher than our heads, and our mistakes have mounted up
to heaven 76 from the times of our ancestors, and we are in great sin
to this day. 77 Because of our sins and the sins of our ancestors, we
with our kindred and our kings and our priests were given over to the
kings of the earth, to the sword and exile and plundering, in shame
until this day. 78 And now in some measure mercy has come to us from
you, O Lord, to leave to us a root and a name in your holy place, 79 and
to uncover a light for us in the house of the Lord our God, and to give
us food in the time of our servitude. 80 Even in our bondage we were
not forsaken by our Lord, but he brought us into favor with the kings
of the Persians, so that they have given us food 81 and glorified the
temple of our Lord, and raised Zion from desolation, to give us a
stronghold in Judea and Jerusalem.
82 "And now, O Lord, what shall we say, when we have these things?
For we have transgressed your commandments, which you gave by
your servants the prophets, saying, 83 'The land that you are entering
to take possession of is a land polluted with the pollution of the aliens
of the land, and they have filled it with their uncleanness. 84 Therefore
do not give your daughters in marriage to their descendants, and do
not take their daughters for your descendants; 85 do not seek ever to
have peace with them, so that you may be strong and eat the good
things of the land and leave it for an inheritance to your children
forever.' 86 And all that has happened to us has come about because
of our evil deeds and our great sins. For you, O Lord, lifted the burden
of our sins 87 and gave us such a root as this; but we turned back again
to transgress your law by mixing with the uncleanness of the peoples

424

1 ESDRAS 425

of the land. 88 Were you not angry enough with us to destroy us
without leaving a root or seed or name? 89 O Lord of Israel, you are
faithful; for we are left as a root to this day. 90 See, we are now before
you in our iniquities; for we can no longer stand in your presence
because of these things."
The people repent and dismiss their foreign wives
91 While Ezra was praying and making his confession, weeping and
lying on the ground before the temple, there gathered around him a
very great crowd of men and women and youths from Jerusalem; for
there was great weeping among the multitude. 92 Then Shecaniah son
of Jehiel, one of the men of Israel, called out, and said to Ezra, "We
have sinned against the Lord, and have married foreign women from
the peoples of the land; but even now there is hope for Israel. 93 Let us
take an oath to the Lord about this, that we will put away all our
foreign wives, with their children, 94 as seems good to you and to all
who obey the law of the Lord. 95 Rise up and take action, for it is your
task, and we are with you to take strong measures." 96 Then Ezra rose
up and made the leaders of the priests and Levites of all Israel swear
that they would do this. And they swore to it.
[1 Esdras 9]
1 Then Ezra set out and went from the court of the temple to the
chamber of Jehohanan son of Eliashib, 2 and spent the night there; and
he did not eat bread or drink water, for he was mourning over the
great iniquities of the multitude. 3 And a proclamation was made
throughout Judea and Jerusalem to all who had returned from exile
that they should assemble at Jerusalem, 4 and that if any did not meet
there within two or three days, in accordance with the decision of the
ruling elders, their livestock would be seized for sacrifice and the men
themselves expelled from the multitude of those who had returned
from the captivity.
5 Then the men of the tribe of Judah and Benjamin assembled at
Jerusalem within three days; this was the ninth month, on the
twentieth day of the month. 6 All the multitude sat in the open square

425

1 ESDRAS 426

before the temple, shivering because of the bad weather that
prevailed. 7 Then Ezra stood up and said to them, "You have broken
the law and married foreign women, and so have increased the sin of
Israel. 8 Now then make confession and give glory to the Lord the God
of our ancestors, 9 and do his will; separate yourselves from the
peoples of the land and from your foreign wives."
10 Then all the multitude shouted and said with a loud voice, "We will
do as you have said. 11 But the multitude is great and it is winter, and
we are not able to stand in the open air. This is not a work we can do
in one day or two, for we have sinned too much in these things. 12 So
let the leaders of the multitude stay, and let all those in our
settlements who have foreign wives come at the time appointed, 13
with the elders and judges of each place, until we are freed from the
wrath of the Lord over this matter."
14 Jonathan son of Asahel and Jahzeiah son of Tikvah undertook the
matter on these terms, and Meshullam and Levi and Shabbethai served
with them as judges. 15 And those who had returned from exile acted
in accordance with all this.
16 Ezra the priest chose for himself the leading men of their ancestral
houses, all of them by name; and on the new moon of the tenth month
they began their sessions to investigate the matter. 17 And the cases of
the men who had foreign wives were brought to an end by the new
moon of the first month.
18 Of the priests, those who were brought in and found to have
foreign wives were: 19 of the descendants of Jeshua son of Jozadak
and his kindred, Maaseiah, Eliezar, Jarib, and Jodan. 20 They pledged
themselves to put away their wives, and to offer rams in expiation of
their error. 21 Of the descendants of Immer: Hanani and Zebadiah and
Maaseiah and Shemaiah and Jehiel and Azariah. 22 Of the descendants
of Pashhur: Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, and Nathanael, and Gedaliah,
and Salthas.

426

1 ESDRAS 427

23 And of the Levites: Jozabad and Shimei and Kelaiah, who was Kelita,
and Pethahiah and Judah and Jonah. 24 Of the temple singers: Eliashib
and Zaccur. 25 Of the gatekeepers: Shallum and Telem.
26 Of Israel: of the descendants of Parosh: Ramiah, Izziah, Malchijah,
Mijamin, and Eleazar, and Asibias, and Benaiah. 27 Of the descendants
of Elam: Mattaniah and Zechariah, Jezrielus and Abdi, and Jeremoth
and Elijah. 28 Of the descendants of Zamoth: Eliadas, Eliashib,
Othoniah, Jeremoth, and Zabad and Zerdaiah. 29 Of the descendants
of Bebai: Jehohanan and Hananiah and Zabbai and Emathis. 30 Of the
descendants of Mani: Olamus, Mamuchus, Adaiah, Jashub, and Sheal
and Jeremoth. 31 Of the descendants of Addi: Naathus and Moossias,
Laccunus and Naidus, and Bescaspasmys and Sesthel, and Belnuus and
Manasseas. 32 Of the descendants of Annan, Elionas and Asaias and
Melchias and Sabbaias and Simon Chosamaeus. 33 Of the descendants
of Hashum: Mattenai and Mattattah and Zabad and Eliphelet and
Manasseh and Shimei. 34 Of the descendants of Bani: Jeremai,
Momdius, Maerus, Joel, Mamdai and Bedeiah and Vaniah, Carabasion
and Eliashib and Mamitanemus, Eliasis, Binnui, Elialis, Shimei,
Shelemiah, Nethaniah. Of the descendants of Ezora: Shashai, Azarel,
Azael, Samatus, Zambris, Joseph. 35 Of the descendants of Nooma:
Mazitias, Zabad, Iddo, Joel, Benaiah. 36 All these had married foreign
women, and they put them away together with their children.
The restoration is complete: Ezra public reading of the law
37 The priests and the Levites and the Israelites settled in Jerusalem and
in the country. On the new moon of the seventh month, when the
people of Israel were in their settlements, 38 the whole multitude
gathered with one accord in the open square before the east gate of
the temple; 39 they told Ezra the chief priest and reader to bring the
law of Moses that had been given by the Lord God of Israel. 40 So Ezra
the chief priest brought the law, for all the multitude, men and
women, and all the priests to hear the law, on the new moon of the
seventh month. 41 He read aloud in the open square before the gate of
the temple from early morning until midday, in the presence of both
men and women; and all the multitude gave attention to the law. 42
Ezra the priest and reader of the law stood on the wooden platform

427

1 ESDRAS 428

that had been prepared; 43 and beside him stood Mattathiah, Shema,
Ananias, Azariah, Uriah, Hezekiah, and Baalsamus on his right, 44 and
on his left Pedaiah, Mishael, Malchijah, Lothasubus, Nabariah, and
Zechariah. 45 Then Ezra took up the book of the law in the sight of the
multitude, for he had the place of honor in the presence of all. 46
When he opened the law, they all stood erect. And Ezra blessed the
Lord God Most High, the God of hosts, the Almighty, 47 and the
multitude answered, "Amen." They lifted up their hands, and fell to
the ground and worshiped the Lord. 48 Jeshua and Anniuth and
Sherebiah, Jadinus, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodiah, Maiannas and Kelita,
Azariah and Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, the Levites, taught the law of
the Lord, at the same time explaining what was read.
The concluding celebration
49 Then Attharates said to Ezra the chief priest and reader, and to the
Levites who were teaching the multitude, and to all, 50 "This day is
holy to the Lord" — now they were all weeping as they heard the law
— 51 "so go your way, eat the fat and drink the sweet, and send
portions to those who have none; 52 for the day is holy to the Lord;
and do not be sorrowful, for the Lord will exalt you." 53 The Levites
commanded all the people, saying, "This day is holy; do not be
sorrowful." 54 Then they all went their way, to eat and drink and enjoy
themselves, and to give portions to those who had none, and to make
great rejoicing; 55 because they were inspired by the words which they
had been taught. And they came together.

428

PRAYER OF MANASSEH 429

PRAYER OF MANASSEH
Introduction
The Prayer of Manasseh is a pseudepigraphical prayer characteristic of
Second Temple Judaism. An anthological composition (i.e., mosaic of
biblical phrases and allusions), it is formally an individual lament for
personal sin, with a petition for forgiveness. Similar to the "Penitential
Psalms" in the Psalter, especially Ps 51, it differs from them in that an
acknowledgment of divine justice and a confession of sin replace the
complaint about God's inaction. Its closest biblical parallels are a
number of late penitential prayers: Ezra 9.1-15; Neh 1.4-11; 9.6-37; Dan
9.4-19; Ps 106; Bar 1.15-3.8 (and cf. 1 Kings 8.48-52).
It is found in the Didascalia Apostolorum, a third-century CE Syriac
translation of an original Greek work, and in the Apostolic
Constitutions (fourth century, Greek). In the Codex Alexandrius, it is
one of the fourteen canticles appended to the Psalter. A composition
of a Palestinian Jew, its original language may have been either Greek
or Semitic (Hebrew or Aramaic). It is probably a work of the second or
first century BCE. For the Easter Orthodox churches, it is a
deuterocanonical work.
Its title recalls the story of King Manasseh in 2 Chr 33; because of his
idolatry (vv. 2-5), the Lord brought the Assyrians against Judah, and
Manasseh was taken off, a captive in chains, to Babylon (10-11). In vv.
12-13 (and in 18-19) the Chronicler states that Manasseh prayed in his
distress. The Prayer of Manasseh was composed with 2 Chr 33 in mind
(cf. Pr Man 10 and 2 Chr 33.10; Pr Man 9b-10 and 2 Chr 33.11; Pr Man 1, 11
and 2 Chr 33.12) to fill a gap in 2 Chr, which lacks Manasseh's prayer.
The major themes of the Prayer are the mercy that God extends even
to the worst of sinners (see the sins of Manasseh in 2 Kings 21.2-17; 2
Chr 33.2-9, 19) and the effectiveness of sincere contrition and
repentance. It is a tripartite poem, consisting of an acknowledgment of
429

PRAYER OF MANASSEH 430

God's infinite power, shown in his role as creator (vv. 1-4); a confession
of sin, including divine mercy to repentant sinners (vv. 5-8) and a
prayer for forgiveness (vv. 9-13); and a final petition for salvation and
concluding doxology (vv. 14-15).

Prayer of Manasseh
Invocation and praise of the creator
1 O Lord Almighty,
God of our ancestors,
of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob
and of their righteous offspring;
2 you who made heaven and earth
with all their order;
3 who shackled the sea by your word of command,
who confined the deep
and sealed it with your terrible and glorious name;
4 at whom all things shudder,
and tremble before your power,
5 for your glorious splendor cannot be borne,
and the wrath of your threat to sinners is unendurable;
6 yet immeasurable and unsearchable
is your promised mercy,

430

PRAYER OF MANASSEH 431

7 for you are the Lord Most High,
of great compassion, long-suffering, and very merciful,
and you relent at human suffering.
O Lord, according to your great goodness
you have promised repentance and forgiveness
to those who have sinned against you,
and in the multitude of your mercies
you have appointed repentance for sinners,
so that they may be saved.
8 Therefore you, O Lord, God of the righteous,
have not appointed repentance for the righteous,
for Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, who did not sin against you,
but you have appointed repentance for me, who am a sinner.
Confession of Sins
9 For the sins I have committed are more in number than the sand of
the sea;
my transgressions are multiplied, O Lord, they are multiplied!
I am not worthy to look up and see the height of heaven
because of the multitude of my iniquities.
10 I am weighted down with many an iron fetter,
so that I am rejected because of my sins,
and I have no relief;
for I have provoked your wrath
and have done what is evil in your sight,
setting up abominations and multiplying offenses.

431

PRAYER OF MANASSEH 432

Supplication for Pardon
11 And now I bend the knee of my heart,
imploring you for your kindness.
12 I have sinned, O Lord, I have sinned,
and I acknowledge my transgressions.
13 I earnestly implore you,
forgive me, O Lord, forgive me!
Do not destroy me with my transgressions!
Do not be angry with me forever or store up evil for me;
do not condemn me to the depths of the earth.
For you, O Lord, are the God of those who repent,
14 and in me you will manifest your goodness;
for, unworthy as I am, you will save me according to your great
mercy,
15 and I will praise you continually all the days of my life.
For all the host of heaven sings your praise,
and yours is the glory forever. Amen.

432

PSALM 151 433

PSALM 151
Introduction
To the traditional Hebrew Psalter, the Septuagint (LXX) adds Ps 151,
with a superscript describing it as "outside the number" (i.e., of the 150
Psalms); this is the basis of the NRSV translation. It is found in the
fourth-century CE Greek Codex Sinaiticus with a different
superscription and in the sixth-century Codex Alexandrius (with a
superscription, "The 151 Psalms of David"). In Syriac, Ps 151 is is the first
of a series of psalms (Ps 151-155) about the heroic exploits of David in 1
Sam 16-17.
A Hebrew version of psalm is found in the Dead Sea Scrolls (11 QPs).
This Hebrew version is made up of two distinct psalms: Ps 151A (=LXX Ps
151) is a poem based on 1 Sam 16.1-13, about David the shepherd
becoming Israel's king, with a superscription; this psalm is truncated in
the Greek and Syriac versions. Ps 151B is the fragmentary beginning of
another psalm, also with a superscription, that must have followed Ps
151A in the original scroll; it apparently deals with David's contest with
Goliath (1 Sam 17), a story that is also the subject of LXX Ps 151.6-7.
In form, Ps 151A is not a hymn or a petition, but a narrative (cf. Ps 78),
an autobiographical poem in which David, the youngest of his
brothers, speaks of his shepherding care for his father's flocks, of his
psalms praising God, and of his anointment as Israel's king. The
superscription of the Hebrew poem ("A Hallelujah of David the son of
Jesse") is similar to the superscriptions of Ps 145 ("Praise. Of David")
and the introductory "Hallelujah" of Ps 111-113, 146-150, and thus serves
to integrate this psalm into the end of Psalms.

433

PSALM 151 434

Psalm 151
This psalm is ascribed to David as his own composition (though it is
outside the number), after he had fought in single combat with
Goliath.
1 I was small among my brothers,
and the youngest in my father's house;
I tended my father's sheep.
2 My hands made a harp;
my fingers fashioned a lyre.
3 And who will tell my Lord?
The Lord himself; it is he who hears.
4 It was he who sent his messenger
and took me from my father's sheep,
and anointed me with his anointing oil.
5 My brothers were handsome and tall,
but the Lord was not pleased with them.
6 I went out to meet the Philistine,
and he cursed me by his idols.
7 But I drew his own sword;
I beheaded him, and took away disgrace from
the people of Israel.

434

3 MACCABEES 435

3 MACCABEES
Introduction
The of the book known as 3 Maccabees is a misnomer, for it is not a
historical account of the Maccabees, but a fictional story about
Egyptian Jews under Ptolemy IV Philopator (221-204 BCE), half a
century before the Maccabean period. The book is preserved in the
Greek Septuagint and the Syriac Peshitta, as well as in most
manuscripts of the Armenian Bible. It is not, however, included in the
Latin Vulgate. This may explain it was not included in the canon of the
Roman Catholic Church or in the traditional Protestant apocrypha. It is
included in the canon of the Eastern Orthodox churches.
Third Maccabees begins with a brief account of how Ptolemy was saved
from assassination at the battle of Raphia by the intervention of a Jew
(1.1-5). This brief story of Jewish loyalty provides a foil against which
the king's hostility to the Jews must be seen. The second episode (1.62.24) tells of the king's unsuccessful attempt to enter the holy of holies
in the Jerusalem Temple. The desecration is averted by divine
intervention in response to the prayer of the high priest Simon. The
third episode, which takes up most of the book, describes the
persecution of the Jews in Egypt. Upon his return there, the king
determines to take vengeance upon the Jews for his humiliation in
Jerusalem. He radically alters their legal status and attempts to force
them to worship the Greek god Dionysus, promising to those who
comply full citizenship in Alexandria (2.25-33). The vast majority of Jews
resists, and with great cruelty they are herded together to be
registered, tortured, and put to death. Again divine intervention averts
disaster, as after forty days the writing materials have been exhausted
and the registration cannot be completed (3.1-4.21). Finally the king
decrees that drugged elephants be turned upon the Jews, who have
been detained in the city's arena. Twice this is providentially delayed,
and the third miracle occurs in answer to the prayer of the aged priest
435

3 MACCABEES 436

Eleazar, paralleling the prayer of the high priest in the second episode.
The elephants turn on the king's forces, and he repents, allowing the
Jews to return to their homes (5.1-6.21). The book ends with a royal
letter decreeing protection for the Jews, who punish those who had
apostatized and rejoice at their providential deliverance (ch 7).
Third Maccabees belongs to a narrative genre that was especially
popular among Jews who lived in the Diaspora, outside the land of
Israel. Other examples are found in Esther and in Daniel 2-6. These
stories tell of some great danger that threatens the Jewish community,
which is then averted, either through heroic action (Esther) or, more
typically, through divine intervention. Such stories provided both
entertainment and edification, allowing the Jewish readers to indulge
their fears of destruction and then allaying those fears by the happy
ending.
The work was originally written in Greek by an unknown Alexandrian
Jew. The change in the status of the Jews, and the promise of
Alexandrian citizenship to those who abandoned their religion, reflect
the situation of the Alexandrian Jews after Rome conquered Egypt in
30 BCE. Non-Jews were subjected to a new tax, called the "laographia"
(the word used in connection with the change of status in 3 Macc 2.28).
Citizenship normally required the worship of other gods, and so was
unacceptable to most Jews. The book was most probably composed in
the early first century CE, although it does depict some earlier historical
events, such as the battle of Raphia, known from other sources.
Although the book is written in a rather bombastic style, it provides a
colorful drama of danger and deliverance. It also conveys a strict
message of the need for solidarity in the Jewish community and the
contemptible nature of apostasy.

436

3 MACCABEES 437

[3 Maccabees 1]
The battle of Raphia
1 When Philopator learned from those who returned that the regions
that he had controlled had been seized by Antiochus, he gave orders to
all his forces, both infantry and cavalry, took with him his sister
Arsinoë, and marched out to the region near Raphia, where the army
of Antiochus was encamped. 2 But a certain Theodotus, determined to
carry out the plot he had devised, took with him the best of the
Ptolemaic arms that had been previously issued to him, and crossed
over by night to the tent of Ptolemy, intending single-handed to kill
him and thereby end the war. 3 But Dositheus, known as the son of
Drimylus, a Jew by birth who later changed his religion and
apostatized from the ancestral traditions, had led the king away and
arranged that a certain insignificant man should sleep in the tent; and
so it turned out that this man incurred the vengeance meant for the
king. 4 When a bitter fight resulted, and matters were turning out
rather in favor of Antiochus, Arsinoë went to the troops with wailing
and tears, her locks all disheveled, and exhorted them to defend
themselves and their children and wives bravely, promising to give
them each two minas of gold if they won the battle. 5 And so it came
about that the enemy was routed in the action, and many captives also
were taken. 6 Now that he had foiled the plot, Ptolemy decided to visit
the neighboring cities and encourage them. 7 By doing this, and by
endowing their sacred enclosures with gifts, he strengthened the
morale of his subjects.
Ptolemy attempts to enter the sanctuary at Jerusalem
8 Since the Jews had sent some of their council and elders to greet him,
to bring him gifts of welcome, and to congratulate him on what had
happened, he was all the more eager to visit them as soon as possible.
9 After he had arrived in Jerusalem, he offered sacrifice to the supreme
God and made thank offerings and did what was fitting for the holy
place. Then, upon entering the place and being impressed by its
excellence and its beauty, 10 he marveled at the good order of the
temple, and conceived a desire to enter the sanctuary. 11 When they
said that this was not permitted, because not even members of their

437

3 MACCABEES 438

own nation were allowed to enter, not even all of the priests, but only
the high priest who was pre-eminent over all — and he only once a
year — the king was by no means persuaded. 12 Even after the law had
been read to him, he did not cease to maintain that he ought to enter,
saying, "Even if those men are deprived of this honor, I ought not to
be." 13 And he inquired why, when he entered every other temple, no
one there had stopped him. 14 And someone answered thoughtlessly
that it was wrong to take that as a portent. 15 "But since this has
happened," the king said, "why should not I at least enter, whether
they wish it or not?"
Jewish reaction to Ptolemy's determination to enter the sanctuary
16 Then the priests in all their vestments prostrated themselves and
entreated the supreme God to aid in the present situation and to avert
the violence of this evil design, and they filled the temple with cries
and tears; 17 those who remained behind in the city were agitated and
hurried out, supposing that something mysterious was occurring. 18
Young women who had been secluded in their chambers rushed out
with their mothers, sprinkled their hair with dust, and filled the streets
with groans and lamentations. 19 Those women who had recently been
arrayed for marriage abandoned the bridal chambers prepared for
wedded union, and, neglecting proper modesty, in a disorderly rush
flocked together in the city. 20 Mothers and nurses abandoned even
newborn children here and there, some in houses and some in the
streets, and without a backward look they crowded together at the
most high temple. 21 Various were the supplications of those gathered
there because of what the king was profanely plotting. 22 In addition,
the bolder of the citizens would not tolerate the completion of his
plans or the fulfillment of his intended purpose. 23 They shouted to
their compatriots to take arms and die courageously for the ancestral
law, and created a considerable disturbance in the holy place; and
being barely restrained by the old men and the elders, they resorted to
the same posture of supplication as the others. 24 Meanwhile the
crowd, as before, was engaged in prayer, 25 while the elders near the
king tried in various ways to change his arrogant mind from the plan
that he had conceived. 26 But he, in his arrogance, took heed of
nothing, and began now to approach, determined to bring the

438

3 MACCABEES 439

aforesaid plan to a conclusion. 27 When those who were around him
observed this, they turned, together with our people, to call upon him
who has all power to defend them in the present trouble and not to
overlook this unlawful and haughty deed. 28 The continuous,
vehement, and concerted cry of the crowds resulted in an immense
uproar; 29 for it seemed that not only the people but also the walls
and the whole earth around echoed, because indeed all at that time
preferred death to the profanation of the place.
[3 Maccabees 2]
The prayer of Simon, the high priest
1 Then the high priest Simon, facing the sanctuary, bending his knees
and extending his hands with calm dignity, prayed as follows: 2 "Lord,
Lord, king of the heavens, and sovereign of all creation, holy among
the holy ones, the only ruler, almighty, give attention to us who are
suffering grievously from an impious and profane man, puffed up in
his audacity and power. 3 For you, the creator of all things and the
governor of all, are a just Ruler, and you judge those who have done
anything in insolence and arrogance. 4 You destroyed those who in the
past committed injustice, among whom were even giants who trusted
in their strength and boldness, whom you destroyed by bringing on
them a boundless flood. 5 You consumed with fire and sulfur the
people of Sodom who acted arrogantly, who were notorious for their
vices; and you made them an example to those who should come
afterward. 6 You made known your mighty power by inflicting many
and varied punishments on the audacious Pharaoh who had enslaved
your holy people Israel. 7 And when he pursued them with chariots and
a mass of troops, you overwhelmed him in the depths of the sea, but
carried through safely those who had put their confidence in you, the
Ruler over the whole creation. 8 And when they had seen works of
your hands, they praised you, the Almighty. 9 You, O King, when you
had created the boundless and immeasurable earth, chose this city and
sanctified this place for your name, though you have no need of
anything; and when you had glorified it by your magnificent
manifestation, you made it a firm foundation for the glory of your
great and honored name. 10 And because you love the house of Israel,
you promised that if we should have reverses and tribulation should

439

3 MACCABEES 440

overtake us, you would listen to our petition when we come to this
place and pray. 11 And indeed you are faithful and true. 12 And because
oftentimes when our fathers were oppressed you helped them in their
humiliation, and rescued them from great evils, 13 see now, O holy
King, that because of our many and great sins we are crushed with
suffering, subjected to our enemies, and overtaken by helplessness. 14
In our downfall this audacious and profane man undertakes to violate
the holy place on earth dedicated to your glorious name. 15 For your
dwelling is the heaven of heavens, unapproachable by human beings.
16 But because you graciously bestowed your glory on your people
Israel, you sanctified this place. 17 Do not punish us for the defilement
committed by these men, or call us to account for this profanation,
otherwise the transgressors will boast in their wrath and exult in the
arrogance of their tongue, saying, 18 'We have trampled down the
house of the sanctuary as the houses of the abominations are trampled
down.' 19 Wipe away our sins and disperse our errors, and reveal your
mercy at this hour. 20 Speedily let your mercies overtake us, and put
praises in the mouth of those who are downcast and broken in spirit,
and give us peace."
The punishment of Ptolemy
21 Thereupon God, who oversees all things, the first Father of all, holy
among the holy ones, having heard the lawful supplication, scourged
him who had exalted himself in insolence and audacity. 22 He shook
him on this side and that as a reed is shaken by the wind, so that he lay
helpless on the ground and, besides being paralyzed in his limbs, was
unable even to speak, since he was smitten by a righteous judgment. 23
Then both friends and bodyguards, seeing the severe punishment that
had overtaken him, and fearing that he would lose his life, quickly
dragged him out, panic-stricken in their exceedingly great fear. 24
After a while he recovered, and though he had been punished, he by
no means repented, but went away uttering bitter threats.
Hostile Measures against the Jews of Alexandria
25 When he arrived in Egypt, he increased in his deeds of malice,
abetted by the previously mentioned drinking companions and

440

3 MACCABEES 441

comrades, who were strangers to everything just. 26 He was not
content with his uncounted licentious deeds, but even continued with
such audacity that he framed evil reports in the various localities; and
many of his friends, intently observing the king's purpose, themselves
also followed his will. 27 He proposed to inflict public disgrace on the
Jewish community, and he set up a stone on the tower in the courtyard
with this inscription: 28 "None of those who do not sacrifice shall enter
their sanctuaries, and all Jews shall be subjected to a registration
involving poll tax and to the status of slaves. Those who object to this
are to be taken by force and put to death; 29 those who are registered
are also to be branded on their bodies by fire with the ivy-leaf symbol
of Dionysus, and they shall also be reduced to their former limited
status." 30 In order that he might not appear to be an enemy of all, he
inscribed below: "But if any of them prefer to join those who have
been initiated into the mysteries, they shall have equal citizenship with
the Alexandrians."
31 Now some, however, with an obvious abhorrence of the price to be
exacted for maintaining the religion of their city, readily gave
themselves up, since they expected to enhance their reputation by
their future association with the king. 32 But the majority acted firmly
with a courageous spirit and did not abandon their religion; and by
paying money in exchange for life they confidently attempted to save
themselves from the registration. 33 They remained resolutely hopeful
of obtaining help, and they abhorred those who separated themselves
from them, considering them to be enemies of the Jewish nation, and
depriving them of companionship and mutual help.
[3 Maccabees 3]
The Jews and their neighbors
1 When the impious king comprehended this situation, he became so
infuriated that not only was he enraged against those Jews who lived
in Alexandria, but was still more bitterly hostile toward those in the
countryside; and he ordered that all should promptly be gathered into
one place, and put to death by the most cruel means. 2 While these
matters were being arranged, a hostile rumor was circulated against
the Jewish nation by some who conspired to do them ill, a pretext

441

3 MACCABEES 442

being given by a report that they hindered others from the observance
of their customs. 3 The Jews, however, continued to maintain goodwill
and unswerving loyalty toward the dynasty; 4 but because they
worshiped God and conducted themselves by his law, they kept their
separateness with respect to foods. For this reason they appeared
hateful to some; 5 but since they adorned their style of life with the
good deeds of upright people, they were established in good repute
with everyone. 6 Nevertheless those of other races paid no heed to
their good service to their nation, which was common talk among all; 7
instead they gossiped about the differences in worship and foods,
alleging that these people were loyal neither to the king nor to his
authorities, but were hostile and greatly opposed to his government.
So they attached no ordinary reproach to them.
8 The Greeks in the city, though wronged in no way, when they saw an
unexpected tumult around these people and the crowds that suddenly
were forming, were not strong enough to help them, for they lived
under tyranny. They did try to console them, being grieved at the
situation, and expected that matters would change; 9 for such a great
community ought not be left to its fate when it had committed no
offense. 10 And already some of their neighbors and friends and
business associates had taken some of them aside privately and were
pledging to protect them and to exert more earnest efforts for their
assistance.
Ptolemy orders the arrest of all Jews in his kingdom
11 Then the king, boastful of his present good fortune, and not
considering the might of the supreme God, but assuming that he
would persevere constantly in his same purpose, wrote this letter
against them:
12 "King Ptolemy Philopator to his generals and soldiers in Egypt and
all its districts, greetings and good health:
13 "I myself and our government are faring well. 14 When our
expedition took place in Asia, as you yourselves know, it was brought
to conclusion, according to plan, by the gods' deliberate alliance with

442

3 MACCABEES 443

us in battle, 15 and we considered that we should not rule the nations
inhabiting Coelesyria and Phoenicia by the power of the spear, but
should cherish them with clemency and great benevolence, gladly
treating them well. 16 And when we had granted very great revenues
to the temples in the cities, we came on to Jerusalem also, and went up
to honor the temple of those wicked people, who never cease from
their folly. 17 They accepted our presence by word, but insincerely by
deed, because when we proposed to enter their inner temple and
honor it with magnificent and most beautiful offerings, 18 they were
carried away by their traditional arrogance, and excluded us from
entering; but they were spared the exercise of our power because of
the benevolence that we have toward all. 19 By maintaining their
manifest ill-will toward us, they become the only people among all
nations who hold their heads high in defiance of kings and their own
benefactors, and are unwilling to regard any action as sincere.
20 "But we, when we arrived in Egypt victorious, accommodated
ourselves to their folly and did as was proper, since we treat all nations
with benevolence. 21 Among other things, we made known to all our
amnesty toward their compatriots here, both because of their alliance
with us and the myriad affairs liberally entrusted to them from the
beginning; and we ventured to make a change, by deciding both to
deem them worthy of Alexandrian citizenship and to make them
participants in our regular religious rites. 22 But in their innate malice
they took this in a contrary spirit, and disdained what is good. Since
they incline constantly to evil, 23 they not only spurn the priceless
citizenship, but also both by speech and by silence they abominate
those few among them who are sincerely disposed toward us; in every
situation, in accordance with their infamous way of life, they secretly
suspect that we may soon alter our policy. 24 Therefore, fully convinced
by these indications that they are ill-disposed toward us in every way,
we have taken precautions so that, if a sudden disorder later arises
against us, we shall not have these impious people behind our backs as
traitors and barbarous enemies. 25 Therefore we have given orders
that, as soon as this letter arrives, you are to send to us those who live
among you, together with their wives and children, with insulting and
harsh treatment, and bound securely with iron fetters, to suffer the
sure and shameful death that befits enemies. 26 For when all of these

443

3 MACCABEES 444

have been punished, we are sure that for the remaining time the
government will be established for ourselves in good order and in the
best state. 27 But those who shelter any of the Jews, whether old
people or children or even infants, will be tortured to death with the
most hateful torments, together with their families. 28 Any who are
willing to give information will receive the property of those who incur
the punishment, and also two thousand drachmas from the royal
treasury, and will be awarded their freedom. 29 Every place detected
sheltering a Jew is to be made unapproachable and burned with fire,
and shall become useless for all time to any mortal creature." 30 The
letter was written in the above form.
[3 Maccabees 4]
The Jews brought to Alexandria and imprisoned
1 In every place, then, where this decree arrived, a feast at public
expense was arranged for the Gentiles with shouts and gladness, for
the inveterate enmity that had long ago been in their minds was now
made evident and outspoken. 2 But among the Jews there was
incessant mourning, lamentation, and tearful cries; everywhere their
hearts were burning, and they groaned because of the unexpected
destruction that had suddenly been decreed for them. 3 What district
or city, or what habitable place at all, or what streets were not filled
with mourning and wailing for them? 4 For with such a harsh and
ruthless spirit were they being sent off, all together, by the generals in
the several cities, that at the sight of their unusual punishments, even
some of their enemies, perceiving the common object of pity before
their eyes, reflected on the uncertainty of life and shed tears at the
most miserable expulsion of these people. 5 For a multitude of grayheaded old men, sluggish and bent with age, was being led away,
forced to march at a swift pace by the violence with which they were
driven in such a shameful manner. 6 And young women who had just
entered the bridal chamber to share married life exchanged joy for
wailing, their myrrh-perfumed hair sprinkled with ashes, and were
carried away unveiled, all together raising a lament instead of a
wedding song, as they were torn by the harsh treatment of the
heathen. 7 In bonds and in public view they were violently dragged
along as far as the place of embarkation. 8 Their husbands, in the

444

3 MACCABEES 445

prime of youth, their necks encircled with ropes instead of garlands,
spent the remaining days of their marriage festival in lamentations
instead of good cheer and youthful revelry, seeing death immediately
before them. 9 They were brought on board like wild animals, driven
under the constraint of iron bonds; some were fastened by the neck to
the benches of the boats, others had their feet secured by unbreakable
fetters, 10 and in addition they were confined under a solid deck, so
that, with their eyes in total darkness, they would undergo treatment
befitting traitors during the whole voyage.
11 When these people had been brought to the place called Schedia,
and the voyage was concluded as the king had decreed, he
commanded that they should be enclosed in the hippodrome that had
been built with a monstrous perimeter wall in front of the city, and
that was well suited to make them an obvious spectacle to all coming
back into the city and to those from the city going out into the
country, so that they could neither communicate with the king's forces
nor in any way claim to be inside the circuit of the city. 12 And when
this had happened, the king, hearing that the Jews' compatriots from
the city frequently went out in secret to lament bitterly the ignoble
misfortune of their kindred, 13 ordered in his rage that these people be
dealt with in precisely the same fashion as the others, not omitting any
detail of their punishment. 14 The entire race was to be registered
individually, not for the hard labor that has been briefly mentioned
before, but to be tortured with the outrages that he had ordered, and
at the end to be destroyed in the space of a single day. 15 The
registration of these people was therefore conducted with bitter haste
and zealous intensity from the rising of the sun until its setting, coming
to an end after forty days but still uncompleted.
16 The king was greatly and continually filled with joy, organizing
feasts in honor of all his idols, with a mind alienated from truth and
with a profane mouth, praising speechless things that are not able
even to communicate or to come to one's help, and uttering improper
words against the supreme God. 17 But after the previously mentioned
interval of time the scribes declared to the king that they were no
longer able to take the census of the Jews because of their immense
number, 18 though most of them were still in the country, some still

445

3 MACCABEES 446

residing in their homes, and some at the place; the task was impossible
for all the generals in Egypt. 19 After he had threatened them severely,
charging that they had been bribed to contrive a means of escape, he
was clearly convinced about the matter 20 when they said and proved
that both the paper and the pens they used for writing had already
given out. 21 But this was an act of the invincible providence of him
who was aiding the Jews from heaven.
[3 Maccabees 5]
Ptolemy orders the execution of the Jews, but is thwarted
1 Then the king, completely inflexible, was filled with overpowering
anger and wrath; so he summoned Hermon, keeper of the elephants, 2
and ordered him on the following day to drug all the elephants — five
hundred in number — with large handfuls of frankincense and plenty
of unmixed wine, and to drive them in, maddened by the lavish
abundance of drink, so that the Jews might meet their doom. 3 When
he had given these orders he returned to his feasting, together with
those of his Friends and of the army who were especially hostile
toward the Jews. 4 And Hermon, keeper of the elephants, proceeded
faithfully to carry out the orders. 5 The servants in charge of the Jews
went out in the evening and bound the hands of the wretched people
and arranged for their continued custody through the night, convinced
that the whole nation would experience its final destruction. 6 For to
the Gentiles it appeared that the Jews were left without any aid, 7
because in their bonds they were forcibly confined on every side. But
with tears and a voice hard to silence they all called upon the Almighty
Lord and Ruler of all power, their merciful God and Father, praying 8
that he avert with vengeance the evil plot against them and in a
glorious manifestation rescue them from the fate now prepared for
them. 9 So their entreaty ascended fervently to heaven.
10 Hermon, however, when he had drugged the pitiless elephants until
they had been filled with a great abundance of wine and satiated with
frankincense, presented himself at the courtyard early in the morning
to report to the king about these preparations. 11 But the Lord sent
upon the king a portion of sleep, that beneficence that from the
beginning, night and day, is bestowed by him who grants it to

446

3 MACCABEES 447

whomever he wishes. 12 And by the action of the Lord he was
overcome by so pleasant and deep a sleep that he quite failed in his
lawless purpose and was completely frustrated in his inflexible plan. 13
Then the Jews, since they had escaped the appointed hour, praised
their holy God and again implored him who is easily reconciled to show
the might of his all-powerful hand to the arrogant Gentiles.
14 But now, since it was nearly the middle of the tenth hour, the
person who was in charge of the invitations, seeing that the guests
were assembled, approached the king and nudged him. 15 And when
he had with difficulty roused him, he pointed out that the hour of the
banquet was already slipping by, and he gave him an account of the
situation. 16 The king, after considering this, returned to his drinking,
and ordered those present for the banquet to recline opposite him. 17
When this was done he urged them to give themselves over to revelry
and to make the present portion of the banquet joyful by celebrating
all the more. 18 After the party had been going on for some time, the
king summoned Hermon and with sharp threats demanded to know
why the Jews had been allowed to remain alive through the present
day. 19 But when he, with the corroboration of the king's Friends,
pointed out that while it was still night he had carried out completely
the order given him, 20 the king, possessed by a savagery worse than
that of Phalaris, said that the Jews were benefited by today's sleep,
"but," he added, "tomorrow without delay prepare the elephants in
the same way for the destruction of the lawless Jews!" 21 When the
king had spoken, all those present readily and joyfully with one accord
gave their approval, and all went to their own homes. 22 But they did
not so much employ the duration of the night in sleep as in devising all
sorts of insults for those they thought to be doomed.
23 Then, as soon as the cock had crowed in the early morning, Hermon,
having equipped the animals, began to move them along in the great
colonnade. 24 The crowds of the city had been assembled for this most
pitiful spectacle and they were eagerly waiting for daybreak. 25 But
the Jews, at their last gasp — since the time had run out — stretched
their hands toward heaven and with most tearful supplication and
mournful dirges implored the supreme God to help them again at
once. 26 The rays of the sun were not yet shed abroad, and while the

447

3 MACCABEES 448

king was receiving his Friends, Hermon arrived and invited him to come
out, indicating that what the king desired was ready for action. 27 But
he, on receiving the report and being struck by the unusual invitation
to come out — since he had been completely overcome by
incomprehension — inquired what the matter was for which this had
been so zealously completed for him. 28 This was the act of God who
rules over all things, for he had implanted in the king's mind a
forgetfulness of the things he had previously devised. 29 Then Hermon
and all the king's Friends pointed out that the animals and the armed
forces were ready, "O king, according to your eager purpose." 30 But
at these words he was filled with an overpowering wrath, because by
the providence of God his whole mind had been deranged concerning
these matters; and with a threatening look he said, 31 "If your parents
or children were present, I would have prepared them to be a rich feast
for the savage animals instead of the Jews, who give me no ground for
complaint and have exhibited to an extraordinary degree a full and
firm loyalty to my ancestors. 32 In fact you would have been deprived
of life instead of these, if it were not for an affection arising from our
nurture in common and your usefulness." 33 So Hermon suffered an
unexpected and dangerous threat, and his eyes wavered and his face
fell. 34 The king's Friends one by one sullenly slipped away and
dismissed the assembled people to their own occupations. 35 Then the
Jews, on hearing what the king had said, praised the manifest Lord
God, King of kings, since this also was his aid that they had received.
36 The king, however, reconvened the party in the same manner and
urged the guests to return to their celebrating. 37 After summoning
Hermon he said in a threatening tone, "How many times, you poor
wretch, must I give you orders about these things? 38 Equip the
elephants now once more for the destruction of the Jews tomorrow!"
39 But the officials who were at table with him, wondering at his
instability of mind, remonstrated as follows: 40 "O king, how long will
you put us to the test, as though we are idiots, ordering now for a
third time that they be destroyed, and again revoking your decree in
the matter? 41 As a result the city is in a tumult because of its
expectation; it is crowded with masses of people, and also in constant
danger of being plundered."

448

3 MACCABEES 449

42 At this the king, a Phalaris in everything and filled with madness,
took no account of the changes of mind that had come about within
him for the protection of the Jews, and he firmly swore an irrevocable
oath that he would send them to death without delay, mangled by the
knees and feet of the animals, 43 and would also march against Judea
and rapidly level it to the ground with fire and spear, and by burning
to the ground the temple inaccessible to him would quickly render it
forever empty of those who offered sacrifices there. 44 Then the
Friends and officers departed with great joy, and they confidently
posted the armed forces at the places in the city most favorable for
keeping guard.
45 Now when the animals had been brought virtually to a state of
madness, so to speak, by the very fragrant draughts of wine mixed
with frankincense and had been equipped with frightful devices, the
elephant keeper 46 entered at about dawn into the courtyard — the
city now being filled with countless masses of people crowding their
way into the hippodrome — and urged the king on to the matter at
hand. 47 So he, when he had filled his impious mind with a deep rage,
rushed out in full force along with the animals, wishing to witness,
with invulnerable heart and with his own eyes, the grievous and pitiful
destruction of the aforementioned people.
48 When the Jews saw the dust raised by the elephants going out at
the gate and by the following armed forces, as well as by the trampling
of the crowd, and heard the loud and tumultuous noise, 49 they
thought that this was their last moment of life, the end of their most
miserable suspense, and giving way to lamentation and groans they
kissed each other, embracing relatives and falling into one another's
arms — parents and children, mothers and daughters, and others with
babies at their breasts who were drawing their last milk. 50 Not only
this, but when they considered the help that they had received before
from heaven, they prostrated themselves with one accord on the
ground, removing the babies from their breasts, 51 and cried out in a
very loud voice, imploring the Ruler over every power to manifest
himself and be merciful to them, as they stood now at the gates of
death.

449

3 MACCABEES 450

[3 Maccabees 6]
The prayer of Eleazar
1 Then a certain Eleazar, famous among the priests of the country, who
had attained a ripe old age and throughout his life had been adorned
with every virtue, directed the elders around him to stop calling upon
the holy God, and he prayed as follows: 2 "King of great power,
Almighty God Most High, governing all creation with mercy, 3 look
upon the descendants of Abraham, O Father, upon the children of the
sainted Jacob, a people of your consecrated portion who are perishing
as foreigners in a foreign land. 4 Pharaoh with his abundance of
chariots, the former ruler of this Egypt, exalted with lawless insolence
and boastful tongue, you destroyed together with his arrogant army
by drowning them in the sea, manifesting the light of your mercy on
the nation of Israel. 5 Sennacherib exulting in his countless forces,
oppressive king of the Assyrians, who had already gained control of
the whole world by the spear and was lifted up against your holy city,
speaking grievous words with boasting and insolence, you, O Lord,
broke in pieces, showing your power to many nations. 6 The three
companions in Babylon who had voluntarily surrendered their lives to
the flames so as not to serve vain things, you rescued unharmed, even
to a hair, moistening the fiery furnace with dew and turning the flame
against all their enemies. 7 Daniel, who through envious slanders was
thrown down into the ground to lions as food for wild animals, you
brought up to the light unharmed. 8 And Jonah, wasting away in the
belly of a huge, sea-born monster, you, Father, watched over and
restored unharmed to all his family. 9 And now, you who hate
insolence, all-merciful and protector of all, reveal yourself quickly to
those of the nation of Israel — who are being outrageously treated by
the abominable and lawless Gentiles.
10 "Even if our lives have become entangled in impieties in our exile,
rescue us from the hand of the enemy, and destroy us, Lord, by
whatever fate you choose. 11 Let not the vain-minded praise their
vanities at the destruction of your beloved people, saying, 'Not even
their god has rescued them.' 12 But you, O Eternal One, who have all
might and all power, watch over us now and have mercy on us who by
the senseless insolence of the lawless are being deprived of life in the

450

3 MACCABEES 451

manner of traitors. 13 And let the Gentiles cower today in fear of your
invincible might, O honored One, who have power to save the nation
of Jacob. 14 The whole throng of infants and their parents entreat you
with tears. 15 Let it be shown to all the Gentiles that you are with us, O
Lord, and have not turned your face from us; but just as you have said,
'Not even when they were in the land of their enemies did I neglect
them,' so accomplish it, O Lord."
The Jews are delivered, and the king now favors them
16 Just as Eleazar was ending his prayer, the king arrived at the
hippodrome with the animals and all the arrogance of his forces. 17
And when the Jews observed this they raised great cries to heaven so
that even the nearby valleys resounded with them and brought an
uncontrollable terror upon the army. 18 Then the most glorious,
almighty, and true God revealed his holy face and opened the heavenly
gates, from which two glorious angels of fearful aspect descended,
visible to all but the Jews. 19 They opposed the forces of the enemy
and filled them with confusion and terror, binding them with
immovable shackles. 20 Even the king began to shudder bodily, and he
forgot his sullen insolence. 21 The animals turned back upon the armed
forces following them and began trampling and destroying them.
22 Then the king's anger was turned to pity and tears because of the
things that he had devised beforehand. 23 For when he heard the
shouting and saw them all fallen headlong to destruction, he wept and
angrily threatened his Friends, saying, 24 "You are committing treason
and surpassing tyrants in cruelty; and even me, your benefactor, you
are now attempting to deprive of dominion and life by secretly
devising acts of no advantage to the kingdom. 25 Who has driven from
their homes those who faithfully kept our country's fortresses, and
foolishly gathered every one of them here? 26 Who is it that has so
lawlessly encompassed with outrageous treatment those who from the
beginning differed from all nations in their goodwill toward us and
often have accepted willingly the worst of human dangers? 27 Loose
and untie their unjust bonds! Send them back to their homes in peace,
begging pardon for your former actions! 28 Release the children of the
almighty and living God of heaven, who from the time of our ancestors

451

3 MACCABEES 452

until now has granted an unimpeded and notable stability to our
government." 29 These then were the things he said; and the Jews,
immediately released, praised their holy God and Savior, since they
now had escaped death.
30 Then the king, when he had returned to the city, summoned the
official in charge of the revenues and ordered him to provide to the
Jews both wines and everything else needed for a festival of seven
days, deciding that they should celebrate their rescue with all
joyfulness in that same place in which they had expected to meet their
destruction. 31 Accordingly those disgracefully treated and near to
death, or rather, who stood at its gates, arranged for a banquet of
deliverance instead of a bitter and lamentable death, and full of joy
they apportioned to celebrants the place that had been prepared for
their destruction and burial. 32 They stopped their chanting of dirges
and took up the song of their ancestors, praising God, their Savior and
worker of wonders. Putting an end to all mourning and wailing, they
formed choruses as a sign of peaceful joy. 33 Likewise also the king,
after convening a great banquet to celebrate these events, gave thanks
to heaven unceasingly and lavishly for the unexpected rescue that he
had experienced. 34 Those who had previously believed that the Jews
would be destroyed and become food for birds, and had joyfully
registered them, groaned as they themselves were overcome by
disgrace, and their fire-breathing boldness was ignominiously
quenched.
35 The Jews, as we have said before, arranged the aforementioned
choral group and passed the time in feasting to the accompaniment of
joyous thanksgiving and psalms. 36 And when they had ordained a
public rite for these things in their whole community and for their
descendants, they instituted the observance of the aforesaid days as a
festival, not for drinking and gluttony, but because of the deliverance
that had come to them through God. 37 Then they petitioned the king,
asking for dismissal to their homes. 38 So their registration was carried
out from the twenty-fifth of Pachon to the fourth of Epeiph, for forty
days; and their destruction was set for the fifth to the seventh of
Epeiph, the three days 39 on which the Lord of all most gloriously
revealed his mercy and rescued them all together and unharmed. 40

452

3 MACCABEES 453

Then they feasted, being provided with everything by the king, until
the fourteenth day, on which also they made the petition for their
dismissal. 41 The king granted their request at once and wrote the
following letter for them to the generals in the cities, magnanimously
expressing his concern:
[3 Maccabees 7]
Ptolemy's letter on behalf of the Jews
1 "King Ptolemy Philopator to the generals in Egypt and all in authority
in his government, greetings and good health:
2 "We ourselves and our children are faring well, the great God
guiding our affairs according to our desire. 3 Certain of our friends,
frequently urging us with malicious intent, persuaded us to gather
together the Jews of the kingdom in a body and to punish them with
barbarous penalties as traitors; 4 for they declared that our
government would never be firmly established until this was
accomplished, because of the ill-will that these people had toward all
nations. 5 They also led them out with harsh treatment as slaves, or
rather as traitors, and, girding themselves with a cruelty more savage
than that of Scythian custom, they tried without any inquiry or
examination to put them to death. 6 But we very severely threatened
them for these acts, and in accordance with the clemency that we have
toward all people we barely spared their lives. Since we have come to
realize that the God of heaven surely defends the Jews, always taking
their part as a father does for his children, 7 and since we have taken
into account the friendly and firm goodwill that they had toward us
and our ancestors, we justly have acquitted them of every charge of
whatever kind. 8 We also have ordered all people to return to their
own homes, with no one in any place doing them harm at all or
reproaching them for the irrational things that have happened. 9 For
you should know that if we devise any evil against them or cause them
any grief at all, we always shall have not a mortal but the Ruler over
every power, the Most High God, in everything and inescapably as an
antagonist to avenge such acts. Farewell."

453

3 MACCABEES 454

The Jews punish the renegades and return home
10 On receiving this letter the Jews did not immediately hurry to make
their departure, but they requested of the king that at their own hands
those of the Jewish nation who had willfully transgressed against the
holy God and the law of God should receive the punishment they
deserved. 11 They declared that those who for the belly's sake had
transgressed the divine commandments would never be favorably
disposed toward the king's government. 12 The king then, admitting
and approving the truth of what they said, granted them a general
license so that freely, and without royal authority or supervision, they
might destroy those everywhere in his kingdom who had transgressed
the law of God. 13 When they had applauded him in fitting manner,
their priests and the whole multitude shouted the Hallelujah and
joyfully departed. 14 And so on their way they punished and put to a
public and shameful death any whom they met of their compatriots
who had become defiled. 15 In that day they put to death more than
three hundred men; and they kept the day as a joyful festival, since
they had destroyed the profaners. 16 But those who had held fast to
God even to death and had received the full enjoyment of deliverance
began their departure from the city, crowned with all sorts of very
fragrant flowers, joyfully and loudly giving thanks to the one God of
their ancestors, the eternal Savior of Israel, in words of praise and all
kinds of melodious songs.
17 When they had arrived at Ptolemais, called "rose-bearing" because
of a characteristic of the place, the fleet waited for them, in
accordance with the common desire, for seven days. 18 There they
celebrated their deliverance, for the king had generously provided all
things to them for their journey until all of them arrived at their own
houses. 19 And when they had all landed in peace with appropriate
thanksgiving, there too in like manner they decided to observe these
days as a joyous festival during the time of their stay. 20 Then, after
inscribing them as holy on a pillar and dedicating a place of prayer at
the site of the festival, they departed unharmed, free, and overjoyed,
since at the king's command they had all of them been brought safely
by land and sea and river to their own homes. 21 They also possessed
greater prestige among their enemies, being held in honor and awe;

454

3 MACCABEES 455

and they were not subject at all to confiscation of their belongings by
anyone. 22 Besides, they all recovered all of their property, in
accordance with the registration, so that those who held any of it
restored it to them with extreme fear. So the supreme God perfectly
performed great deeds for their deliverance. 23 Blessed be the
Deliverer of Israel through all times! Amen.

455

2 ESDRAS 456

2 ESDRAS
Introduction
The book known as 2 Esdras is actually a composite work made up of
three separate writings: 5 Ezra (chs 1-2), 4 Ezra (chs 3-14), and 6 Ezra
(chs 15-16).
Fourth Ezra, the longest and most complex of the three, is also the
earliest. Written in Hebrew by an anonymous Jew in Israel near the end
of the first century CE, it sets forth its author's anguished reflections on
the destruction of Jerusalem and its Temple by the Romans in 70 CE.
The author adopts the pseudonym of Ezra, whom he presents as living
after the destruction of the First Temple by the Babylonians in 586 BCE,
and also refers to Rome by a pseudonym, "Babylon." Thus he writes on
two levels, comparing his own situation with that of his eponymous
biblical hero. The book's central concern is the issue of theodicy: How
could a just God allow such misfortunes to happen to God's chosen
people?
The author of 4 Ezra is a deeply reflective and highly imaginative
thinker, who is moreover skilled and sophisticated enough to present
divergent theological viewpoints in different parts of the book. In the
first three of the book's seven "visions," Ezra, the book's spirited and
loquacious hero, argues persuasively a profoundly humanistic
viewpoint that stresses the ideals of God's mercy, justice, and care for
humanity, especially Israel. Ezra is rebuffed time and again, however,
by his angelic interlocutor, who emphasizes the limitations of human
reasoning.
In a fourth vision, the book's central and pivotal section, Ezra
experiences a profound psychological shift (a "conversion" experience)
from his previous attitude to a state of unquestioning acceptance of
God's will. As a sign of this transition he receives a mystical vision of
456

2 ESDRAS 457

the heavenly Jerusalem. Equipped with his newly acquired state of
mind, Ezra in the last section of the book receives two further mystical
visions (the fifth and sixth), both indicating that the true solution to
the problem of God's justice is an apocalyptic one: The suffering
righteous will receive their reward at the end of the world. Finally, in
the climactic seventh vision, the inspired Ezra is granted permission by
God to rewrite the scriptures that had been burned by the
"Babylonians," but with one variation: In addition to the traditional
books of the Hebrew canon, he writes seventy secret books mean for
the "wise" among his people. Fourth Ezra's author thus displays his
penchant for mystical, esoteric, and apocalyptic modes of thinking and
his conviction that these hold the answers to the ethical and
theological dilemmas of Israel, and indeed of all humankind.
In the course of the second century CE, 4 Ezra was translated into
Greek; from Greek it was rendered into a plethora of other languages.
Although the Hebrew and Greek texts have been lost with time, the
book is attested today in no less than eight versions: Latin, Syriac,
Ethiopic, Georgian, Armenian, two independent Arabic versions, and a
fragmentary Coptic version. This large number of translations is
evidence of the book's immense popularity in the various Christian
churches of the early Middle Ages.
Fifth Ezra, a Christian writing of the second or third century CE, is also
pseudonymously ascribed to Ezra. It was composed in either Greek or
Latin; its place of composition is uncertain. Fifth Ezra reflects the
growing tension between Christian and Jewish communities. It indicts
the people of Israel for their sins and "predicts" the coming of a new
people (the Christians) who will inherit Israel's patrimony.
Sixth Ezra is a Christian composition of the third century CE, probably
from Asia Minor. In it an anonymous prophet predicts terrible
catastrophes that will afflict the whole earth as a result of human
iniquity and warns God's "elect" to abstain from sin if they wish to
escape the calamities. The book reflects a situation in which its
Christian community was experiencing persecution and strives to
convince its audience to stand firm. Although 6 Ezra survives in full
only in Latin, a fourth-century Greek parchment fragment of 15.57-59

457

2 ESDRAS 458

found at Oxyrhynchus, Egypt, indicates that the book was composed in
Greek.
At some time before 400 CE, a Latin form of 6 Ezra was appended to
the end of 4 Ezra. In turn, a Latin form of 5 Ezra was later added to the
end of that corpus, probably before 450 CE. Then, prior to 800 CE, 5
Ezra was moved to the head of the corpus, resulting in the form of the
book known today.

[2 Esdras 1]
(Chs 1-2 comprise a separate literary composition also known as 5
Ezra.)
Ascription
1 The book of the prophet Ezra son of Seraiah, son of Azariah, son of
Hilkiah, son of Shallum, son of Zadok, son of Ahitub, 2 son of Ahijah,
son of Phinehas, son of Eli, son of Amariah, son of Azariah, son of
Meraimoth, son of Arna, son of Uzzi, son of Borith, son of Abishua, son
of Phinehas, son of Eleazar, 3 son of Aaron, of the tribe of Levi, who
was a captive in the country of the Medes in the reign of Artaxerxes,
king of the Persians.
A prophetic indictment against Israel; Prophetic historical recital of
God's benefits during the Exodus
4 The word of the Lord came to me, saying, 5 "Go, declare to my
people their evil deeds, and to their children the iniquities that they
have committed against me, so that they may tell their children's
children 6 that the sins of their parents have increased in them, for
they have forgotten me and have offered sacrifices to strange gods. 7
Was it not I who brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage? But they have angered me and despised my
counsels. 8 Now you, pull out the hair of your head and hurl all evils
upon them, for they have not obeyed my law — they are a rebellious
people. 9 How long shall I endure them, on whom I have bestowed
such great benefits? 10 For their sake I have overthrown many kings; I

458

2 ESDRAS 459

struck down Pharaoh with his servants and all his army. 11 I destroyed
all nations before them, and scattered in the east the peoples of two
provinces, Tyre and Sidon; I killed all their enemies.
12 "But speak to them and say, Thus says the Lord: 13 Surely it was I
who brought you through the sea, and made safe highways for you
where there was no road; I gave you Moses as leader and Aaron as
priest; 14 I provided light for you from a pillar of fire, and did great
wonders among you. Yet you have forgotten me, says the Lord.
15 "Thus says the Lord Almighty: The quails were a sign to you; I gave
you camps for your protection, and in them you complained. 16 You
have not exulted in my name at the destruction of your enemies, but
to this day you still complain. 17 Where are the benefits that I
bestowed on you? When you were hungry and thirsty in the
wilderness, did you not cry out to me, 18 saying, 'Why have you led us
into this wilderness to kill us? It would have been better for us to serve
the Egyptians than to die in this wilderness.' 19 I pitied your groanings
and gave you manna for food; you ate the bread of angels. 20 When
you were thirsty, did I not split the rock so that waters flowed in
abundance? Because of the heat I clothed you with the leaves of trees.
21 I divided fertile lands among you; I drove out the Canaanites, the
Perizzites, and the Philistines before you. What more can I do for you?
says the Lord. 22 Thus says the Lord Almighty: When you were in the
wilderness, at the bitter stream, thirsty and blaspheming my name, 23 I
did not send fire on you for your blasphemies, but threw a tree into
the water and made the stream sweet.
Pronouncement of judgment against Israel
24 "What shall I do to you, O Jacob? You, Judah, would not obey me. I
will turn to other nations and will give them my name, so that they
may keep my statutes. 25 Because you have forsaken me, I also will
forsake you. When you beg mercy of me, I will show you no mercy. 26
When you call to me, I will not listen to you; for you have defiled your
hands with blood, and your feet are swift to commit murder. 27 It is
not as though you had forsaken me; you have forsaken yourselves, says
the Lord.

459

2 ESDRAS 460

28 "Thus says the Lord Almighty: Have I not entreated you as a father
entreats his sons or a mother her daughters or a nurse her children, 29
so that you should be my people and I should be your God, and that
you should be my children and I should be your father? 30 I gathered
you as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings. But now, what shall I
do to you? I will cast you out from my presence. 31 When you offer
oblations to me, I will turn my face from you; for I have rejected your
festal days, and new moons, and circumcisions of the flesh. 32 I sent
you my servants the prophets, but you have taken and killed them and
torn their bodies in pieces; I will require their blood of you, says the
Lord.
33 "Thus says the Lord Almighty: Your house is desolate; I will drive you
out as the wind drives straw; 34 and your sons will have no children,
because with you they have neglected my commandment and have
done what is evil in my sight. 35 I will give your houses to a people that
will come, who without having heard me will believe. Those to whom I
have shown no signs will do what I have commanded. 36 They have
seen no prophets, yet will recall their former state. 37 I call to witness
the gratitude of the people that is to come, whose children rejoice
with gladness; though they do not see me with bodily eyes, yet with
the spirit they will believe the things I have said.
Vision of the coming people
38 "And now, father, look with pride and see the people coming from
the east; 39 to them I will give as leaders Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and Hosea and Amos and Micah and Joel and Obadiah and Jonah 40
and Nahum and Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah and Malachi,
who is also called the messenger of the Lord.
[2 Esdras 2]
Further pronouncement of judgment
1 "Thus says the Lord: I brought this people out of bondage, and I gave
them commandments through my servants the prophets; but they
would not listen to them, and made my counsels void. 2 The mother
who bore them says to them, 'Go, my children, because I am a widow

460

2 ESDRAS 461

and forsaken. 3 I brought you up with gladness; but with mourning
and sorrow I have lost you, because you have sinned before the Lord
God and have done what is evil in my sight. 4 But now what can I do
for you? For I am a widow and forsaken. Go, my children, and ask for
mercy from the Lord.' 5 Now I call upon you, father, as a witness in
addition to the mother of the children, because they would not keep
my covenant, 6 so that you may bring confusion on them and bring
their mother to ruin, so that they may have no offspring. 7 Let them be
scattered among the nations; let their names be blotted out from the
earth, because they have despised my covenant.
8 "Woe to you, Assyria, who conceal the unrighteous within you! O
wicked nation, remember what I did to Sodom and Gomorrah, 9 whose
land lies in lumps of pitch and heaps of ashes. That is what I will do to
those who have not listened to me, says the Lord Almighty."
Prophetic exhortation of the new people; Blessing and instruction
10 Thus says the Lord to Ezra: "Tell my people that I will give them the
kingdom of Jerusalem, which I was going to give to Israel. 11 Moreover,
I will take back to myself their glory, and will give to these others the
everlasting habitations, which I had prepared for Israel. 12 The tree of
life shall give them fragrant perfume, and they shall neither toil nor
become weary. 13 Go and you will receive; pray that your days may be
few, that they may be shortened. The kingdom is already prepared for
you; be on the watch! 14 Call, O call heaven and earth to witness: I set
aside evil and created good; for I am the Living One, says the Lord.
Exhortation of the mother
15 "Mother, embrace your children; bring them up with gladness, as
does a dove; strengthen their feet, because I have chosen you, says the
Lord. 16 And I will raise up the dead from their places, and bring them
out from their tombs, because I recognize my name in them. 17 Do not
fear, mother of children, for I have chosen you, says the Lord. 18 I will
send you help, my servants Isaiah and Jeremiah. According to their
counsel I have consecrated and prepared for you twelve trees loaded
with various fruits, 19 and the same number of springs flowing with

461

2 ESDRAS 462

milk and honey, and seven mighty mountains on which roses and lilies
grow; by these I will fill your children with joy.
20 "Guard the rights of the widow, secure justice for the ward, give to
the needy, defend the orphan, clothe the naked, 21 care for the injured
and the weak, do not ridicule the lame, protect the maimed, and let
the blind have a vision of my splendor. 22 Protect the old and the
young within your walls. 23 When you find any who are dead, commit
them to the grave and mark it, and I will give you the first place in my
resurrection. 24 Pause and be quiet, my people, because your rest will
come.
25 "Good nurse, nourish your children; strengthen their feet. 26 Not
one of the servants whom I have given you will perish, for I will require
them from among your number. 27 Do not be anxious, for when the
day of tribulation and anguish comes, others shall weep and be
sorrowful, but you shall rejoice and have abundance. 28 The nations
shall envy you, but they shall not be able to do anything against you,
says the Lord. 29 My power will protect you, so that your children may
not see hell.
30 "Rejoice, O mother, with your children, because I will deliver you,
says the Lord. 31 Remember your children that sleep, because I will
bring them out of the hiding places of the earth, and will show mercy
to them; for I am merciful, says the Lord Almighty. 32 Embrace your
children until I come, and proclaim mercy to them; because my springs
run over, and my grace will not fail."
Encouragement of the "nations"
33 I, Ezra, received a command from the Lord on Mount Horeb to go to
Israel. When I came to them they rejected me and refused the LORD's
commandment. 34 Therefore I say to you, O nations that hear and
understand, "Wait for your shepherd; he will give you everlasting rest,
because he who will come at the end of the age is close at hand. 35 Be
ready for the rewards of the kingdom, because perpetual light will
shine on you forevermore. 36 Flee from the shadow of this age, receive
the joy of your glory; I publicly call on my savior to witness. 37 Receive

462

2 ESDRAS 463

what the Lord has entrusted to you and be joyful, giving thanks to him
who has called you to the celestial kingdoms. 38 Rise, stand erect and
see the number of those who have been sealed at the feast of the
Lord. 39 Those who have departed from the shadow of this age have
received glorious garments from the Lord. 40 Take again your full
number, O Zion, and close the list of your people who are clothed in
white, who have fulfilled the law of the Lord. 41 The number of your
children, whom you desired, is now complete; implore the LORD's
authority that your people, who have been called from the beginning,
may be made holy."
Ezra's vision of a great multitude
42 I, Ezra, saw on Mount Zion a great multitude that I could not
number, and they all were praising the Lord with songs. 43 In their
midst was a young man of great stature, taller than any of the others,
and on the head of each of them he placed a crown, but he was more
exalted than they. And I was held spellbound. 44 Then I asked an
angel, "Who are these, my lord?" 45 He answered and said to me,
"These are they who have put off mortal clothing and have put on the
immortal, and have confessed the name of God. Now they are being
crowned, and receive palms." 46 Then I said to the angel, "Who is that
young man who is placing crowns on them and putting palms in their
hands?" 47 He answered and said to me, "He is the Son of God, whom
they confessed in the world." So I began to praise those who had stood
valiantly for the name of the Lord. 48 Then the angel said to me, "Go,
tell my people how great and how many are the wonders of the Lord
God that you have seen."
[2 Esdras 3]
(Chs 3-14 comprise a separate literary composition also known as 4
Ezra.)
The first vision; Introduction
1 In the thirtieth year after the destruction of the city, I was in Babylon
— I, Salathiel, who am also called Ezra. I was troubled as I lay on my
bed, and my thoughts welled up in my heart, 2 because I saw the
desolation of Zion and the wealth of those who lived in Babylon. 3 My

463

2 ESDRAS 464

spirit was greatly agitated, and I began to speak anxious words to the
Most High, and said,
Addressing God, the author raises perplexing questions
4 "O sovereign Lord, did you not speak at the beginning when you
planted the earth — and that without help — and commanded the
dust 5 and it gave you Adam, a lifeless body? Yet he was the creation
of your hands, and you breathed into him the breath of life, and he
was made alive in your presence. 6 And you led him into the garden
that your right hand had planted before the earth appeared. 7 And
you laid upon him one commandment of yours; but he transgressed it,
and immediately you appointed death for him and for his descendants.
From him there sprang nations and tribes, peoples and clans without
number. 8 And every nation walked after its own will; they did
ungodly things in your sight and rejected your commands, and you did
not hinder them. 9 But again, in its time you brought the flood upon
the inhabitants of the world and destroyed them. 10 And the same fate
befell all of them: just as death came upon Adam, so the flood upon
them. 11 But you left one of them, Noah with his household, and all the
righteous who have descended from him.
12 "When those who lived on earth began to multiply, they produced
children and peoples and many nations, and again they began to be
more ungodly than were their ancestors. 13 And when they were
committing iniquity in your sight, you chose for yourself one of them,
whose name was Abraham; 14 you loved him, and to him alone you
revealed the end of the times, secretly by night. 15 You made an
everlasting covenant with him, and promised him that you would
never forsake his descendants; and you gave him Isaac, and to Isaac you
gave Jacob and Esau. 16 You set apart Jacob for yourself, but Esau you
rejected; and Jacob became a great multitude. 17 And when you led his
descendants out of Egypt, you brought them to Mount Sinai. 18 You
bent down the heavens and shook the earth, and moved the world,
and caused the depths to tremble, and troubled the times. 19 Your
glory passed through the four gates of fire and earthquake and wind
and ice, to give the law to the descendants of Jacob, and your
commandment to the posterity of Israel.

464

2 ESDRAS 465

20 "Yet you did not take away their evil heart from them, so that your
law might produce fruit in them. 21 For the first Adam, burdened with
an evil heart, transgressed and was overcome, as were also all who
were descended from him. 22 Thus the disease became permanent; the
law was in the hearts of the people along with the evil root; but what
was good departed, and the evil remained. 23 So the times passed and
the years were completed, and you raised up for yourself a servant,
named David. 24 You commanded him to build a city for your name,
and there to offer you oblations from what is yours. 25 This was done
for many years; but the inhabitants of the city transgressed, 26 in
everything doing just as Adam and all his descendants had done, for
they also had the evil heart. 27 So you handed over your city to your
enemies.
28 "Then I said in my heart, Are the deeds of those who inhabit
Babylon any better? Is that why it has gained dominion over Zion? 29
For when I came here I saw ungodly deeds without number, and my
soul has seen many sinners during these thirty years. And my heart
failed me, 30 because I have seen how you endure those who sin, and
have spared those who act wickedly, and have destroyed your people,
and protected your enemies, 31 and have not shown to anyone how
your way may be comprehended. Are the deeds of Babylon better than
those of Zion? 32 Or has another nation known you besides Israel? Or
what tribes have so believed the covenants as these tribes of Jacob? 33
Yet their reward has not appeared and their labor has borne no fruit.
For I have traveled widely among the nations and have seen that they
abound in wealth, though they are unmindful of your commandments.
34 Now therefore weigh in a balance our iniquities and those of the
inhabitants of the world; and it will be found which way the turn of
the scale will incline. 35 When have the inhabitants of the earth not
sinned in your sight? Or what nation has kept your commandments so
well? 36 You may indeed find individuals who have kept your
commandments, but nations you will not find."

465

2 ESDRAS 466

[2 Esdras 4]
Dialogic dispute between Ezra and the angel Uriel
1 Then the angel that had been sent to me, whose name was Uriel,
answered 2 and said to me, "Your understanding has utterly failed
regarding this world, and do you think you can comprehend the way
of the Most High?" 3 Then I said, "Yes, my lord." And he replied to me,
"I have been sent to show you three ways, and to put before you three
problems. 4 If you can solve one of them for me, then I will show you
the way you desire to see, and will teach you why the heart is evil."
5 I said, "Speak, my lord."
And he said to me, "Go, weigh for me the weight of fire, or measure
for me a blast of wind, or call back for me the day that is past."
6 I answered and said, "Who of those that have been born can do that,
that you should ask me about such things?"
7 And he said to me, "If I had asked you, 'How many dwellings are in
the heart of the sea, or how many streams are at the source of the
deep, or how many streams are above the firmament, or which are the
exits of Hades, or which are the entrances of paradise?' 8 perhaps you
would have said to me, 'I never went down into the deep, nor as yet
into Hades, neither did I ever ascend into heaven.' 9 But now I have
asked you only about fire and wind and the day — things that you
have experienced and from which you cannot be separated, and you
have given me no answer about them." 10 He said to me, "You cannot
understand the things with which you have grown up; 11 how then can
your mind comprehend the way of the Most High? And how can one
who is already worn out by the corrupt world understand
incorruption?" When I heard this, I fell on my face 12 and said to him,
"It would have been better for us not to be here than to come here
and live in ungodliness, and to suffer and not understand why."
13 He answered me and said, "I went into a forest of trees of the plain,
and they made a plan 14 and said, 'Come, let us go and make war
against the sea, so that it may recede before us and so that we may

466

2 ESDRAS 467

make for ourselves more forests.' 15 In like manner the waves of the
sea also made a plan and said, 'Come, let us go up and subdue the
forest of the plain so that there also we may gain more territory for
ourselves.' 16 But the plan of the forest was in vain, for the fire came
and consumed it; 17 likewise also the plan of the waves of the sea was
in vain, for the sand stood firm and blocked it. 18 If now you were a
judge between them, which would you undertake to justify, and which
to condemn?"
19 I answered and said, "Each made a foolish plan, for the land has
been assigned to the forest, and the locale of the sea a place to carry
its waves."
20 He answered me and said, "You have judged rightly, but why have
you not judged so in your own case? 21 For as the land has been
assigned to the forest and the sea to its waves, so also those who
inhabit the earth can understand only what is on the earth, and he
who is above the heavens can understand what is above the height of
the heavens."
22 Then I answered and said, "I implore you, my lord, why have I been
endowed with the power of understanding? 23 For I did not wish to
inquire about the ways above, but about those things that we daily
experience: why Israel has been given over to the Gentiles in disgrace;
why the people whom you loved has been given over to godless tribes,
and the law of our ancestors has been brought to destruction and the
written covenants no longer exist. 24 We pass from the world like
locusts, and our life is like a mist, and we are not worthy to obtain
mercy. 25 But what will he do for his name that is invoked over us? It is
about these things that I have asked."
Dialogic prediction regarding the future
26 He answered me and said, "If you are alive, you will see, and if you
live long, you will often marvel, because the age is hurrying swiftly to
its end. 27 It will not be able to bring the things that have been
promised to the righteous in their appointed times, because this age is
full of sadness and infirmities. 28 For the evil about which you ask me

467

2 ESDRAS 468

has been sown, but the harvest of it has not yet come. 29 If therefore
that which has been sown is not reaped, and if the place where the evil
has been sown does not pass away, the field where the good has been
sown will not come. 30 For a grain of evil seed was sown in Adam's
heart from the beginning, and how much ungodliness it has produced
until now — and will produce until the time of threshing comes! 31
Consider now for yourself how much fruit of ungodliness a grain of evil
seed has produced. 32 When heads of grain without number are sown,
how great a threshing floor they will fill!"
33 Then I answered and said, "How long? When will these things be?
Why are our years few and evil?" 34 He answered me and said, "Do not
be in a greater hurry than the Most High. You, indeed, are in a hurry
for yourself, but the Highest is in a hurry on behalf of many. 35 Did not
the souls of the righteous in their chambers ask about these matters,
saying, 'How long are we to remain here? And when will the harvest of
our reward come?' 36 And the archangel Jeremiel answered and said,
'When the number of those like yourselves is completed; for he has
weighed the age in the balance, 37 and measured the times by
measure, and numbered the times by number; and he will not move or
arouse them until that measure is fulfilled.'"
38 Then I answered and said, "But, O sovereign Lord, all of us also are
full of ungodliness. 39 It is perhaps on account of us that the time of
threshing is delayed for the righteous — on account of the sins of
those who inhabit the earth."
40 He answered me and said, "Go and ask a pregnant woman whether,
when her nine months have been completed, her womb can keep the
fetus within her any longer."
41 And I said, "No, lord, it cannot."
He said to me, "In Hades the chambers of the souls are like the
womb. 42 For just as a woman who is in labor makes haste to escape
the pangs of birth, so also do these places hasten to give back those
things that were committed to them from the beginning. 43 Then the
things that you desire to see will be disclosed to you."

468

2 ESDRAS 469

44 I answered and said, "If I have found favor in your sight, and if it is
possible, and if I am worthy, 45 show me this also: whether more time
is to come than has passed, or whether for us the greater part has gone
by. 46 For I know what has gone by, but I do not know what is to
come."
47 And he said to me, "Stand at my right side, and I will show you the
interpretation of a parable."
48 So I stood and looked, and lo, a flaming furnace passed by before
me, and when the flame had gone by I looked, and lo, the smoke
remained. 49 And after this a cloud full of water passed before me and
poured down a heavy and violent rain, and when the violent rainstorm
had passed, drops still remained in the cloud.
50 He said to me, "Consider it for yourself; for just as the rain is more
than the drops, and the fire is greater than the smoke, so the quantity
that passed was far greater; but drops and smoke remained."
51 Then I prayed and said, "Do you think that I shall live until those
days? Or who will be alive in those days?"
52 He answered me and said, "Concerning the signs about which you
ask me, I can tell you in part; but I was not sent to tell you concerning
your life, for I do not know.
[2 Esdras 5]
Direct prediction of the future by the angel
1 "Now concerning the signs: lo, the days are coming when those who
inhabit the earth shall be seized with great terror, and the way of truth
shall be hidden, and the land shall be barren of faith. 2
Unrighteousness shall be increased beyond what you yourself see, and
beyond what you heard of formerly. 3 And the land that you now see
ruling shall be a trackless waste, and people shall see it desolate. 4 But
if the Most High grants that you live, you shall see it thrown into
confusion after the third period;

469

2 ESDRAS 470

and the sun shall suddenly begin to shine at night,
and the moon during the day.
5 Blood shall drip from wood,
and the stone shall utter its voice;
the peoples shall be troubled,
and the stars shall fall.
6 And one shall reign whom those who inhabit the earth do not
expect, and the birds shall fly away together; 7 and the Dead Sea shall
cast up fish; and one whom the many do not know shall make his voice
heard by night, and all shall hear his voice. 8 There shall be chaos also
in many places, fire shall often break out, the wild animals shall roam
beyond their haunts, and menstruous women shall bring forth
monsters. 9 Salt waters shall be found in the sweet, and all friends shall
conquer one another; then shall reason hide itself, and wisdom shall
withdraw into its chamber, 10 and it shall be sought by many but shall
not be found, and unrighteousness and unrestraint shall increase on
earth. 11 One country shall ask its neighbor, 'Has righteousness, or
anyone who does right, passed through you?' And it will answer, 'No.'
12 At that time people shall hope but not obtain; they shall labor, but
their ways shall not prosper. 13 These are the signs that I am permitted
to tell you, and if you pray again, and weep as you do now, and fast
for seven days, you shall hear yet greater things than these."
Conclusion of the vision
14 Then I woke up, and my body shuddered violently, and my soul was
so troubled that it fainted. 15 But the angel who had come and talked
with me held me and strengthened me and set me on my feet.
16 Now on the second night Phaltiel, a chief of the people, came to me
and said, "Where have you been? And why is your face sad? 17 Or do
you not know that Israel has been entrusted to you in the land of their
exile? 18 Rise therefore and eat some bread, and do not forsake us, like
a shepherd who leaves the flock in the power of savage wolves."
19 Then I said to him, "Go away from me and do not come near me for
seven days; then you may come to me."

470

2 ESDRAS 471

He heard what I said and left me. 20 So I fasted seven days, mourning
and weeping, as the angel Uriel had commanded me.
The second vision; Introduction
21 After seven days the thoughts of my heart were very grievous to me
again. 22 Then my soul recovered the spirit of understanding, and I
began once more to speak words in the presence of the Most High.
Addressing God, the seer reiterates his complaints of divine injustice in
dealing with Israel
23 I said, "O sovereign Lord, from every forest of the earth and from all
its trees you have chosen one vine, 24 and from all the lands of the
world you have chosen for yourself one region, and from all the
flowers of the world you have chosen for yourself one lily, 25 and from
all the depths of the sea you have filled for yourself one river, and
from all the cities that have been built you have consecrated Zion for
yourself, 26 and from all the birds that have been created you have
named for yourself one dove, and from all the flocks that have been
made you have provided for yourself one sheep, 27 and from all the
multitude of peoples you have gotten for yourself one people; and to
this people, whom you have loved, you have given the law that is
approved by all. 28 And now, O Lord, why have you handed the one
over to the many, and dishonored the one root beyond the others, and
scattered your only one among the many? 29 And those who opposed
your promises have trampled on those who believed your covenants. 30
If you really hate your people, they should be punished at your own
hands."
Dialogic dispute with the angel
31 When I had spoken these words, the angel who had come to me on
a previous night was sent to me. 32 He said to me, "Listen to me, and I
will instruct you; pay attention to me, and I will tell you more."

471

2 ESDRAS 472

33 Then I said, "Speak, my lord." And he said to me, "Are you greatly
disturbed in mind over Israel? Or do you love him more than his Maker
does?"
34 I said, "No, my lord, but because of my grief I have spoken; for every
hour I suffer agonies of heart, while I strive to understand the way of
the Most High and to search out some part of his judgment."
35 He said to me, "You cannot." And I said, "Why not, my lord? Why
then was I born? Or why did not my mother's womb become my grave,
so that I would not see the travail of Jacob and the exhaustion of the
people of Israel?"
36 He said to me, "Count up for me those who have not yet come, and
gather for me the scattered raindrops, and make the withered flowers
bloom again for me; 37 open for me the closed chambers, and bring
out for me the winds shut up in them, or show me the picture of a
voice; and then I will explain to you the travail that you ask to
understand."
38 I said, "O sovereign Lord, who is able to know these things except
him whose dwelling is not with mortals? 39 As for me, I am without
wisdom, and how can I speak concerning the things that you have
asked me?"
40 He said to me, "Just as you cannot do one of the things that were
mentioned, so you cannot discover my judgment, or the goal of the
love that I have promised to my people."
Dialogic prediction concerning the future
41 I said, "Yet, O Lord, you have charge of those who are alive at the
end, but what will those do who lived before me, or we, ourselves, or
those who come after us?"
42 He said to me, "I shall liken my judgment to a circle; just as for those
who are last there is no slowness, so for those who are first there is no
haste."

472

2 ESDRAS 473

43 Then I answered and said, "Could you not have created at one time
those who have been and those who are and those who will be, so that
you might show your judgment the sooner?"
44 He replied to me and said, "The creation cannot move faster than
the Creator, nor can the world hold at one time those who have been
created in it."
45 I said, "How have you said to your servant that you will certainly
give life at one time to your creation? If therefore all creatures will live
at one time and the creation will sustain them, it might even now be
able to support all of them present at one time."
46 He said to me, "Ask a woman's womb, and say to it, 'If you bear ten
children, why one after another?' Request it therefore to produce ten
at one time."
47 I said, "Of course it cannot, but only each in its own time."
48 He said to me, "Even so I have given the womb of the earth to those
who from time to time are sown in it. 49 For as an infant does not
bring forth, and a woman who has become old does not bring forth
any longer, so I have made the same rule for the world that I created."
50 Then I inquired and said, "Since you have now given me the
opportunity, let me speak before you. Is our mother, of whom you
have told me, still young? Or is she now approaching old age?"
51 He replied to me, "Ask a woman who bears children, and she will
tell you. 52 Say to her, 'Why are those whom you have borne recently
not like those whom you bore before, but smaller in stature?' 53 And
she herself will answer you, 'Those born in the strength of youth are
different from those born during the time of old age, when the womb
is failing.' 54 Therefore you also should consider that you and your
contemporaries are smaller in stature than those who were before you,
55 and those who come after you will be smaller than you, as born of a
creation that already is aging and passing the strength of youth."

473

2 ESDRAS 474

56 I said, "I implore you, O Lord, if I have found favor in your sight,
show your servant through whom you will visit your creation."
[2 Esdras 6]
1 He said to me, "At the beginning of the circle of the earth, before the
portals of the world were in place, and before the assembled winds
blew, 2 and before the rumblings of thunder sounded, and before the
flashes of lightning shone, and before the foundations of paradise
were laid, 3 and before the beautiful flowers were seen, and before
the powers of movements were established, and before the
innumerable hosts of angels were gathered together, 4 and before the
heights of the air were lifted up, and before the measures of the
firmaments were named, and before the footstool of Zion was
established, 5 and before the present years were reckoned and before
the imaginations of those who now sin were estranged, and before
those who stored up treasures of faith were sealed — 6 then I planned
these things, and they were made through me alone and not through
another; just as the end shall come through me alone and not through
another."
7 I answered and said, "What will be the dividing of the times? Or
when will be the end of the first age and the beginning of the age that
follows?"
8 He said to me, "From Abraham to Isaac, because from him were born
Jacob and Esau, for Jacob's hand held Esau's heel from the beginning.
9 Now Esau is the end of this age, and Jacob is the beginning of the
age that follows. 10 The beginning of a person is the hand, and the end
of a person is the heel; seek for nothing else, Ezra, between the heel
and the hand, Ezra!"
Direct prediction of the future
11 I answered and said, "O sovereign Lord, if I have found favor in your
sight, 12 show your servant the last of your signs of which you showed
me a part on a previous night."

474

2 ESDRAS 475

13 He answered and said to me, "Rise to your feet and you will hear a
full, resounding voice. 14 And if the place where you are standing is
greatly shaken 15 while the voice is speaking, do not be terrified;
because the word concerns the end, and the foundations of the earth
will understand 16 that the speech concerns them. They will tremble
and be shaken, for they know that their end must be changed."
17 When I heard this, I got to my feet and listened; a voice was
speaking, and its sound was like the sound of mighty waters. 18 It said,
"The days are coming when I draw near to visit the inhabitants of the
earth, 19 and when I require from the doers of iniquity the penalty of
their iniquity, and when the humiliation of Zion is complete. 20 When
the seal is placed upon the age that is about to pass away, then I will
show these signs: the books shall be opened before the face of the
firmament, and all shall see my judgment together. 21 Children a year
old shall speak with their voices, and pregnant women shall give birth
to premature children at three and four months, and these shall live
and leap about. 22 Sown places shall suddenly appear unsown, and full
storehouses shall suddenly be found to be empty; 23 the trumpet shall
sound aloud, and when all hear it, they shall suddenly be terrified. 24
At that time friends shall make war on friends like enemies, the earth
and those who inhabit it shall be terrified, and the springs of the
fountains shall stand still, so that for three hours they shall not flow.
25 "It shall be that whoever remains after all that I have foretold to
you shall be saved and shall see my salvation and the end of my world.
26 And they shall see those who were taken up, who from their birth
have not tasted death; and the heart of the earth's inhabitants shall be
changed and converted to a different spirit. 27 For evil shall be blotted
out, and deceit shall be quenched; 28 faithfulness shall flourish, and
corruption shall be overcome, and the truth, which has been so long
without fruit, shall be revealed."
The conclusion of the vision
29 While he spoke to me, little by little the place where I was standing
began to rock to and fro. 30 And he said to me, "I have come to show
you these things this night. 31 If therefore you will pray again and fast

475

2 ESDRAS 476

again for seven days, I will again declare to you greater things than
these, 32 because your voice has surely been heard by the Most High;
for the Mighty One has seen your uprightness and has also observed
the purity that you have maintained from your youth. 33 Therefore he
sent me to show you all these things, and to say to you: 'Believe and do
not be afraid! 34 Do not be quick to think vain thoughts concerning
the former times; then you will not act hastily in the last times.'"
The third vision
35 Now after this I wept again and fasted seven days in the same way
as before, in order to complete the three weeks that had been
prescribed for me. 36 Then on the eighth night my heart was troubled
within me again, and I began to speak in the presence of the Most
High. 37 My spirit was greatly aroused, and my soul was in distress.
Addressing God, the seer recounts God's work in six days of creation
38 I said, "O Lord, you spoke at the beginning of creation, and said on
the first day, 'Let heaven and earth be made,' and your word
accomplished the work. 39 Then the spirit was blowing, and darkness
and silence embraced everything; the sound of human voices was not
yet there. 40 Then you commanded a ray of light to be brought out
from your store-chambers, so that your works could be seen.
41 "Again, on the second day, you created the spirit of the firmament,
and commanded it to divide and separate the waters, so that one part
might move upward and the other part remain beneath.
42 "On the third day you commanded the waters to be gathered
together in a seventh part of the earth; six parts you dried up and kept
so that some of them might be planted and cultivated and be of
service before you. 43 For your word went forth, and at once the work
was done. 44 Immediately fruit came forth in endless abundance and
of varied appeal to the taste, and flowers of inimitable color, and
odors of inexpressible fragrance. These were made on the third day.

476

2 ESDRAS 477

45 "On the fourth day you commanded the brightness of the sun, the
light of the moon, and the arrangement of the stars to come into
being; 46 and you commanded them to serve humankind, about to be
formed.
47 "On the fifth day you commanded the seventh part, where the
water had been gathered together, to bring forth living creatures,
birds, and fishes; and so it was done. 48 The dumb and lifeless water
produced living creatures, as it was commanded, so that therefore the
nations might declare your wondrous works.
49 "Then you kept in existence two living creatures; the one you called
Behemoth and the name of the other Leviathan. 50 And you separated
one from the other, for the seventh part where the water had been
gathered together could not hold them both. 51 And you gave
Behemoth one of the parts that had been dried up on the third day, to
live in it, where there are a thousand mountains; 52 but to Leviathan
you gave the seventh part, the watery part; and you have kept them to
be eaten by whom you wish, and when you wish.
53 "On the sixth day you commanded the earth to bring forth before
you cattle, wild animals, and creeping things; 54 and over these you
placed Adam, as ruler over all the works that you had made; and from
him we have all come, the people whom you have chosen.
55 "All this I have spoken before you, O Lord, because you have said
that it was for us that you created this world. 56 As for the other
nations that have descended from Adam, you have said that they are
nothing, and that they are like spittle, and you have compared their
abundance to a drop from a bucket. 57 And now, O Lord, these
nations, which are reputed to be as nothing, domineer over us and
devour us. 58 But we your people, whom you have called your
firstborn, only begotten, zealous for you, and most dear, have been
given into their hands. 59 If the world has indeed been created for us,
why do we not possess our world as an inheritance? How long will this
be so?"

477

2 ESDRAS 478

[2 Esdras 7]
Dispute between Ezra and the angel
1 When I had finished speaking these words, the angel who had been
sent to me on the former nights was sent to me again. 2 He said to me,
"Rise, Ezra, and listen to the words that I have come to speak to you."
3 I said, "Speak, my lord." And he said to me, "There is a sea set in a
wide expanse so that it is deep and vast, 4 but it has an entrance set in
a narrow place, so that it is like a river. 5 If there are those who wish to
reach the sea, to look at it or to navigate it, how can they come to the
broad part unless they pass through the narrow part? 6 Another
example: There is a city built and set on a plain, and it is full of all good
things; 7 but the entrance to it is narrow and set in a precipitous place,
so that there is fire on the right hand and deep water on the left. 8
There is only one path lying between them, that is, between the fire
and the water, so that only one person can walk on the path. 9 If now
the city is given to someone as an inheritance, how will the heir receive
the inheritance unless by passing through the appointed danger?"
10 I said, "That is right, lord." He said to me, "So also is Israel's portion.
11 For I made the world for their sake, and when Adam transgressed my
statutes, what had been made was judged. 12 And so the entrances of
this world were made narrow and sorrowful and toilsome; they are
few and evil, full of dangers and involved in great hardships. 13 But the
entrances of the greater world are broad and safe, and yield the fruit
of immortality. 14 Therefore unless the living pass through the difficult
and futile experiences, they can never receive those things that have
been reserved for them. 15 Now therefore why are you disturbed,
seeing that you are to perish? Why are you moved, seeing that you are
mortal? 16 Why have you not considered in your mind what is to come,
rather than what is now present?"
17 Then I answered and said, "O sovereign Lord, you have ordained in
your law that the righteous shall inherit these things, but that the
ungodly shall perish. 18 The righteous, therefore, can endure difficult
circumstances while hoping for easier ones; but those who have done

478

2 ESDRAS 479

wickedly have suffered the difficult circumstances and will never see
the easier ones."
19 He said to me, "You are not a better judge than the Lord, or wiser
than the Most High! 20 Let many perish who are now living, rather
than that the law of God that is set before them be disregarded! 21 For
the Lord strictly commanded those who came into the world, when
they came, what they should do to live, and what they should observe
to avoid punishment. 22 Nevertheless they were not obedient, and
spoke against him;
they devised for themselves vain thoughts,
23
and proposed to themselves wicked frauds;
they even declared that the Most High does not exist,
and they ignored his ways.
24 They scorned his law,
and denied his covenants;
they have been unfaithful to his statutes,
and have not performed his works.
25 That is the reason, Ezra, that empty things are for the empty, and
full things are for the full.
Direct prediction of the future by the angel
26 "For indeed the time will come, when the signs that I have foretold
to you will come to pass, that the city that now is not seen shall
appear, and the land that now is hidden shall be disclosed. 27 Everyone
who has been delivered from the evils that I have foretold shall see my
wonders. 28 For my son the Messiah shall be revealed with those who
are with him, and those who remain shall rejoice four hundred years.
29 After those years my son the Messiah shall die, and all who draw
human breath. 30 Then the world shall be turned back to primeval
silence for seven days, as it was at the first beginnings, so that no one
shall be left. 31 After seven days the world that is not yet awake shall
be roused, and that which is corruptible shall perish. 32 The earth shall
give up those who are asleep in it, and the dust those who rest there in
silence; and the chambers shall give up the souls that have been
committed to them. 33 The Most High shall be revealed on the seat of
judgment, and compassion shall pass away, and patience shall be

479

2 ESDRAS 480

withdrawn. 34 Only judgment shall remain, truth shall stand, and
faithfulness shall grow strong. 35 Recompense shall follow, and the
reward shall be manifested; righteous deeds shall awake, and
unrighteous deeds shall not sleep. 36 The pit of torment shall appear,
and opposite it shall be the place of rest; and the furnace of hell shall
be disclosed, and opposite it the paradise of delight. 37 Then the Most
High will say to the nations that have been raised from the dead, 'Look
now, and understand whom you have denied, whom you have not
served, whose commandments you have despised. 38 Look on this side
and on that; here are delight and rest, and there are fire and
torments.' Thus he will speak to them on the day of judgment — 39 a
day that has no sun or moon or stars, 40 or cloud or thunder or
lightning, or wind or water or air, or darkness or evening or morning,
41 or summer or spring or heat or winter or frost or cold, or hail or rain
or dew, 42 or noon or night, or dawn or shining or brightness or light,
but only the splendor of the glory of the Most High, by which all shall
see what has been destined. 43 It will last as though for a week of
years. 44 This is my judgment and its prescribed order; and to you
alone I have shown these things."
The second section of the third vision
45 I answered and said, "O sovereign Lord, I said then and I say now:
Blessed are those who are alive and keep your commandments! 46 But
what of those for whom I prayed? For who among the living is there
that has not sinned, or who is there among mortals that has not
transgressed your covenant? 47 And now I see that the world to come
will bring delight to few, but torments to many. 48 For an evil heart
has grown up in us, which has alienated us from God, and has brought
us into corruption and the ways of death, and has shown us the paths
of perdition and removed us far from life — and that not merely for a
few but for almost all who have been created."
49 He answered me and said, "Listen to me, Ezra, and I will instruct
you, and will admonish you once more. 50 For this reason the Most
High has made not one world but two. 51 Inasmuch as you have said
that the righteous are not many but few, while the ungodly abound,
hear the explanation for this.

480

2 ESDRAS 481

52 "If you have just a few precious stones, will you add to them lead
and clay?" 53 I said, "Lord, how could that be?" 54 And he said to me,
"Not only that, but ask the earth and she will tell you; defer to her,
and she will declare it to you. 55 Say to her, 'You produce gold and
silver and bronze, and also iron and lead and clay; 56 but silver is more
abundant than gold, and bronze than silver, and iron than bronze, and
lead than iron, and clay than lead.' 57 Judge therefore which things are
precious and desirable, those that are abundant or those that are
rare?"
58 I said, "O sovereign Lord, what is plentiful is of less worth, for what
is more rare is more precious."
59 He answered me and said, "Consider within yourself what you have
thought, for the person who has what is hard to get rejoices more than
the person who has what is plentiful. 60 So also will be the judgment
that I have promised; for I will rejoice over the few who shall be saved,
because it is they who have made my glory to prevail now, and
through them my name has now been honored. 61 I will not grieve
over the great number of those who perish; for it is they who are now
like a mist, and are similar to a flame and smoke — they are set on fire
and burn hotly, and are extinguished."
62 I replied and said, "O earth, what have you brought forth, if the
mind is made out of the dust like the other created things? 63 For it
would have been better if the dust itself had not been born, so that
the mind might not have been made from it. 64 But now the mind
grows with us, and therefore we are tormented, because we perish and
we know it. 65 Let the human race lament, but let the wild animals of
the field be glad; let all who have been born lament, but let the cattle
and the flocks rejoice. 66 It is much better with them than with us; for
they do not look for a judgment, and they do not know of any torment
or salvation promised to them after death. 67 What does it profit us
that we shall be preserved alive but cruelly tormented? 68 For all who
have been born are entangled in iniquities, and are full of sins and
burdened with transgressions. 69 And if after death we were not to
come into judgment, perhaps it would have been better for us."

481

2 ESDRAS 482

70 He answered me and said, "When the Most High made the world
and Adam and all who have come from him, he first prepared the
judgment and the things that pertain to the judgment. 71 But now,
understand from your own words — for you have said that the mind
grows with us. 72 For this reason, therefore, those who live on earth
shall be tormented, because though they had understanding, they
committed iniquity; and though they received the commandments,
they did not keep them; and though they obtained the law, they dealt
unfaithfully with what they received. 73 What, then, will they have to
say in the judgment, or how will they answer in the last times? 74 How
long the Most High has been patient with those who inhabit the
world! — and not for their sake, but because of the times that he has
foreordained."
Dialogic prediction of the future
75 I answered and said, "If I have found favor in your sight, O Lord,
show this also to your servant: whether after death, as soon as
everyone of us yields up the soul, we shall be kept in rest until those
times come when you will renew the creation, or whether we shall be
tormented at once?"
76 He answered me and said, "I will show you that also, but do not
include yourself with those who have shown scorn, or number yourself
among those who are tormented. 77 For you have a treasure of works
stored up with the Most High, but it will not be shown to you until the
last times. 78 Now concerning death, the teaching is: When the decisive
decree has gone out from the Most High that a person shall die, as the
spirit leaves the body to return again to him who gave it, first of all it
adores the glory of the Most High. 79 If it is one of those who have
shown scorn and have not kept the way of the Most High, who have
despised his law and hated those who fear God — 80 such spirits shall
not enter into habitations, but shall immediately wander about in
torments, always grieving and sad, in seven ways. 81 The first way,
because they have scorned the law of the Most High. 82 The second
way, because they cannot now make a good repentance so that they
may live. 83 The third way, they shall see the reward laid up for those
who have trusted the covenants of the Most High. 84 The fourth way,

482

2 ESDRAS 483

they shall consider the torment laid up for themselves in the last days.
85 The fifth way, they shall see how the habitations of the others are
guarded by angels in profound quiet. 86 The sixth way, they shall see
how some of them will cross over into torments. 87 The seventh way,
which is worse than all the ways that have been mentioned, because
they shall utterly waste away in confusion and be consumed with
shame, and shall wither with fear at seeing the glory of the Most High
in whose presence they sinned while they were alive, and in whose
presence they are to be judged in the last times.
88 "Now this is the order of those who have kept the ways of the Most
High, when they shall be separated from their mortal body. 89 During
the time that they lived in it, they laboriously served the Most High,
and withstood danger every hour so that they might keep the law of
the Lawgiver perfectly. 90 Therefore this is the teaching concerning
them: 91 First of all, they shall see with great joy the glory of him who
receives them, for they shall have rest in seven orders. 92 The first
order, because they have striven with great effort to overcome the evil
thought that was formed with them, so that it might not lead them
astray from life into death. 93 The second order, because they see the
perplexity in which the souls of the ungodly wander and the
punishment that awaits them. 94 The third order, they see the witness
that he who formed them bears concerning them, that throughout
their life they kept the law with which they were entrusted. 95 The
fourth order, they understand the rest that they now enjoy, being
gathered into their chambers and guarded by angels in profound
quiet, and the glory waiting for them in the last days. 96 The fifth
order, they rejoice that they have now escaped what is corruptible and
shall inherit what is to come; and besides they see the straits and toil
from which they have been delivered, and the spacious liberty that
they are to receive and enjoy in immortality. 97 The sixth order, when
it is shown them how their face is to shine like the sun, and how they
are to be made like the light of the stars, being incorruptible from then
on. 98 The seventh order, which is greater than all that have been
mentioned, because they shall rejoice with boldness, and shall be
confident without confusion, and shall be glad without fear, for they
press forward to see the face of him whom they served in life and from
whom they are to receive their reward when glorified. 99 This is the

483

2 ESDRAS 484

order of the souls of the righteous, as henceforth is announced; and
the previously mentioned are the ways of torment that those who
would not give heed shall suffer hereafter."
100 Then I answered and said, "Will time therefore be given to the
souls, after they have been separated from the bodies, to see what you
have described to me?"
101 He said to me, "They shall have freedom for seven days, so that
during these seven days they may see the things of which you have
been told, and afterwards they shall be gathered in their habitations."
Dispute between Ezra and the angel
102 I answered and said, "If I have found favor in your sight, show
further to me, your servant, whether on the day of judgment the
righteous will be able to intercede for the ungodly or to entreat the
Most High for them — 103 fathers for sons or sons for parents, brothers
for brothers, relatives for their kindred, or friends for those who are
most dear."
104 He answered me and said, "Since you have found favor in my sight,
I will show you this also. The day of judgment is decisive and displays to
all the seal of truth. Just as now a father does not send his son, or a son
his father, or a master his servant, or a friend his dearest friend, to be
ill or sleep or eat or be healed in his place, 105 so no one shall ever pray
for another on that day, neither shall anyone lay a burden on another;
for then all shall bear their own righteousness and unrighteousness."
[NOTE: At v. 106 we come to the continuation of ch 7 as preserved in
the standard editions of the Latin Vulgate; NRSV resumes the Latin
numbering here, designating verses 106-140 as 36-70, but with the
numbers 106-140 added as well.]
36 106 I answered and said, "How then do we find that first Abraham
prayed for the people of Sodom, and Moses for our ancestors who
sinned in the desert, 37 107 and Joshua after him for Israel in the days
of Achan, 38 108 and Samuel in the days of Saul, and David for the

484

2 ESDRAS 485

plague, and Solomon for those at the dedication, 39 109 and Elijah for
those who received the rain, and for the one who was dead, that he
might live, 40 110 and Hezekiah for the people in the days of
Sennacherib, and many others prayed for many? 41 111 So if now, when
corruption has increased and unrighteousness has multiplied, the
righteous have prayed for the ungodly, why will it not be so then as
well?"
42 112 He answered me and said, "This present world is not the end; the
full glory does not remain in it; therefore those who were strong
prayed for the weak. 43 113 But the day of judgment will be the end of
this age and the beginning of the immortal age to come, in which
corruption has passed away, 44 114 sinful indulgence has come to an
end, unbelief has been cut off, and righteousness has increased and
truth has appeared. 45 115 Therefore no one will then be able to have
mercy on someone who has been condemned in the judgment, or to
harm someone who is victorious."
46 116 I answered and said, "This is my first and last comment: it would
have been better if the earth had not produced Adam, or else, when it
had produced him, had restrained him from sinning. 47 117 For what
good is it to all that they live in sorrow now and expect punishment
after death? 48 118 O Adam, what have you done? For though it was
you who sinned, the fall was not yours alone, but ours also who are
your descendants. 49 119 For what good is it to us, if an immortal time
has been promised to us, but we have done deeds that bring death? 50
120 And what good is it that an everlasting hope has been promised to
us, but we have miserably failed? 51 121 Or that safe and healthful
habitations have been reserved for us, but we have lived wickedly? 52
122 Or that the glory of the Most High will defend those who have led
a pure life, but we have walked in the most wicked ways? 53 123 Or
that a paradise shall be revealed, whose fruit remains unspoiled and in
which are abundance and healing, but we shall not enter it 54 124
because we have lived in perverse ways? 55 125 Or that the faces of
those who practiced self-control shall shine more than the stars, but
our faces shall be blacker than darkness? 56 126 For while we lived and
committed iniquity we did not consider what we should suffer after
death."

485

2 ESDRAS 486

57 127 He answered and said, "This is the significance of the contest
that all who are born on earth shall wage: 58 128 if they are defeated
they shall suffer what you have said, but if they are victorious they
shall receive what I have said. 59 129 For this is the way of which Moses,
while he was alive, spoke to the people, saying, 'Choose life for
yourself, so that you may live!' 60 130 But they did not believe him or
the prophets after him, or even myself who have spoken to them. 61
131 Therefore there shall not be grief at their destruction, so much as
joy over those to whom salvation is assured."
62 132 I answered and said, "I know, O Lord, that the Most High is now
called merciful, because he has mercy on those who have not yet come
into the world; 63 133 and gracious, because he is gracious to those
who turn in repentance to his law; 64 134 and patient, because he
shows patience toward those who have sinned, since they are his own
creatures; 65 135 and bountiful, because he would rather give than
take away; 66 136 and abundant in compassion, because he makes his
compassions abound more and more to those now living and to those
who are gone and to those yet to come — 67 137 for if he did not make
them abound, the world with those who inhabit it would not have life
— 68 138 and he is called the giver, because if he did not give out of his
goodness so that those who have committed iniquities might be
relieved of them, not one ten-thousandth of humankind could have
life; 69 139 and the judge, because if he did not pardon those who
were created by his word and blot out the multitude of their sins, 70
140 there would probably be left only very few of the innumerable
multitude."
[2 Esdras 8]
1 He answered me and said, "The Most High made this world for the
sake of many, but the world to come for the sake of only a few. 2 But I
tell you a parable, Ezra. Just as, when you ask the earth, it will tell you
that it provides a large amount of clay from which earthenware is
made, but only a little dust from which gold comes, so is the course of
the present world. 3 Many have been created, but only a few shall be
saved."

486

2 ESDRAS 487

The third section of the third vision; Monologue of Ezra
4 I answered and said, "Then drink your fill of understanding, O my
soul, and drink wisdom, O my heart. 5 For not of your own will did you
come into the world, and against your will you depart, for you have
been given only a short time to live. 6 O Lord above us, grant to your
servant that we may pray before you, and give us a seed for our heart
and cultivation of our understanding so that fruit may be produced, by
which every mortal who bears the likeness of a human being may be
able to live. 7 For you alone exist, and we are a work of your hands, as
you have declared. 8 And because you give life to the body that is now
fashioned in the womb, and furnish it with members, what you have
created is preserved amid fire and water, and for nine months the
womb endures your creature that has been created in it. 9 But that
which keeps and that which is kept shall both be kept by your keeping.
And when the womb gives up again what has been created in it, 10 you
have commanded that from the members themselves (that is, from the
breasts) milk, the fruit of the breasts, should be supplied, 11 so that
what has been fashioned may be nourished for a time; and afterwards
you will still guide it in your mercy. 12 You have nurtured it in your
righteousness, and instructed it in your law, and reproved it in your
wisdom. 13 You put it to death as your creation, and make it live as
your work. 14 If then you will suddenly and quickly destroy what with
so great labor was fashioned by your command, to what purpose was it
made? 15 And now I will speak out: About all humankind you know
best; but I will speak about your people, for whom I am grieved, 16 and
about your inheritance, for whom I lament, and about Israel, for whom
I am sad, and about the seed of Jacob, for whom I am troubled. 17
Therefore I will pray before you for myself and for them, for I see the
failings of us who inhabit the earth; 18 and now also I have heard of
the swiftness of the judgment that is to come. 19 Therefore hear my
voice and understand my words, and I will speak before you."
Ezra's Prayer
The beginning of the words of Ezra's prayer, before he was taken up.
He said: 20 "O Lord, you who inhabit eternity, whose eyes are exalted
and whose upper chambers are in the air, 21 whose throne is beyond

487

2 ESDRAS 488

measure and whose glory is beyond comprehension, before whom the
hosts of angels stand trembling 22 and at whose command they are
changed to wind and fire, whose word is sure and whose utterances
are certain, whose command is strong and whose ordinance is terrible,
23 whose look dries up the depths and whose indignation makes the
mountains melt away, and whose truth is established forever — 24
hear, O Lord, the prayer of your servant, and give ear to the petition of
your creature; attend to my words. 25 For as long as I live I will speak,
and as long as I have understanding I will answer. 26 O do not look on
the sins of your people, but on those who serve you in truth. 27 Do not
take note of the endeavors of those who act wickedly, but of the
endeavors of those who have kept your covenants amid afflictions. 28
Do not think of those who have lived wickedly in your sight, but
remember those who have willingly acknowledged that you are to be
feared. 29 Do not will the destruction of those who have the ways of
cattle, but regard those who have gloriously taught your law. 30 Do
not be angry with those who are deemed worse than wild animals, but
love those who have always put their trust in your glory. 31 For we and
our ancestors have passed our lives in ways that bring death; but it is
because of us sinners that you are called merciful. 32 For if you have
desired to have pity on us, who have no works of righteousness, then
you will be called merciful. 33 For the righteous, who have many works
laid up with you, shall receive their reward in consequence of their
own deeds. 34 But what are mortals, that you are angry with them; or
what is a corruptible race, that you are so bitter against it? 35 For in
truth there is no one among those who have been born who has not
acted wickedly; among those who have existed there is no one who has
not done wrong. 36 For in this, O Lord, your righteousness and
goodness will be declared, when you are merciful to those who have
no store of good works."
Dispute between Ezra and the angel
37 He answered me and said, "Some things you have spoken rightly,
and it will turn out according to your words. 38 For indeed I will not
concern myself about the fashioning of those who have sinned, or
about their death, their judgment, or their destruction; 39 but I will
rejoice over the creation of the righteous, over their pilgrimage also,

488

2 ESDRAS 489

and their salvation, and their receiving their reward. 40 As I have
spoken, therefore, so it shall be.
41 "For just as the farmer sows many seeds in the ground and plants a
multitude of seedlings, and yet not all that have been sown will come
up in due season, and not all that were planted will take root; so also
those who have been sown in the world will not all be saved."
42 I answered and said, "If I have found favor in your sight, let me
speak. 43 If the farmer's seed does not come up, because it has not
received your rain in due season, or if it has been ruined by too much
rain, it perishes. 44 But people, who have been formed by your hands
and are called your own image because they are made like you, and for
whose sake you have formed all things — have you also made them
like the farmer's seed? 45 Surely not, O Lord above! But spare your
people and have mercy on your inheritance, for you have mercy on
your own creation."
46 He answered me and said, "Things that are present are for those
who live now, and things that are future are for those who will live
hereafter. 47 For you come far short of being able to love my creation
more than I love it. But you have often compared yourself to the
unrighteous. Never do so! 48 But even in this respect you will be
praiseworthy before the Most High, 49 because you have humbled
yourself, as is becoming for you, and have not considered yourself to
be among the righteous. You will receive the greatest glory, 50 for
many miseries will affect those who inhabit the world in the last times,
because they have walked in great pride. 51 But think of your own
case, and inquire concerning the glory of those who are like yourself,
52 because it is for you that paradise is opened, the tree of life is
planted, the age to come is prepared, plenty is provided, a city is built,
rest is appointed, goodness is established and wisdom perfected
beforehand. 53 The root of evil is sealed up from you, illness is
banished from you, and death is hidden; Hades has fled and corruption
has been forgotten; 54 sorrows have passed away, and in the end the
treasure of immortality is made manifest. 55 Therefore do not ask any
more questions about the great number of those who perish. 56 For
when they had opportunity to choose, they despised the Most High,

489

2 ESDRAS 490

and were contemptuous of his law, and abandoned his ways. 57
Moreover, they have even trampled on his righteous ones, 58 and said
in their hearts that there is no God — though they knew well that they
must die. 59 For just as the things that I have predicted await you, so
the thirst and torment that are prepared await them. For the Most
High did not intend that anyone should be destroyed; 60 but those
who were created have themselves defiled the name of him who made
them, and have been ungrateful to him who prepared life for them
now. 61 Therefore my judgment is now drawing near; 62 I have not
shown this to all people, but only to you and a few like you."
Direct prediction of the future by the angel
Then I answered and said, 63 "O Lord, you have already shown me a
great number of the signs that you will do in the last times, but you
have not shown me when you will do them."
[2 Esdras 9]
1 He answered me and said, "Measure carefully in your mind, and
when you see that some of the predicted signs have occurred, 2 then
you will know that it is the very time when the Most High is about to
visit the world that he has made. 3 So when there shall appear in the
world earthquakes, tumult of peoples, intrigues of nations, wavering
of leaders, confusion of princes, 4 then you will know that it was of
these that the Most High spoke from the days that were of old, from
the beginning. 5 For just as with everything that has occurred in the
world, the beginning is evident, and the end manifest; 6 so also are the
times of the Most High: the beginnings are manifest in wonders and
mighty works, and the end in penalties and in signs.
7 "It shall be that all who will be saved and will be able to escape on
account of their works, or on account of the faith by which they have
believed, 8 will survive the dangers that have been predicted, and will
see my salvation in my land and within my borders, which I have
sanctified for myself from the beginning. 9 Then those who have now
abused my ways shall be amazed, and those who have rejected them
with contempt shall live in torments. 10 For as many as did not

490

2 ESDRAS 491

acknowledge me in their lifetime, though they received my benefits, 11
and as many as scorned my law while they still had freedom, and did
not understand but despised it while an opportunity of repentance was
still open to them, 12 these must in torment acknowledge it after
death. 13 Therefore, do not continue to be curious about how the
ungodly will be punished; but inquire how the righteous will be saved,
those to whom the age belongs and for whose sake the age was
made."
14 I answered and said, 15 "I said before, and I say now, and will say it
again: there are more who perish than those who will be saved, 16 as a
wave is greater than a drop of water."
17 He answered me and said, "As is the field, so is the seed; and as are
the flowers, so are the colors; and as is the work, so is the product; and
as is the farmer, so is the threshing floor. 18 For there was a time in this
age when I was preparing for those who now exist, before the world
was made for them to live in, and no one opposed me then, for no one
existed; 19 but now those who have been created in this world, which
is supplied both with an unfailing table and an inexhaustible pasture,
have become corrupt in their ways. 20 So I considered my world, and
saw that it was lost. I saw that my earth was in peril because of the
devices of those who had come into it. 21 And I saw and spared some
with great difficulty, and saved for myself one grape out of a cluster,
and one plant out of a great forest. 22 So let the multitude perish that
has been born in vain, but let my grape and my plant be saved,
because with much labor I have perfected them.
Conclusion and injunctions
23 "Now, if you will let seven days more pass — do not, however, fast
during them, 24 but go into a field of flowers where no house has
been built, and eat only of the flowers of the field, and taste no meat
and drink no wine, but eat only flowers — 25 and pray to the Most
High continually, then I will come and talk with you."

491

2 ESDRAS 492

The fourth vision; Introduction
26 So I went, as he directed me, into the field that is called Ardat; there
I sat among the flowers and ate of the plants of the field, and the
nourishment they afforded satisfied me. 27 After seven days, while I lay
on the grass, my heart was troubled again as it was before. 28 Then my
mouth was opened, and I began to speak before the Most High, and
said,
Ezra's address
29 "O Lord, you showed yourself among us, to our ancestors in the
wilderness when they came out from Egypt and when they came into
the untrodden and unfruitful wilderness; 30 and you said, 'Hear me, O
Israel, and give heed to my words, O descendants of Jacob. 31 For I sow
my law in you, and it shall bring forth fruit in you, and you shall be
glorified through it forever.' 32 But though our ancestors received the
law, they did not keep it and did not observe the statutes; yet the fruit
of the law did not perish — for it could not, because it was yours. 33
Yet those who received it perished, because they did not keep what
had been sown in them. 34 Now this is the general rule that, when the
ground has received seed, or the sea a ship, or any dish food or drink,
and when it comes about that what was sown or what was launched or
what was put in is destroyed, 35 they are destroyed, but the things that
held them remain; yet with us it has not been so. 36 For we who have
received the law and sinned will perish, as well as our hearts that
received it; 37 the law, however, does not perish but survives in its
glory."
The first part of the vision
38 When I said these things in my heart, I looked around, and on my
right I saw a woman; she was mourning and weeping with a loud
voice, and was deeply grieved at heart; her clothes were torn, and
there were ashes on her head. 39 Then I dismissed the thoughts with
which I had been engaged, and turned to her 40 and said to her, "Why
are you weeping, and why are you grieved at heart?"

492

2 ESDRAS 493

41 She said to me, "Let me alone, my lord, so that I may weep for
myself and continue to mourn, for I am greatly embittered in spirit and
deeply distressed."
42 I said to her, "What has happened to you? Tell me."
43 And she said to me, "Your servant was barren and had no child,
though I lived with my husband for thirty years. 44 Every hour and
every day during those thirty years I prayed to the Most High, night
and day. 45 And after thirty years God heard your servant, and looked
upon my low estate, and considered my distress, and gave me a son. I
rejoiced greatly over him, I and my husband and all my neighbors; and
we gave great glory to the Mighty One. 46 And I brought him up with
much care. 47 So when he grew up and I came to take a wife for him, I
set a day for the marriage feast.
[2 Esdras 10]
1 "But it happened that when my son entered his wedding chamber, he
fell down and died. 2 So all of us put out our lamps, and all my
neighbors attempted to console me; I remained quiet until the evening
of the second day. 3 But when all of them had stopped consoling me,
encouraging me to be quiet, I got up in the night and fled, and I came
to this field, as you see. 4 And now I intend not to return to the town,
but to stay here; I will neither eat nor drink, but will mourn and fast
continually until I die."
The second part of the vision
5 Then I broke off the reflections with which I was still engaged, and
answered her in anger and said, 6 "You most foolish of women, do you
not see our mourning, and what has happened to us? 7 For Zion, the
mother of us all, is in deep grief and great distress. 8 It is most
appropriate to mourn now, because we are all mourning, and to be
sorrowful, because we are all sorrowing; you are sorrowing for one
son, but we, the whole world, for our mother. 9 Now ask the earth,
and she will tell you that it is she who ought to mourn over so many
who have come into being upon her. 10 From the beginning all have

493

2 ESDRAS 494

been born of her, and others will come; and, lo, almost all go to
perdition, and a multitude of them will come to doom. 11 Who then
ought to mourn the more, she who lost so great a multitude, or you
who are grieving for one alone? 12 But if you say to me, 'My
lamentation is not like the earth's, for I have lost the fruit of my womb,
which I brought forth in pain and bore in sorrow; 13 but it is with the
earth according to the way of the earth — the multitude that is now in
it goes as it came'; 14 then I say to you, 'Just as you brought forth in
sorrow, so the earth also has from the beginning given her fruit, that
is, humankind, to him who made her.' 15 Now, therefore, keep your
sorrow to yourself, and bear bravely the troubles that have come upon
you. 16 For if you acknowledge the decree of God to be just, you will
receive your son back in due time, and will be praised among women.
17 Therefore go into the town to your husband."
18 She said to me, "I will not do so; I will not go into the city, but I will
die here."
19 So I spoke again to her, and said, 20 "Do not do that, but let
yourself be persuaded — for how many are the adversities of Zion? —
and be consoled because of the sorrow of Jerusalem. 21 For you see
how our sanctuary has been laid waste, our altar thrown down, our
temple destroyed; 22 our harp has been laid low, our song has been
silenced, and our rejoicing has been ended; the light of our lampstand
has been put out, the ark of our covenant has been plundered, our
holy things have been polluted, and the name by which we are called
has been almost profaned; our children have suffered abuse, our
priests have been burned to death, our Levites have gone into exile,
our virgins have been defiled, and our wives have been ravished; our
righteous men have been carried off, our little ones have been cast
out, our young men have been enslaved and our strong men made
powerless. 23 And, worst of all, the seal of Zion has been deprived of
its glory, and given over into the hands of those that hate us. 24
Therefore shake off your great sadness and lay aside your many
sorrows, so that the Mighty One may be merciful to you again, and the
Most High may give you rest, a respite from your troubles."

494

2 ESDRAS 495

A vision of the transformed Jerusalem
25 While I was talking to her, her face suddenly began to shine
exceedingly; her countenance flashed like lightning, so that I was too
frightened to approach her, and my heart was terrified. While I was
wondering what this meant, 26 she suddenly uttered a loud and fearful
cry, so that the earth shook at the sound. 27 When I looked up, the
woman was no longer visible to me, but a city was being built, and a
place of huge foundations showed itself.
The appearance of the angel
I was afraid, and cried with a loud voice and said, 28 "Where is the
angel Uriel, who came to me at first? For it was he who brought me
into this overpowering bewilderment; my end has become corruption,
and my prayer a reproach."
29 While I was speaking these words, the angel who had come to me at
first came to me, and when he saw me 30 lying there like a corpse,
deprived of my understanding, he grasped my right hand and
strengthened me and set me on my feet, and said to me, 31 "What is
the matter with you? And why are you troubled? And why are your
understanding and the thoughts of your mind troubled?"
32 I said, "It was because you abandoned me. I did as you directed, and
went out into the field, and lo, what I have seen and can still see, I am
unable to explain."
33 He said to me, "Stand up like a man, and I will instruct you."
34 I said, "Speak, my lord; only do not forsake me, so that I may not die
before my time. 35 For I have seen what I did not know, and I hear
what I do not understand 36 — or is my mind deceived, and my soul
dreaming? 37 Now therefore I beg you to give your servant an
explanation of this bewildering vision."

495

2 ESDRAS 496

Interpretation of the vision
38 He answered me and said, "Listen to me, and I will teach you, and
tell you about the things that you fear; for the Most High has revealed
many secrets to you. 39 He has seen your righteous conduct, and that
you have sorrowed continually for your people and mourned greatly
over Zion. 40 This therefore is the meaning of the vision. 41 The
woman who appeared to you a little while ago, whom you saw
mourning and whom you began to console 42 (you do not now see the
form of a woman, but there appeared to you a city being built) 43 and
who told you about the misfortune of her son — this is the
interpretation: 44 The woman whom you saw is Zion, which you now
behold as a city being built. 45 And as for her telling you that she was
barren for thirty years, the reason is that there were three thousand
years in the world before any offering was offered in it. 46 And after
three thousand years Solomon built the city, and offered offerings;
then it was that the barren woman bore a son. 47 And as for her telling
you that she brought him up with much care, that was the period of
residence in Jerusalem. 48 And as for her saying to you, 'My son died as
he entered his wedding chamber,' and that misfortune had overtaken
her, this was the destruction that befell Jerusalem. 49 So you saw her
likeness, how she mourned for her son, and you began to console her
for what had happened. 50 For now the Most High, seeing that you are
sincerely grieved and profoundly distressed for her, has shown you the
brilliance of her glory, and the loveliness of her beauty. 51 Therefore I
told you to remain in the field where no house had been built, 52 for I
knew that the Most High would reveal these things to you. 53
Therefore I told you to go into the field where there was no
foundation of any building, 54 because no work of human construction
could endure in a place where the city of the Most High was to be
revealed.
Conclusion and injunctions
55 "Therefore do not be afraid, and do not let your heart be terrified;
but go in and see the splendor or the vastness of the building, as far as
it is possible for your eyes to see it, 56 and afterward you will hear as
much as your ears can hear. 57 For you are more blessed than many,

496

2 ESDRAS 497

and you have been called to be with the Most High as few have been.
58 But tomorrow night you shall remain here, 59 and the Most High
will show you in those dream visions what the Most High will do to
those who inhabit the earth in the last days."
So I slept that night and the following one, as he had told me.
[2 Esdras 11]
The fifth vision; description of the vision
1 On the second night I had a dream: I saw rising from the sea an eagle
that had twelve feathered wings and three heads. 2 I saw it spread its
wings over the whole earth, and all the winds of heaven blew upon it,
and the clouds were gathered around it. 3 I saw that out of its wings
there grew opposing wings; but they became little, puny wings. 4 But
its heads were at rest; the middle head was larger than the other
heads, but it too was at rest with them. 5 Then I saw that the eagle
flew with its wings, and it reigned over the earth and over those who
inhabit it. 6 And I saw how all things under heaven were subjected to
it, and no one spoke against it — not a single creature that was on the
earth. 7 Then I saw the eagle rise upon its talons, and it uttered a cry to
its wings, saying, 8 "Do not all watch at the same time; let each sleep
in its own place, and watch in its turn; 9 but let the heads be reserved
for the last."
10 I looked again and saw that the voice did not come from its heads,
but from the middle of its body. 11 I counted its rival wings, and there
were eight of them. 12 As I watched, one wing on the right side rose
up, and it reigned over all the earth. 13 And after a time its reign came
to an end, and it disappeared, so that even its place was no longer
visible. Then the next wing rose up and reigned, and it continued to
reign a long time. 14 While it was reigning its end came also, so that it
disappeared like the first. 15 And a voice sounded, saying to it, 16
"Listen to me, you who have ruled the earth all this time; I announce
this to you before you disappear. 17 After you no one shall rule as long
as you have ruled, not even half as long."

497

2 ESDRAS 498

18 Then the third wing raised itself up, and held the rule as the earlier
ones had done, and it also disappeared. 19 And so it went with all the
wings; they wielded power one after another and then were never
seen again. 20 I kept looking, and in due time the wings that followed
also rose up on the right side, in order to rule. There were some of
them that ruled, yet disappeared suddenly; 21 and others of them rose
up, but did not hold the rule.
22 And after this I looked and saw that the twelve wings and the two
little wings had disappeared, 23 and nothing remained on the eagle's
body except the three heads that were at rest and six little wings.
24 As I kept looking I saw that two little wings separated from the six
and remained under the head that was on the right side; but four
remained in their place. 25 Then I saw that these little wings planned
to set themselves up and hold the rule. 26 As I kept looking, one was
set up, but suddenly disappeared; 27 a second also, and this
disappeared more quickly than the first. 28 While I continued to look
the two that remained were planning between themselves to reign
together; 29 and while they were planning, one of the heads that were
at rest (the one that was in the middle) suddenly awoke; it was greater
than the other two heads. 30 And I saw how it allied the two heads
with itself, 31 and how the head turned with those that were with it
and devoured the two little wings that were planning to reign. 32
Moreover this head gained control of the whole earth, and with much
oppression dominated its inhabitants; it had greater power over the
world than all the wings that had gone before.
33 After this I looked again and saw the head in the middle suddenly
disappear, just as the wings had done. 34 But the two heads remained,
which also in like manner ruled over the earth and its inhabitants. 35
And while I looked, I saw the head on the right side devour the one on
the left.
36 Then I heard a voice saying to me, "Look in front of you and
consider what you see." 37 When I looked, I saw what seemed to be a
lion roused from the forest, roaring; and I heard how it uttered a
human voice to the eagle, and spoke, saying, 38 "Listen and I will

498

2 ESDRAS 499

speak to you. The Most High says to you, 39 'Are you not the one that
remains of the four beasts that I had made to reign in my world, so
that the end of my times might come through them? 40 You, the
fourth that has come, have conquered all the beasts that have gone
before; and you have held sway over the world with great terror, and
over all the earth with grievous oppression; and for so long you have
lived on the earth with deceit. 41 You have judged the earth, but not
with truth, 42 for you have oppressed the meek and injured the
peaceable; you have hated those who tell the truth, and have loved
liars; you have destroyed the homes of those who brought forth fruit,
and have laid low the walls of those who did you no harm. 43 Your
insolence has come up before the Most High, and your pride to the
Mighty One. 44 The Most High has looked at his times; now they have
ended, and his ages have reached completion. 45 Therefore you, eagle,
will surely disappear, you and your terrifying wings, your most evil
little wings, your malicious heads, your most evil talons, and your
whole worthless body, 46 so that the whole earth, freed from your
violence, may be refreshed and relieved, and may hope for the
judgment and mercy of him who made it.'"
[2 Esdras 12]
1 While the lion was saying these words to the eagle, I looked 2 and
saw that the remaining head had disappeared. The two wings that had
gone over to it rose up and set themselves up to reign, and their reign
was brief and full of tumult. 3 When I looked again, they were already
vanishing. The whole body of the eagle was burned, and the earth was
exceedingly terrified.
The seer's response
Then I woke up in great perplexity of mind and great fear, and I said to
my spirit, 4 "You have brought this upon me, because you search out
the ways of the Most High. 5 I am still weary in mind and very weak in
my spirit, and not even a little strength is left in me, because of the
great fear with which I have been terrified tonight. 6 Therefore I will
now entreat the Most High that he may strengthen me to the end."

499

2 ESDRAS 500

7 Then I said, "O sovereign Lord, if I have found favor in your sight, and
if I have been accounted righteous before you beyond many others,
and if my prayer has indeed come up before your face, 8 strengthen
me and show me, your servant, the interpretation and meaning of this
terrifying vision so that you may fully comfort my soul. 9 For you have
judged me worthy to be shown the end of the times and the last
events of the times."
The interpretation
10 He said to me, "This is the interpretation of this vision that you have
seen: 11 The eagle that you saw coming up from the sea is the fourth
kingdom that appeared in a vision to your brother Daniel. 12 But it was
not explained to him as I now explain to you or have explained it. 13
The days are coming when a kingdom shall rise on earth, and it shall be
more terrifying than all the kingdoms that have been before it. 14 And
twelve kings shall reign in it, one after another. 15 But the second that
is to reign shall hold sway for a longer time than any other one of the
twelve. 16 This is the interpretation of the twelve wings that you saw.
17 "As for your hearing a voice that spoke, coming not from the eagle's
heads but from the midst of its body, this is the interpretation: 18 In
the midst of the time of that kingdom great struggles shall arise, and it
shall be in danger of falling; nevertheless it shall not fall then, but shall
regain its former power. 19 As for your seeing eight little wings
clinging to its wings, this is the interpretation: 20 Eight kings shall arise
in it, whose times shall be short and their years swift; 21 two of them
shall perish when the middle of its time draws near; and four shall be
kept for the time when its end approaches, but two shall be kept until
the end.
22 "As for your seeing three heads at rest, this is the interpretation: 23
In its last days the Most High will raise up three kings, and they shall
renew many things in it, and shall rule the earth 24 and its inhabitants
more oppressively than all who were before them. Therefore they are
called the heads of the eagle, 25 because it is they who shall sum up his
wickedness and perform his last actions. 26 As for your seeing that the
large head disappeared, one of the kings shall die in his bed, but in

500

2 ESDRAS 501

agonies. 27 But as for the two who remained, the sword shall devour
them. 28 For the sword of one shall devour him who was with him; but
he also shall fall by the sword in the last days.
29 "As for your seeing two little wings passing over to the head which
was on the right side, 30 this is the interpretation: It is these whom the
Most High has kept for the eagle's end; this was the reign which was
brief and full of tumult, as you have seen.
31 "And as for the lion whom you saw rousing up out of the forest and
roaring and speaking to the eagle and reproving him for his
unrighteousness, and as for all his words that you have heard, 32 this is
the Messiah whom the Most High has kept until the end of days, who
will arise from the offspring of David, and will come and speak with
them. He will denounce them for their ungodliness and for their
wickedness, and will display before them their contemptuous dealings.
33 For first he will bring them alive before his judgment seat, and when
he has reproved them, then he will destroy them. 34 But in mercy he
will set free the remnant of my people, those who have been saved
throughout my borders, and he will make them joyful until the end
comes, the day of judgment, of which I spoke to you at the beginning.
35 This is the dream that you saw, and this is its interpretation. 36 And
you alone were worthy to learn this secret of the Most High.
Conclusion and injunctions
37 Therefore write all these things that you have seen in a book, put it
in a hidden place; 38 and you shall teach them to the wise among your
people, whose hearts you know are able to comprehend and keep
these secrets. 39 But as for you, wait here seven days more, so that you
may be shown whatever it pleases the Most High to show you." Then
he left me.
The seer comforts those who were grieved because of his absence
40 When all the people heard that the seven days were past and I had
not returned to the city, they all gathered together, from the least to
the greatest, and came to me and spoke to me, saying, 41 "How have

501

2 ESDRAS 502

we offended you, and what harm have we done you, that you have
forsaken us and sit in this place? 42 For of all the prophets you alone
are left to us, like a cluster of grapes from the vintage, and like a lamp
in a dark place, and like a haven for a ship saved from a storm. 43 Are
not the disasters that have befallen us enough? 44 Therefore if you
forsake us, how much better it would have been for us if we also had
been consumed in the burning of Zion. 45 For we are no better than
those who died there." And they wept with a loud voice.
Then I answered them and said, 46 "Take courage, O Israel; and do not
be sorrowful, O house of Jacob; 47 for the Most High has you in
remembrance, and the Mighty One has not forgotten you in your
struggle. 48 As for me, I have neither forsaken you nor withdrawn
from you; but I have come to this place to pray on account of the
desolation of Zion, and to seek mercy on account of the humiliation of
our sanctuary. 49 Now go to your homes, every one of you, and after
these days I will come to you." 50 So the people went into the city, as I
told them to do. 51 But I sat in the field seven days, as the angel had
commanded me; and I ate only of the flowers of the field, and my food
was of plants during those days.
[2 Esdras 13]
The sixth vision; description of the vision
1 After seven days I dreamed a dream in the night. 2 And lo, a wind
arose from the sea and stirred up all its waves. 3 As I kept looking the
wind made something like the figure of a man come up out of the
heart of the sea. And I saw that this man flew with the clouds of
heaven; and wherever he turned his face to look, everything under his
gaze trembled, 4 and whenever his voice issued from his mouth, all
who heard his voice melted as wax melts when it feels the fire.
5 After this I looked and saw that an innumerable multitude of people
were gathered together from the four winds of heaven to make war
against the man who came up out of the sea. 6 And I looked and saw
that he carved out for himself a great mountain, and flew up on to it. 7
And I tried to see the region or place from which the mountain was
carved, but I could not.

502

2 ESDRAS 503

8 After this I looked and saw that all who had gathered together
against him, to wage war with him, were filled with fear, and yet they
dared to fight. 9 When he saw the onrush of the approaching
multitude, he neither lifted his hand nor held a spear or any weapon of
war; 10 but I saw only how he sent forth from his mouth something like
a stream of fire, and from his lips a flaming breath, and from his
tongue he shot forth a storm of sparks. 11 All these were mingled
together, the stream of fire and the flaming breath and the great
storm, and fell on the onrushing multitude that was prepared to fight,
and burned up all of them, so that suddenly nothing was seen of the
innumerable multitude but only the dust of ashes and the smell of
smoke. When I saw it, I was amazed.
12 After this I saw the same man come down from the mountain and
call to himself another multitude that was peaceable. 13 Then many
people came to him, some of whom were joyful and some sorrowful;
some of them were bound, and some were bringing others as
offerings.
The seer prays that God will interpret the vision to him
Then I woke up in great terror, and prayed to the Most High, and said,
14 "From the beginning you have shown your servant these wonders,
and have deemed me worthy to have my prayer heard by you; 15 now
show me the interpretation of this dream also. 16 For as I consider it in
my mind, alas for those who will be left in those days! And still more,
alas for those who are not left! 17 For those who are not left will be
sad 18 because they understand the things that are reserved for the last
days, but cannot attain them. 19 But alas for those also who are left,
and for that very reason! For they shall see great dangers and much
distress, as these dreams show. 20 Yet it is better to come into these
things, though incurring peril, than to pass from the world like a cloud,
and not to see what will happen in the last days."

503

2 ESDRAS 504

The interpretation
He answered me and said, 21 "I will tell you the interpretation of the
vision, and I will also explain to you the things that you have
mentioned. 22 As for what you said about those who survive, and
concerning those who do not survive, this is the interpretation: 23 The
one who brings the peril at that time will protect those who fall into
peril, who have works and faith toward the Almighty. 24 Understand
therefore that those who are left are more blessed than those who
have died.
25 "This is the interpretation of the vision: As for your seeing a man
come up from the heart of the sea, 26 this is he whom the Most High
has been keeping for many ages, who will himself deliver his creation;
and he will direct those who are left. 27 And as for your seeing wind
and fire and a storm coming out of his mouth, 28 and as for his not
holding a spear or weapon of war, yet destroying the onrushing
multitude that came to conquer him, this is the interpretation: 29 The
days are coming when the Most High will deliver those who are on the
earth. 30 And bewilderment of mind shall come over those who inhabit
the earth. 31 They shall plan to make war against one another, city
against city, place against place, people against people, and kingdom
against kingdom. 32 When these things take place and the signs occur
that I showed you before, then my Son will be revealed, whom you saw
as a man coming up from the sea.
33 "Then, when all the nations hear his voice, all the nations shall leave
their own lands and the warfare that they have against one another;
34 and an innumerable multitude shall be gathered together, as you
saw, wishing to come and conquer him. 35 But he shall stand on the
top of Mount Zion. 36 And Zion shall come and be made manifest to all
people, prepared and built, as you saw the mountain carved out
without hands. 37 Then he, my Son, will reprove the assembled nations
for their ungodliness (this was symbolized by the storm), 38 and will
reproach them to their face with their evil thoughts and the torments
with which they are to be tortured (which were symbolized by the
flames), and will destroy them without effort by means of the law
(which was symbolized by the fire).

504

2 ESDRAS 505

39 "And as for your seeing him gather to himself another multitude
that was peaceable, 40 these are the nine tribes that were taken away
from their own land into exile in the days of King Hoshea, whom
Shalmaneser, king of the Assyrians, made captives; he took them across
the river, and they were taken into another land. 41 But they formed
this plan for themselves, that they would leave the multitude of the
nations and go to a more distant region, where no human beings had
ever lived, 42 so that there at least they might keep their statutes that
they had not kept in their own land. 43 And they went in by the
narrow passages of the Euphrates river. 44 For at that time the Most
High performed signs for them, and stopped the channels of the river
until they had crossed over. 45 Through that region there was a long
way to go, a journey of a year and a half; and that country is called
Arzareth.
46 "Then they lived there until the last times; and now, when they are
about to come again, 47 the Most High will stop the channels of the
river again, so that they may be able to cross over. Therefore you saw
the multitude gathered together in peace. 48 But those who are left of
your people, who are found within my holy borders, shall be saved. 49
Therefore when he destroys the multitude of the nations that are
gathered together, he will defend the people who remain. 50 And
then he will show them very many wonders."
51 I said, "O sovereign Lord, explain this to me: Why did I see the man
coming up from the heart of the sea?"
52 He said to me, "Just as no one can explore or know what is in the
depths of the sea, so no one on earth can see my Son or those who are
with him, except in the time of his day. 53 This is the interpretation of
the dream that you saw. And you alone have been enlightened about
this, 54 because you have forsaken your own ways and have applied
yourself to mine, and have searched out my law; 55 for you have
devoted your life to wisdom, and called understanding your mother.

505

2 ESDRAS 506

Conclusion and injunctions
56 Therefore I have shown you these things; for there is a reward laid
up with the Most High. For it will be that after three more days I will
tell you other things, and explain weighty and wondrous matters to
you."
57 Then I got up and walked in the field, giving great glory and praise
to the Most High for the wonders that he does from time to time, 58
and because he governs the times and whatever things come to pass in
their seasons. And I stayed there three days.
[2 Esdras 14]
The seventh vision
1 On the third day, while I was sitting under an oak, suddenly a voice
came out of a bush opposite me and said, "Ezra, Ezra!" 2 And I
answered, "Here I am, Lord," and I rose to my feet. 3 Then he said to
me, "I revealed myself in a bush and spoke to Moses when my people
were in bondage in Egypt; 4 and I sent him and led my people out of
Egypt; and I led him up on Mount Sinai, where I kept him with me
many days. 5 I told him many wondrous things, and showed him the
secrets of the times and declared to him the end of the times. Then I
commanded him, saying, 6 'These words you shall publish openly, and
these you shall keep secret.' 7 And now I say to you: 8 Lay up in your
heart the signs that I have shown you, the dreams that you have seen,
and the interpretations that you have heard; 9 for you shall be taken
up from among humankind, and henceforth you shall live with my Son
and with those who are like you, until the times are ended. 10 The age
has lost its youth, and the times begin to grow old. 11 For the age is
divided into twelve parts, and nine of its parts have already passed, 12
as well as half of the tenth part; so two of its parts remain, besides half
of the tenth part. 13 Now therefore, set your house in order, and
reprove your people; comfort the lowly among them, and instruct
those that are wise. And now renounce the life that is corruptible, 14
and put away from you mortal thoughts; cast away from you the
burdens of humankind, and divest yourself now of your weak nature;
15 lay to one side the thoughts that are most grievous to you, and

506

2 ESDRAS 507

hurry to escape from these times. 16 For evils worse than those that you
have now seen happen shall take place hereafter. 17 For the weaker
the world becomes through old age, the more shall evils be increased
upon its inhabitants. 18 Truth shall go farther away, and falsehood
shall come near. For the eagle that you saw in the vision is already
hurrying to come."
Ezra's prayer for inspiration to restore the holy scriptures is granted
19 Then I answered and said, "Let me speak in your presence, Lord. 20
For I will go, as you have commanded me, and I will reprove the people
who are now living; but who will warn those who will be born
hereafter? For the world lies in darkness, and its inhabitants are
without light. 21 For your law has been burned, and so no one knows
the things which have been done or will be done by you. 22 If then I
have found favor with you, send the holy spirit into me, and I will write
everything that has happened in the world from the beginning, the
things that were written in your law, so that people may be able to
find the path, and that those who want to live in the last days may do
so."
23 He answered me and said, "Go and gather the people, and tell them
not to seek you for forty days. 24 But prepare for yourself many writing
tablets, and take with you Sarea, Dabria, Selemia, Ethanus, and Asiel —
these five, who are trained to write rapidly; 25 and you shall come
here, and I will light in your heart the lamp of understanding, which
shall not be put out until what you are about to write is finished. 26
And when you have finished, some things you shall make public, and
some you shall deliver in secret to the wise; tomorrow at this hour you
shall begin to write."
Ezra reproves the people
27 Then I went as he commanded me, and I gathered all the people
together, and said, 28 "Hear these words, O Israel. 29 At first our
ancestors lived as aliens in Egypt, and they were liberated from there
30 and received the law of life, which they did not keep, which you
also have transgressed after them. 31 Then land was given to you for a

507

2 ESDRAS 508

possession in the land of Zion; but you and your ancestors committed
iniquity and did not keep the ways that the Most High commanded
you. 32 And since he is a righteous judge, in due time he took from you
what he had given. 33 And now you are here, and your people are
farther in the interior. 34 If you, then, will rule over your minds and
discipline your hearts, you shall be kept alive, and after death you shall
obtain mercy. 35 For after death the judgment will come, when we
shall live again; and then the names of the righteous shall become
manifest, and the deeds of the ungodly shall be disclosed. 36 But let no
one come to me now, and let no one seek me for forty days."
The revelation of scriptures
37 So I took the five men, as he commanded me, and we proceeded to
the field, and remained there. 38 And on the next day a voice called
me, saying, "Ezra, open your mouth and drink what I give you to
drink." 39 So I opened my mouth, and a full cup was offered to me; it
was full of something like water, but its color was like fire. 40 I took it
and drank; and when I had drunk it, my heart poured forth
understanding, and wisdom increased in my breast, for my spirit
retained its memory, 41 and my mouth was opened and was no longer
closed. 42 Moreover, the Most High gave understanding to the five
men, and by turns they wrote what was dictated, using characters that
they did not know. They sat forty days; they wrote during the daytime,
and ate their bread at night. 43 But as for me, I spoke in the daytime
and was not silent at night. 44 So during the forty days, ninety-four
books were written. 45 And when the forty days were ended, the Most
High spoke to me, saying, "Make public the twenty-four books that
you wrote first, and let the worthy and the unworthy read them; 46
but keep the seventy that were written last, in order to give them to
the wise among your people. 47 For in them is the spring of
understanding, the fountain of wisdom, and the river of knowledge."
48 And I did so.

508

2 ESDRAS 509

[2 Esdras 15]
(Chs 15-16 comprise a separate literary composition also known as 6
Ezra.)
The commissioning of the prophet
1 Speak in the ears of my people the words of the prophecy that I will
put in your mouth, says the Lord, 2 and cause them to be written on
paper; for they are trustworthy and true. 3 Do not fear the plots
against you, and do not be troubled by the unbelief of those who
oppose you. 4 For all unbelievers shall die in their unbelief.
Prediction of worldwide catastrophes
5 Beware, says the Lord, I am bringing evils upon the world, the sword
and famine, death and destruction, 6 because iniquity has spread
throughout every land, and their harmful doings have reached their
limit. 7 Therefore, says the Lord, 8 I will be silent no longer concerning
their ungodly acts that they impiously commit, neither will I tolerate
their wicked practices. Innocent and righteous blood cries out to me,
and the souls of the righteous cry out continually. 9 I will surely avenge
them, says the Lord, and will receive to myself all the innocent blood
from among them. 10 See, my people are being led like a flock to the
slaughter; I will not allow them to live any longer in the land of Egypt,
11 but I will bring them out with a mighty hand and with an uplifted
arm, and will strike Egypt with plagues, as before, and will destroy all
its land.
12 Let Egypt mourn, and its foundations, because of the plague of
chastisement and castigation that the Lord will bring upon it. 13 Let the
farmers that till the ground mourn, because their seed shall fail to
grow and their trees shall be ruined by blight and hail and by a terrible
tempest. 14 Alas for the world and for those who live in it! 15 For the
sword and misery draw near them, and nation shall rise up to fight
against nation, with swords in their hands. 16 For there shall be unrest
among people; growing strong against one another, they shall in their
might have no respect for their king or the chief of their leaders. 17 For
a person will desire to go into a city, and shall not be able to do so. 18
Because of their pride the cities shall be in confusion, the houses shall

509

2 ESDRAS 510

be destroyed, and people shall be afraid. 19 People shall have no pity
for their neighbors, but shall make an assault upon their houses with
the sword, and plunder their goods, because of hunger for bread and
because of great tribulation.
20 See how I am calling together all the kings of the earth to turn to
me, says God, from the rising sun and from the south, from the east
and from Lebanon; to turn and repay what they have given them. 21
Just as they have done to my elect until this day, so I will do, and will
repay into their bosom. Thus says the Lord God: 22 My right hand will
not spare the sinners, and my sword will not cease from those who
shed innocent blood on earth. 23 And a fire went forth from his wrath,
and consumed the foundations of the earth and the sinners, like burnt
straw. 24 Alas for those who sin and do not observe my
commandments, says the Lord; 25 I will not spare them. Depart, you
faithless children! Do not pollute my sanctuary. 26 For God knows all
who sin against him; therefore he will hand them over to death and
slaughter. 27 Already calamities have come upon the whole earth, and
you shall remain in them; God will not deliver you, because you have
sinned against him.
A vision of warfare in the east
28 What a terrifying sight, appearing from the east! 29 The nations of
the dragons of Arabia shall come out with many chariots, and from the
day that they set out, their hissing shall spread over the earth, so that
all who hear them will fear and tremble. 30 Also the Carmonians,
raging in wrath, shall go forth like wild boars from the forest, and with
great power they shall come and engage them in battle, and with their
tusks they shall devastate a portion of the land of the Assyrians with
their teeth. 31 And then the dragons, remembering their origin, shall
become still stronger; and if they combine in great power and turn to
pursue them, 32 then these shall be disorganized and silenced by their
power, and shall turn and flee. 33 And from the land of the Assyrians
an enemy in ambush shall attack them and destroy one of them, and
fear and trembling shall come upon their army, and indecision upon
their kings.

510

2 ESDRAS 511

A vision of destructive storm clouds
34 See the clouds from the east, and from the north to the south! Their
appearance is exceedingly threatening, full of wrath and storm. 35
They shall clash against one another and shall pour out a heavy
tempest on the earth, and their own tempest; and there shall be blood
from the sword as high as a horse's belly 36 and a man's thigh and a
camel's hock. 37 And there shall be fear and great trembling on the
earth; those who see that wrath shall be horror-stricken, and they shall
be seized with trembling. 38 After that, heavy storm clouds shall be
stirred up from the south, and from the north, and another part from
the west. 39 But the winds from the east shall prevail over the cloud
that was raised in wrath, and shall dispel it; and the tempest that was
to cause destruction by the east wind shall be driven violently toward
the south and west. 40 Great and mighty clouds, full of wrath and
tempest, shall rise and destroy all the earth and its inhabitants, and
shall pour out upon every high and lofty place a terrible tempest, 41
fire and hail and flying swords and floods of water, so that all the
fields and all the streams shall be filled with the abundance of those
waters. 42 They shall destroy cities and walls, mountains and hills, trees
of the forests, and grass of the meadows, and their grain. 43 They shall
go on steadily to Babylon and blot it out. 44 They shall come to it and
surround it; they shall pour out on it the tempest and all its fury; then
the dust and smoke shall reach the sky, and all who are around it shall
mourn for it. 45 And those who survive shall serve those who have
destroyed it.
46 And you, Asia, who share in the splendor of Babylon and the glory
of her person — 47 woe to you, miserable wretch! For you have made
yourself like her; you have decked out your daughters for prostitution
to please and glory in your lovers, who have always lusted after you. 48
You have imitated that hateful one in all her deeds and devices.
Therefore God says, 49 I will send evils upon you: widowhood, poverty,
famine, sword, and pestilence, bringing ruin to your houses, bringing
destruction and death. 50 And the glory of your strength shall wither
like a flower when the heat shall rise that is sent upon you. 51 You shall
be weakened like a wretched woman who is beaten and wounded, so
that you cannot receive your mighty lovers. 52 Would I have dealt with

511

2 ESDRAS 512

you so violently, says the Lord, 53 if you had not killed my chosen
people continually, exulting and clapping your hands and talking
about their death when you were drunk?
54 Beautify your face! 55 The reward of a prostitute is in your lap;
therefore you shall receive your recompense. 56 As you will do to my
chosen people, says the Lord, so God will do to you, and will hand you
over to adversities. 57 Your children shall die of hunger, and you shall
fall by the sword; your cities shall be wiped out, and all your people
who are in the open country shall fall by the sword. 58 Those who are
in the mountains and highlands shall perish of hunger, and they shall
eat their own flesh in hunger for bread and drink their own blood in
thirst for water. 59 Unhappy above all others, you shall come and
suffer fresh miseries. 60 As they pass by they shall crush the hateful
city, and shall destroy a part of your land and abolish a portion of your
glory, when they return from devastated Babylon. 61 You shall be
broken down by them like stubble, and they shall be like fire to you. 62
They shall devour you and your cities, your land and your mountains;
they shall burn with fire all your forests and your fruitful trees. 63 They
shall carry your children away captive, plunder your wealth, and mar
the glory of your countenance.
[2 Esdras 16]
The inevitability of God's judgment
1 Woe to you, Babylon and Asia! Woe to you, Egypt and Syria! 2 Bind
on sackcloth and cloth of goats' hair, and wail for your children, and
lament for them; for your destruction is at hand. 3 The sword has been
sent upon you, and who is there to turn it back? 4 A fire has been sent
upon you, and who is there to quench it? 5 Calamities have been sent
upon you, and who is there to drive them away? 6 Can one drive off a
hungry lion in the forest, or quench a fire in the stubble once it has
started to burn? 7 Can one turn back an arrow shot by a strong archer?
8 The Lord God sends calamities, and who will drive them away? 9 Fire
will go forth from his wrath, and who is there to quench it? 10 He will
flash lightning, and who will not be afraid? He will thunder, and who
will not be terrified? 11 The Lord will threaten, and who will not be
utterly shattered at his presence? 12 The earth and its foundations

512

2 ESDRAS 513

quake, the sea is churned up from the depths, and its waves and the
fish with them shall be troubled at the presence of the Lord and the
glory of his power. 13 For his right hand that bends the bow is strong,
and his arrows that he shoots are sharp and when they are shot to the
ends of the world will not miss once. 14 Calamities are sent forth and
shall not return until they come over the earth. 15 The fire is kindled,
and shall not be put out until it consumes the foundations of the earth.
16 Just as an arrow shot by a mighty archer does not return, so the
calamities that are sent upon the earth shall not return. 17 Alas for me!
Alas for me! Who will deliver me in those days?
Prediction of desolation on the earth
18 The beginning of sorrows, when there shall be much lamentation;
the beginning of famine, when many shall perish; the beginning of
wars, when the powers shall be terrified; the beginning of calamities,
when all shall tremble. What shall they do, when the calamities come?
19 Famine and plague, tribulation and anguish are sent as scourges for
the correction of humankind. 20 Yet for all this they will not turn from
their iniquities, or ever be mindful of the scourges. 21 Indeed,
provisions will be so cheap upon earth that people will imagine that
peace is assured for them, and then calamities shall spring up on the
earth — the sword, famine, and great confusion. 22 For many of those
who live on the earth shall perish by famine; and those who survive the
famine shall die by the sword. 23 And the dead shall be thrown out like
dung, and there shall be no one to console them; for the earth shall be
left desolate, and its cities shall be demolished. 24 No one shall be left
to cultivate the earth or to sow it. 25 The trees shall bear fruit, but who
will gather it? 26 The grapes shall ripen, but who will tread them? For
in all places there shall be great solitude; 27 a person will long to see
another human being, or even to hear a human voice. 28 For ten shall
be left out of a city; and two, out of the field, those who have hidden
themselves in thick groves and clefts in the rocks. 29 Just as in an olive
orchard three or four olives may be left on every tree, 30 or just as,
when a vineyard is gathered, some clusters may be left by those who
search carefully through the vineyard, 31 so in those days three or four
shall be left by those who search their houses with the sword. 32 The
earth shall be left desolate, and its fields shall be plowed up, and its

513

2 ESDRAS 514

roads and all its paths shall bring forth thorns, because no sheep will
go along them. 33 Virgins shall mourn because they have no
bridegrooms; women shall mourn because they have no husbands;
their daughters shall mourn, because they have no help. 34 Their
bridegrooms shall be killed in war, and their husbands shall perish of
famine.
Exhortation of God's people
35 Listen now to these things, and understand them, you who are
servants of the Lord. 36 This is the word of the Lord; receive it and do
not disbelieve what the Lord says. 37 The calamities draw near, and are
not delayed. 38 Just as a pregnant woman, in the ninth month when
the time of her delivery draws near, has great pains around her womb
for two or three hours beforehand, but when the child comes forth
from the womb, there will not be a moment's delay, 39 so the
calamities will not delay in coming upon the earth, and the world will
groan, and pains will seize it on every side.
40 Hear my words, O my people; prepare for battle, and in the midst of
the calamities be like strangers on the earth. 41 Let the one who sells
be like one who will flee; let the one who buys be like one who will
lose; 42 let the one who does business be like one who will not make a
profit; and let the one who builds a house be like one who will not live
in it; 43 let the one who sows be like one who will not reap; so also the
one who prunes the vines, like one who will not gather the grapes; 44
those who marry, like those who will have no children; and those who
do not marry, like those who are widowed. 45 Because of this, those
who labor, labor in vain; 46 for strangers shall gather their fruits, and
plunder their goods, overthrow their houses, and take their children
captive; for in captivity and famine they will produce their children. 47
Those who conduct business, do so only to have it plundered; the more
they adorn their cities, their houses and possessions, and their persons,
48 the more angry I will be with them for their sins, says the Lord. 49
Just as a respectable and virtuous woman abhors a prostitute, 50 so
righteousness shall abhor iniquity, when she decks herself out, and
shall accuse her to her face when he comes who will defend the one
who searches out every sin on earth.

514

2 ESDRAS 515

51 Therefore do not be like her or her works. 52 For in a very short time
iniquity will be removed from the earth, and righteousness will reign
over us.
The impossibility of hiding sins from God
53 Sinners must not say that they have not sinned; for God will burn
coals of fire on the head of everyone who says, "I have not sinned
before God and his glory." 54 The Lord certainly knows everything that
people do; he knows their imaginations and their thoughts and their
hearts. 55 He said, "Let the earth be made," and it was made, and "Let
the heaven be made," and it was made. 56 At his word the stars were
fixed in their places, and he knows the number of the stars. 57 He
searches the abyss and its treasures; he has measured the sea and its
contents; 58 he has confined the sea in the midst of the waters; and by
his word he has suspended the earth over the water. 59 He has spread
out the heaven like a dome and made it secure upon the waters; 60 he
has put springs of water in the desert, and pools on the tops of the
mountains, so as to send rivers from the heights to water the earth. 61
He formed human beings and put a heart in the midst of each body,
and gave each person breath and life and understanding 62 and the
spirit of Almighty God, who surely made all things and searches out
hidden things in hidden places. 63 He knows your imaginations and
what you think in your hearts! Woe to those who sin and want to hide
their sins! 64 The Lord will strictly examine all their works, and will
make a public spectacle of all of you. 65 You shall be put to shame
when your sins come out before others, and your own iniquities shall
stand as your accusers on that day. 66 What will you do? Or how will
you hide your sins before the Lord and his glory? 67 Indeed, God is the
judge; fear him! Cease from your sins, and forget your iniquities, never
to commit them again; so God will lead you forth and deliver you from
all tribulation.
Prediction of persecutions
68 The burning wrath of a great multitude is kindled over you; they
shall drag some of you away and force you to eat what was sacrificed
to idols. 69 And those who consent to eat shall be held in derision and

515

2 ESDRAS 516

contempt, and shall be trampled under foot. 70 For in many places and
in neighboring cities there shall be a great uprising against those who
fear the Lord. 71 They shall be like maniacs, sparing no one, but
plundering and destroying those who continue to fear the Lord. 72 For
they shall destroy and plunder their goods, and drive them out of
house and home. 73 Then the tested quality of my elect shall be
manifest, like gold that is tested by fire.
Concluding instructions to the elect
74 Listen, my elect ones, says the Lord; the days of tribulation are at
hand, but I will deliver you from them. 75 Do not fear or doubt, for
God is your guide. 76 You who keep my commandments and precepts,
says the Lord God, must not let your sins weigh you down, or your
iniquities prevail over you. 77 Woe to those who are choked by their
sins and overwhelmed by their iniquities! They are like a field choked
with underbrush and its path overwhelmed with thorns, so that no one
can pass through. 78 It is shut off and given up to be consumed by fire.

516

4 MACCABEES 517

4 MACCABEES
Introduction
Although not a part of the canon of scripture of any religious
community, 4 Maccabees is included in some important manuscripts of
the Septuagint (the Greek Bible), and its particularly vivid, sometimes
morbid, presentation of unflinching commitment to one's faith was a
source of inspiration for Jews during the Hellenistic era. Despite its
title, 4 Maccabees has little to do with the Maccabean family or their
armed revolt against Seleucid rule during the second century BCE (see
the introductions to 1 and 2 Maccabees). The focus instead is on heroes
of a different sort, a group of Jewish martyrs who endure torture and
execution out of loyalty to their God and their people. According to
the interpretation advanced by the book, it was their noble sacrifice,
not any military or political exploits, that ultimately secured God's
favor for the Jews and rescued them from apostasy and foreign
oppression (18.3-5).
Part moral treatise, part funeral oration, 4 Maccabees is a classic
example of the interpretation of Jewish religion in terms of GrecoRoman intellectual and rhetorical conventions. Indeed, Judaism is even
presented as "a philosophy in accordance with devout reason" (8.1; see
also 1.1; 5.4, 7, 7, 22, 35; 7.7, 9, 21; 8.15). As such, its adherents are
trained to exercise control over the ruinous influence or irrational
emotions such as desire and fear, to prevail over the cruel injustices of
tyranny, and to embody moral virtues, especially piety, wisdom, and
courage. The book's underlying contention is that strict adherence to
Judaism actually fulfills the highest ideals of Hellenistic civilization, a
pointed message for Jews under constant pressure to assimilate into
the dominant, pagan culture.

517

4 MACCABEES 518

The book has two major parts. The first (1.1-3.18) presents the
philosophical thesis that "reason rules the emotions" (1.5), linking
reason especially with "a way of life in accordance with the [Mosaic]
law" (2.8). The second, longer part (3.19-18.19) dramatizes this thesis
through a series of narratives that describe the brutal tortures inflicted
by the Seleucid ruler Antiochus IV Epiphanes (who ruled from 175-164
BCE) on Eleazar, seven brothers, and their mother. These heroic stories,
based on the much shorter accounts of 2 Maccabees 6-7, are meant to
advocate loyalty to Judaism even in the most trying circumstances.
Ultimately, the martyrs are meant to as exemplars for anyone who
would "fight the sacred and noble battle for religion" (9.24; cf. 16.16).
Conversely, Antiochus, portrayed as a shameless, impious, and
bloodthirsty tyrant (e.g., 11.3-6; 12.11-14), represents the epitome of
Gentile vice.
The book's theology, emphasizing veneration of the patriarchs,
obedience to the law, and the sovereignty of God, is fully Jewish, with
two distinctive features. First, the martyrdoms are interpreted as a
substitutionary atonement that expiates the nation's sin and purifies
the land (Atoning sacrifice: the virtuous martyrdoms are taken as
sufficient punishment for the nation's apostasy, so that divine favor is
restored). Second, in contrast to 2 Maccabees with its emphasis on
bodily resurrection, 4 Maccabees speaks of God's final reward for the
martyrs in terms of the immortality of the soul, reflecting Hellenistic
ideas, which would directly influence Christianity.
Written in Greek by an unknown author, 4 Maccabees has sometimes
been assigned to the period 20-54 CE, when Cilicia was joined to Syria
and Phoenicia as a single province, although it in fact could have been
written at any time during the late first century BCE or the first century
CE. The book's place of origin is similarly uncertain. Jerusalem is a likely
candidate, though Antioch, Alexandria, and other cities have been
proposed. While it is unlikely that 4 Maccabees was known to any New
Testament authors, the book's interpretation of martyrdom is
representative of the theological milieu in which early Christians
attached atoning significance to the suffering and death of Jesus (e.g.,
Mt 26.28; Mk 10.45; Rom 3.24-25; Heb 9.11-14; 1 Jn 1.7).

518

4 MACCABEES 519

[4 Maccabees 1]
A philosophical introduction
1 The subject that I am about to discuss is most philosophical, that is,
whether devout reason is sovereign over the emotions. So it is right for
me to advise you to pay earnest attention to philosophy. 2 For the
subject is essential to everyone who is seeking knowledge, and in
addition it includes the praise of the highest virtue — I mean, of
course, rational judgment. 3 If, then, it is evident that reason rules over
those emotions that hinder self-control, namely, gluttony and lust, 4 it
is also clear that it masters the emotions that hinder one from justice,
such as malice, and those that stand in the way of courage, namely
anger, fear, and pain. 5 Some might perhaps ask, "If reason rules the
emotions, why is it not sovereign over forgetfulness and ignorance?"
Their attempt at argument is ridiculous! 6 For reason does not rule its
own emotions, but those that are opposed to justice, courage, and selfcontrol; and it is not for the purpose of destroying them, but so that
one may not give way to them.
7 I could prove to you from many and various examples that reason is
dominant over the emotions, 8 but I can demonstrate it best from the
noble bravery of those who died for the sake of virtue, Eleazar and the
seven brothers and their mother. 9 All of these, by despising sufferings
that bring death, demonstrated that reason controls the emotions. 10
On this anniversary it is fitting for me to praise for their virtues those
who, with their mother, died for the sake of nobility and goodness, but
I would also call them blessed for the honor in which they are held. 11
All people, even their torturers, marveled at their courage and
endurance, and they became the cause of the downfall of tyranny over
their nation. By their endurance they conquered the tyrant, and thus
their native land was purified through them. 12 I shall shortly have an
opportunity to speak of this; but, as my custom is, I shall begin by
stating my main principle, and then I shall turn to their story, giving
glory to the all-wise God.
13 Our inquiry, accordingly, is whether reason is sovereign over the
emotions. 14 We shall decide just what reason is and what emotion is,
how many kinds of emotions there are, and whether reason rules over

519

4 MACCABEES 520

all these. 15 Now reason is the mind that with sound logic prefers the
life of wisdom. 16 Wisdom, next, is the knowledge of divine and human
matters and the causes of these. 17 This, in turn, is education in the law,
by which we learn divine matters reverently and human affairs to our
advantage. 18 Now the kinds of wisdom are rational judgment, justice,
courage, and self-control. 19 Rational judgment is supreme over all of
these, since by means of it reason rules over the emotions. 20 The two
most comprehensive types of the emotions are pleasure and pain; and
each of these is by nature concerned with both body and soul. 21 The
emotions of both pleasure and pain have many consequences. 22 Thus
desire precedes pleasure and delight follows it. 23 Fear precedes pain
and sorrow comes after. 24 Anger, as a person will see by reflecting on
this experience, is an emotion embracing pleasure and pain. 25 In
pleasure there exists even a malevolent tendency, which is the most
complex of all the emotions. 26 In the soul it is boastfulness,
covetousness, thirst for honor, rivalry, and malice; 27 in the body,
indiscriminate eating, gluttony, and solitary gormandizing.
28 Just as pleasure and pain are two plants growing from the body and
the soul, so there are many offshoots of these plants, 29 each of which
the master cultivator, reason, weeds and prunes and ties up and waters
and thoroughly irrigates, and so tames the jungle of habits and
emotions. 30 For reason is the guide of the virtues, but over the
emotions it is sovereign.
Observe now, first of all, that rational judgment is sovereign over the
emotions by virtue of the restraining power of self-control. 31 Selfcontrol, then, is dominance over the desires. 32 Some desires are
mental, others are physical, and reason obviously rules over both. 33
Otherwise, how is it that when we are attracted to forbidden foods we
abstain from the pleasure to be had from them? Is it not because
reason is able to rule over appetites? I for one think so. 34 Therefore
when we crave seafood and fowl and animals and all sorts of foods
that are forbidden to us by the law, we abstain because of domination
by reason. 35 For the emotions of the appetites are restrained, checked
by the temperate mind, and all the impulses of the body are bridled by
reason.

520

4 MACCABEES 521

[4 Maccabees 2]
Fellowship of reason with the law
1 And why is it amazing that the desires of the mind for the enjoyment
of beauty are rendered powerless? 2 It is for this reason, certainly, that
the temperate Joseph is praised, because by mental effort he overcame
sexual desire. 3 For when he was young and in his prime for
intercourse, by his reason he nullified the frenzy of the passions. 4 Not
only is reason proved to rule over the frenzied urge of sexual desire,
but also over every desire. 5 Thus the law says, "You shall not covet
your neighbor's wife or anything that is your neighbor's." 6 In fact,
since the law has told us not to covet, I could prove to you all the more
that reason is able to control desires.
Just so it is with the emotions that hinder one from justice. 7 Otherwise
how could it be that someone who is habitually a solitary gormandizer,
a glutton, or even a drunkard can learn a better way, unless reason is
clearly lord of the emotions? 8 Thus, as soon as one adopts a way of
life in accordance with the law, even though a lover of money, one is
forced to act contrary to natural ways and to lend without interest to
the needy and to cancel the debt when the seventh year arrives. 9 If
one is greedy, one is ruled by the law through reason so that one
neither gleans the harvest nor gathers the last grapes from the
vineyard.
In all other matters we can recognize that reason rules the emotions.
10 For the law prevails even over affection for parents, so that virtue is
not abandoned for their sakes. 11 It is superior to love for one's wife, so
that one rebukes her when she breaks the law. 12 It takes precedence
over love for children, so that one punishes them for misdeeds. 13 It is
sovereign over the relationship of friends, so that one rebukes friends
when they act wickedly. 14 Do not consider it paradoxical when reason,
through the law, can prevail even over enmity. The fruit trees of the
enemy are not cut down, but one preserves the property of enemies
from marauders and helps raise up what has fallen.

521

4 MACCABEES 522

15 It is evident that reason rules even the more violent emotions: lust
for power, vainglory, boasting, arrogance, and malice. 16 For the
temperate mind repels all these malicious emotions, just as it repels
anger — for it is sovereign over even this. 17 When Moses was angry
with Dathan and Abiram, he did nothing against them in anger, but
controlled his anger by reason. 18 For, as I have said, the temperate
mind is able to get the better of the emotions, to correct some, and to
render others powerless. 19 Why else did Jacob, our most wise father,
censure the households of Simeon and Levi for their irrational
slaughter of the entire tribe of the Shechemites, saying, "Cursed be
their anger"? 20 For if reason could not control anger, he would not
have spoken thus. 21 Now when God fashioned human beings, he
planted in them emotions and inclinations, 22 but at the same time he
enthroned the mind among the senses as a sacred governor over them
all. 23 To the mind he gave the law; and one who lives subject to this
will rule a kingdom that is temperate, just, good, and courageous.
24 How is it then, one might say, that if reason is master of the
emotions, it does not control forgetfulness and ignorance? [4
Maccabees 3] 1 But this argument is entirely ridiculous; for it is evident
that reason rules not over its own emotions, but over those of the
body. 2 No one of us can eradicate that kind of desire, but reason can
provide a way for us not to be enslaved by desire. 3 No one of us can
eradicate anger from the mind, but reason can help to deal with anger.
4 No one of us can eradicate malice, but reason can fight at our side so
that we are not overcome by malice. 5 For reason does not uproot the
emotions but is their antagonist.
The example of King David's thirst
6 Now this can be explained more clearly by the story of King David's
thirst. 7 David had been attacking the Philistines all day long, and
together with the soldiers of his nation had killed many of them. 8
Then when evening fell, he came, sweating and quite exhausted, to
the royal tent, around which the whole army of our ancestors had
encamped. 9 Now all the rest were at supper, 10 but the king was
extremely thirsty, and though springs were plentiful there, he could
not satisfy his thirst from them. 11 But a certain irrational desire for the

522

4 MACCABEES 523

water in the enemy's territory tormented and inflamed him, undid and
consumed him. 12 When his guards complained bitterly because of the
king's craving, two staunch young soldiers, respecting the king's desire,
armed themselves fully, and taking a pitcher climbed over the enemy's
ramparts. 13 Eluding the sentinels at the gates, they went searching
throughout the enemy camp 14 and found the spring, and from it
boldly brought the king a drink. 15 But David, though he was burning
with thirst, considered it an altogether fearful danger to his soul to
drink what was regarded as equivalent to blood. 16 Therefore,
opposing reason to desire, he poured out the drink as an offering to
God. 17 For the temperate mind can conquer the drives of the emotions
and quench the flames of frenzied desires; 18 it can overthrow bodily
agonies even when they are extreme, and by nobility of reason spurn
all domination by the emotions.
19 The present occasion now invites us to a narrative demonstration of
temperate reason.
Apollonius's attempt on the temple treasury
20 At a time when our ancestors were enjoying profound peace
because of their observance of the law and were prospering, so that
even Seleucus Nicanor, king of Asia, had both appropriated money to
them for the temple service and recognized their commonwealth — 21
just at that time certain persons attempted a revolution against the
public harmony and caused many and various disasters.
[4 Maccabees 4]
1 Now there was a certain Simon, a political opponent of the noble and
good man, Onias, who then held the high priesthood for life. When
despite all manner of slander he was unable to injure Onias in the eyes
of the nation, he fled the country with the purpose of betraying it. 2 So
he came to Apollonius, governor of Syria, Phoenicia, and Cilicia, and
said, 3 "I have come here because I am loyal to the king's government,
to report that in the Jerusalem treasuries there are deposited tens of
thousands in private funds, which are not the property of the temple
but belong to King Seleucus." 4 When Apollonius learned the details of

523

4 MACCABEES 524

these things, he praised Simon for his service to the king and went up
to Seleucus to inform him of the rich treasure. 5 On receiving authority
to deal with this matter, he proceeded quickly to our country
accompanied by the accursed Simon and a very strong military force. 6
He said that he had come with the king's authority to seize the private
funds in the treasury. 7 The people indignantly protested his words,
considering it outrageous that those who had committed deposits to
the sacred treasury should be deprived of them, and did all that they
could to prevent it. 8 But, uttering threats, Apollonius went on to the
temple. 9 While the priests together with women and children were
imploring God in the temple to shield the holy place that was being
treated so contemptuously, 10 and while Apollonius was going up with
his armed forces to seize the money, angels on horseback with
lightning flashing from their weapons appeared from heaven, instilling
in them great fear and trembling. 11 Then Apollonius fell down half
dead in the temple area that was open to all, stretched out his hands
toward heaven, and with tears begged the Hebrews to pray for him
and propitiate the wrath of the heavenly army. 12 For he said that he
had committed a sin deserving of death, and that if he were spared he
would praise the blessedness of the holy place before all people. 13
Moved by these words, the high priest Onias, although otherwise he
had scruples about doing so, prayed for him so that King Seleucus
would not suppose that Apollonius had been overcome by human
treachery and not by divine justice. 14 So Apollonius, having been
saved beyond all expectations, went away to report to the king what
had happened to him.
Antiochus's persecution of the Jews
15 When King Seleucus died, his son Antiochus Epiphanes succeeded to
the throne, an arrogant and terrible man, 16 who removed Onias from
the priesthood and appointed Onias's brother Jason as high priest. 17
Jason agreed that if the office were conferred on him he would pay
the king three thousand six hundred sixty talents annually. 18 So the
king appointed him high priest and ruler of the nation. 19 Jason
changed the nation's way of life and altered its form of government in
complete violation of the law, 20 so that not only was a gymnasium
constructed at the very citadel of our native land, but also the temple

524

4 MACCABEES 525

service was abolished. 21 The divine justice was angered by these acts
and caused Antiochus himself to make war on them. 22 For when he
was warring against Ptolemy in Egypt, he heard that a rumor of his
death had spread and that the people of Jerusalem had rejoiced
greatly. He speedily marched against them, 23 and after he had
plundered them he issued a decree that if any of them were found
observing the ancestral law they should die. 24 When, by means of his
decrees, he had not been able in any way to put an end to the people's
observance of the law, but saw that all his threats and punishments
were being disregarded 25 — even to the extent that women, because
they had circumcised their sons, were thrown headlong from heights
along with their infants, though they had known beforehand that they
would suffer this — 26 when, I say, his decrees were despised by the
people, he himself tried through torture to compel everyone in the
nation to eat defiling foods and to renounce Judaism.
[4 Maccabees 5]
Martyrdom of Eleazar
1 The tyrant Antiochus, sitting in state with his counselors on a certain
high place, and with his armed soldiers standing around him, 2 ordered
the guards to seize each and every Hebrew and to compel them to eat
pork and food sacrificed to idols. 3 If any were not willing to eat
defiling food, they were to be broken on the wheel and killed. 4 When
many persons had been rounded up, one man, Eleazar by name, leader
of the flock, was brought before the king. He was a man of priestly
family, learned in the law, advanced in age, and known to many in the
tyrant's court because of his philosophy.
Antiochus's exhortation to apostasy
5 When Antiochus saw him he said, 6 "Before I begin to torture you,
old man, I would advise you to save yourself by eating pork, 7 for I
respect your age and your gray hairs. Although you have had them for
so long a time, it does not seem to me that you are a philosopher when
you observe the religion of the Jews. 8 When nature has granted it to
us, why should you abhor eating the very excellent meat of this
animal? 9 It is senseless not to enjoy delicious things that are not

525

4 MACCABEES 526

shameful, and wrong to spurn the gifts of nature. 10 It seems to me
that you will do something even more senseless if, by holding a vain
opinion concerning the truth, you continue to despise me to your own
hurt. 11 Will you not awaken from your foolish philosophy, dispel your
futile reasonings, adopt a mind appropriate to your years, philosophize
according to the truth of what is beneficial, 12 and have compassion on
your old age by honoring my humane advice? 13 For consider this: if
there is some power watching over this religion of yours, it will excuse
you from any transgression that arises out of compulsion."
Eleazar's reply
14 When the tyrant urged him in this fashion to eat meat unlawfully,
Eleazar asked to have a word. 15 When he had received permission to
speak, he began to address the people as follows: 16 "We, O Antiochus,
who have been persuaded to govern our lives by the divine law, think
that there is no compulsion more powerful than our obedience to the
law. 17 Therefore we consider that we should not transgress it in any
respect. 18 Even if, as you suppose, our law were not truly divine and
we had wrongly held it to be divine, not even so would it be right for
us to invalidate our reputation for piety. 19 Therefore do not suppose
that it would be a petty sin if we were to eat defiling food; 20 to
transgress the law in matters either small or great is of equal
seriousness, 21 for in either case the law is equally despised. 22 You
scoff at our philosophy as though living by it were irrational, 23 but it
teaches us self-control, so that we master all pleasures and desires, and
it also trains us in courage, so that we endure any suffering willingly;
24 it instructs us in justice, so that in all our dealings we act impartially,
and it teaches us piety, so that with proper reverence we worship the
only living God.
25 "Therefore we do not eat defiling food; for since we believe that
the law was established by God, we know that in the nature of things
the Creator of the world in giving us the law has shown sympathy
toward us. 26 He has permitted us to eat what will be most suitable for
our lives, but he has forbidden us to eat meats that would be contrary
to this. 27 It would be tyrannical for you to compel us not only to
transgress the law, but also to eat in such a way that you may deride us

526

4 MACCABEES 527

for eating defiling foods, which are most hateful to us. 28 But you shall
have no such occasion to laugh at me, 29 nor will I transgress the
sacred oaths of my ancestors concerning the keeping of the law, 30 not
even if you gouge out my eyes and burn my entrails. 31 I am not so old
and cowardly as not to be young in reason on behalf of piety. 32
Therefore get your torture wheels ready and fan the fire more
vehemently! 33 I do not so pity my old age as to break the ancestral
law by my own act. 34 I will not play false to you, O law that trained
me, nor will I renounce you, beloved self-control. 35 I will not put you
to shame, philosophical reason, nor will I reject you, honored
priesthood and knowledge of the law. 36 You, O king, shall not defile
the honorable mouth of my old age, nor my long life lived lawfully. 37
My ancestors will receive me as pure, as one who does not fear your
violence even to death. 38 You may tyrannize the ungodly, but you
shall not dominate my religious principles, either by words or through
deeds."
[4 Maccabees 6]
Eleazar's torture and death
1 When Eleazar in this manner had made eloquent response to the
exhortations of the tyrant, the guards who were standing by dragged
him violently to the instruments of torture. 2 First they stripped the old
man, though he remained adorned with the gracefulness of his piety. 3
After they had tied his arms on each side they flogged him, 4 while a
herald who faced him cried out, "Obey the king's commands!" 5 But
the courageous and noble man, like a true Eleazar, was unmoved, as
though being tortured in a dream; 6 yet while the old man's eyes were
raised to heaven, his flesh was being torn by scourges, his blood
flowing, and his sides were being cut to pieces. 7 Although he fell to
the ground because his body could not endure the agonies, he kept his
reason upright and unswerving. 8 One of the cruel guards rushed at
him and began to kick him in the side to make him get up again after
he fell. 9 But he bore the pains and scorned the punishment and
endured the tortures. 10 Like a noble athlete the old man, while being
beaten, was victorious over his torturers; 11 in fact, with his face bathed
in sweat, and gasping heavily for breath, he amazed even his torturers
by his courageous spirit.

527

4 MACCABEES 528

12 At that point, partly out of pity for his old age, 13 partly out of
sympathy from their acquaintance with him, partly out of admiration
for his endurance, some of the king's retinue came to him and said, 14
"Eleazar, why are you so irrationally destroying yourself through these
evil things? 15 We will set before you some cooked meat; save yourself
by pretending to eat pork."
16 But Eleazar, as though more bitterly tormented by this counsel, cried
out: 17 "Never may we, the children of Abraham, think so basely that
out of cowardice we feign a role unbecoming to us! 18 For it would be
irrational if having lived in accordance with truth up to old age and
having maintained in accordance with law the reputation of such a life,
we should now change our course 19 and ourselves become a pattern
of impiety to the young by setting them an example in the eating of
defiling food. 20 It would be shameful if we should survive for a little
while and during that time be a laughingstock to all for our cowardice,
21 and be despised by the tyrant as unmanly by not contending even to
death for our divine law. 22 Therefore, O children of Abraham, die
nobly for your religion! 23 And you, guards of the tyrant, why do you
delay?"
24 When they saw that he was so courageous in the face of the
afflictions, and that he had not been changed by their compassion, the
guards brought him to the fire. 25 There they burned him with
maliciously contrived instruments, threw him down, and poured
stinking liquids into his nostrils. 26 When he was now burned to his
very bones and about to expire, he lifted up his eyes to God and said,
27 "You know, O God, that though I might have saved myself, I am
dying in burning torments for the sake of the law. 28 Be merciful to
your people, and let our punishment suffice for them. 29 Make my
blood their purification, and take my life in exchange for theirs." 30
After he said this, the holy man died nobly in his tortures; even in the
tortures of death he resisted, by virtue of reason, for the sake of the
law.
31 Admittedly, then, devout reason is sovereign over the emotions. 32
For if the emotions had prevailed over reason, we would have testified
to their domination. 33 But now that reason has conquered the

528

4 MACCABEES 529

emotions, we properly attribute to it the power to govern. 34 It is right
for us to acknowledge the dominance of reason when it masters even
external agonies. It would be ridiculous to deny it. 35 I have proved not
only that reason has mastered agonies, but also that it masters
pleasures and in no respect yields to them.
[4 Maccabees 7]
An encomium on Eleazar
1 For like a most skillful pilot, the reason of our father Eleazar steered
the ship of religion over the sea of the emotions, 2 and though
buffeted by the stormings of the tyrant and overwhelmed by the
mighty waves of tortures, 3 in no way did he turn the rudder of
religion until he sailed into the haven of immortal victory. 4 No city
besieged with many ingenious war machines has ever held out as did
that most holy man. Although his sacred life was consumed by tortures
and racks, he conquered the besiegers with the shield of his devout
reason. 5 For in setting his mind firm like a jutting cliff, our father
Eleazar broke the maddening waves of the emotions. 6 O priest,
worthy of the priesthood, you neither defiled your sacred teeth nor
profaned your stomach, which had room only for reverence and purity,
by eating defiling foods. 7 O man in harmony with the law and
philosopher of divine life! 8 Such should be those who are
administrators of the law, shielding it with their own blood and noble
sweat in sufferings even to death. 9 You, father, strengthened our
loyalty to the law through your glorious endurance, and you did not
abandon the holiness that you praised, but by your deeds you made
your words of divine philosophy credible. 10 O aged man, more
powerful than tortures; O elder, fiercer than fire; O supreme king over
the passions, Eleazar! 11 For just as our father Aaron, armed with the
censer, ran through the multitude of the people and conquered the
fiery angel, 12 so the descendant of Aaron, Eleazar, though being
consumed by the fire, remained unmoved in his reason. 13 Most
amazing, indeed, though he was an old man, his body no longer tense
and firm, his muscles flabby, his sinews feeble, he became young again
14 in spirit through reason; and by reason like that of Isaac he rendered
the many-headed rack ineffective. 15 O man of blessed age and of

529

4 MACCABEES 530

venerable gray hair and of law-abiding life, whom the faithful seal of
death has perfected!
16 If, therefore, because of piety an aged man despised tortures even
to death, most certainly devout reason is governor of the emotions. 17
Some perhaps might say, "Not all have full command of their
emotions, because not all have prudent reason." 18 But as many as
attend to religion with a whole heart, these alone are able to control
the passions of the flesh, 19 since they believe that they, like our
patriarchs Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, do not die to God, but live to
God. 20 No contradiction therefore arises when some persons appear
to be dominated by their emotions because of the weakness of their
reason. 21 What person who lives as a philosopher by the whole rule of
philosophy, and trusts in God, 22 and knows that it is blessed to endure
any suffering for the sake of virtue, would not be able to overcome the
emotions through godliness? 23 For only the wise and courageous are
masters of their emotions.
[4 Maccabees 8]
The martyrdom of the seven brothers; Antiochus confronts the seven
brothers
1 For this is why even the very young, by following a philosophy in
accordance with devout reason, have prevailed over the most painful
instruments of torture. 2 For when the tyrant was conspicuously
defeated in his first attempt, being unable to compel an aged man to
eat defiling foods, then in violent rage he commanded that others of
the Hebrew captives be brought, and that any who ate defiling food
would be freed after eating, but if any were to refuse, they would be
tortured even more cruelly.
3 When the tyrant had given these orders, seven brothers —
handsome, modest, noble, and accomplished in every way — were
brought before him along with their aged mother. 4 When the tyrant
saw them, grouped about their mother as though a chorus, he was
pleased with them. And struck by their appearance and nobility, he
smiled at them, and summoned them nearer and said, 5 "Young men,
with favorable feelings I admire each and every one of you, and greatly

530

4 MACCABEES 531

respect the beauty and the number of such brothers. Not only do I
advise you not to display the same madness as that of the old man who
has just been tortured, but I also exhort you to yield to me and enjoy
my friendship. 6 Just as I am able to punish those who disobey my
orders, so I can be a benefactor to those who obey me. 7 Trust me,
then, and you will have positions of authority in my government if you
will renounce the ancestral tradition of your national life. 8 Enjoy your
youth by adopting the Greek way of life and by changing your manner
of living. 9 But if by disobedience you rouse my anger, you will compel
me to destroy each and every one of you with dreadful punishments
through tortures. 10 Therefore take pity on yourselves. Even I, your
enemy, have compassion for your youth and handsome appearance. 11
Will you not consider this, that if you disobey, nothing remains for you
but to die on the rack?"
12 When he had said these things, he ordered the instruments of
torture to be brought forward so as to persuade them out of fear to
eat the defiling food. 13 When the guards had placed before them
wheels and joint-dislocators, rack and hooks and catapults and
caldrons, braziers and thumbscrews and iron claws and wedges and
bellows, the tyrant resumed speaking: 14 "Be afraid, young fellows;
whatever justice you revere will be merciful to you when you
transgress under compulsion."
15 But when they had heard the inducements and saw the dreadful
devices, not only were they not afraid, but they also opposed the
tyrant with their own philosophy, and by their right reasoning nullified
his tyranny. 16 Let us consider, on the other hand, what arguments
might have been used if some of them had been cowardly and
unmanly. Would they not have been the following? 17 "O wretches
that we are and so senseless! Since the king has summoned and
exhorted us to accept kind treatment if we obey him, 18 why do we
take pleasure in vain resolves and venture upon a disobedience that
brings death? 19 O men and brothers, should we not fear the
instruments of torture and consider the threats of torments, and give
up this vain opinion and this arrogance that threatens to destroy us? 20
Let us take pity on our youth and have compassion on our mother's
age; 21 and let us seriously consider that if we disobey we are dead! 22

531

4 MACCABEES 532

Also, divine justice will excuse us for fearing the king when we are
under compulsion. 23 Why do we banish ourselves from this most
pleasant life and deprive ourselves of this delightful world? 24 Let us
not struggle against compulsion or take hollow pride in being put to
the rack. 25 Not even the law itself would arbitrarily put us to death
for fearing the instruments of torture. 26 Why does such
contentiousness excite us and such a fatal stubbornness please us,
when we can live in peace if we obey the king?"
27 But the youths, though about to be tortured, neither said any of
these things nor even seriously considered them. 28 For they were
contemptuous of the emotions and sovereign over agonies, 29 so that
as soon as the tyrant had ceased counseling them to eat defiling food,
all with one voice together, as from one mind, said:
[4 Maccabees 9]
1 "Why do you delay, O tyrant? For we are ready to die rather than
transgress our ancestral commandments; 2 we are obviously putting
our forebears to shame unless we should practice ready obedience to
the law and to Moses our counselor. 3 Tyrant and counselor of
lawlessness, in your hatred for us do not pity us more than we pity
ourselves. 4 For we consider this pity of yours, which insures our safety
through transgression of the law, to be more grievous than death
itself. 5 You are trying to terrify us by threatening us with death by
torture, as though a short time ago you learned nothing from Eleazar.
6 And if the aged men of the Hebrews because of their religion lived
piously while enduring torture, it would be even more fitting that we
young men should die despising your coercive tortures, which our aged
instructor also overcame. 7 Therefore, tyrant, put us to the test; and if
you take our lives because of our religion, do not suppose that you can
injure us by torturing us. 8 For we, through this severe suffering and
endurance, shall have the prize of virtue and shall be with God, on
whose account we suffer; 9 but you, because of your bloodthirstiness
toward us, will deservedly undergo from the divine justice eternal
torment by fire."

532

4 MACCABEES 533

Martyrdom of the eldest brother
10 When they had said these things, the tyrant was not only indignant,
as at those who are disobedient, but also infuriated, as at those who
are ungrateful. 11 Then at his command the guards brought forward
the eldest, and having torn off his tunic, they bound his hands and
arms with thongs on each side. 12 When they had worn themselves out
beating him with scourges, without accomplishing anything, they
placed him upon the wheel. 13 When the noble youth was stretched
out around this, his limbs were dislocated, 14 and with every member
disjointed he denounced the tyrant, saying, 15 "Most abominable
tyrant, enemy of heavenly justice, savage of mind, you are mangling
me in this manner, not because I am a murderer, or as one who acts
impiously, but because I protect the divine law." 16 And when the
guards said, "Agree to eat so that you may be released from the
tortures," 17 he replied, "You abominable lackeys, your wheel is not so
powerful as to strangle my reason. Cut my limbs, burn my flesh, and
twist my joints; 18 through all these tortures I will convince you that
children of the Hebrews alone are invincible where virtue is
concerned." 19 While he was saying these things, they spread fire
under him, and while fanning the flames they tightened the wheel
further. 20 The wheel was completely smeared with blood, and the
heap of coals was being quenched by the drippings of gore, and pieces
of flesh were falling off the axles of the machine. 21 Although the
ligaments joining his bones were already severed, the courageous
youth, worthy of Abraham, did not groan, 22 but as though
transformed by fire into immortality, he nobly endured the rackings. 23
"Imitate me, brothers," he said. "Do not leave your post in my struggle
or renounce our courageous family ties. 24 Fight the sacred and noble
battle for religion. Thereby the just Providence of our ancestors may
become merciful to our nation and take vengeance on the accursed
tyrant." 25 When he had said this, the saintly youth broke the thread
of life.
Martyrdom of the second brother
26 While all were marveling at his courageous spirit, the guards
brought in the next eldest, and after fitting themselves with iron

533

4 MACCABEES 534

gauntlets having sharp hooks, they bound him to the torture machine
and catapult. 27 Before torturing him, they inquired if he were willing
to eat, and they heard his noble decision. 28 These leopard-like beasts
tore out his sinews with the iron hands, flayed all his flesh up to his
chin, and tore away his scalp. But he steadfastly endured this agony
and said, 29 "How sweet is any kind of death for the religion of our
ancestors!" 30 To the tyrant he said, "Do you not think, you most
savage tyrant, that you are being tortured more than I, as you see the
arrogant design of your tyranny being defeated by our endurance for
the sake of religion? 31 I lighten my pain by the joys that come from
virtue, 32 but you suffer torture by the threats that come from impiety.
You will not escape, you most abominable tyrant, the judgments of the
divine wrath."
[4 Maccabees 10]
Martyrdom of the third brother
1 When he too had endured a glorious death, the third was led in, and
many repeatedly urged him to save himself by tasting the meat. 2 But
he shouted, "Do you not know that the same father begot me as well
as those who died, and the same mother bore me, and that I was
brought up on the same teachings? 3 I do not renounce the noble
kinship that binds me to my brothers." 5 Enraged by the man's
boldness, they disjointed his hands and feet with their instruments,
dismembering him by prying his limbs from their sockets, 6 and
breaking his fingers and arms and legs and elbows. 7 Since they were
not able in any way to break his spirit, they abandoned the instruments
and scalped him with their fingernails in a Scythian fashion. 8 They
immediately brought him to the wheel, and while his vertebrae were
being dislocated by this, he saw his own flesh torn all around and
drops of blood flowing from his entrails. 9 When he was about to die,
he said, 10 "We, most abominable tyrant, are suffering because of our
godly training and virtue, 11 but you, because of your impiety and
bloodthirstiness, will undergo unceasing torments."

534

4 MACCABEES 535

Martyrdom of the fourth brother
12 When he too had died in a manner worthy of his brothers, they
dragged in the fourth, saying, 13 "As for you, do not give way to the
same insanity as your brothers, but obey the king and save yourself." 14
But he said to them, "You do not have a fire hot enough to make me
play the coward. 15 No — by the blessed death of my brothers, by the
eternal destruction of the tyrant, and by the everlasting life of the
pious, I will not renounce our noble family ties. 16 Contrive tortures,
tyrant, so that you may learn from them that I am a brother to those
who have just now been tortured." 17 When he heard this, the
bloodthirsty, murderous, and utterly abominable Antiochus gave
orders to cut out his tongue. 18 But he said, "Even if you remove my
organ of speech, God hears also those who are mute. 19 See, here is my
tongue; cut it off, for in spite of this you will not make our reason
speechless. 20 Gladly, for the sake of God, we let our bodily members
be mutilated. 21 God will visit you swiftly, for you are cutting out a
tongue that has been melodious with divine hymns."
[4 Maccabees 11]
Martyrdom of the fifth brother
1 When he too died, after being cruelly tortured, the fifth leaped up,
saying, 2 "I will not refuse, tyrant, to be tortured for the sake of virtue.
3 I have come of my own accord, so that by murdering me you will
incur punishment from the heavenly justice for even more crimes. 4
Hater of virtue, hater of humankind, for what act of ours are you
destroying us in this way? 5 Is it because we revere the Creator of all
things and live according to his virtuous law? 6 But these deeds deserve
honors, not tortures." 9 While he was saying these things, the guards
bound him and dragged him to the catapult; 10 they tied him to it on
his knees, and fitting iron clamps on them, they twisted his back
around the wedge on the wheel, so that he was completely curled back
like a scorpion, and all his members were disjointed. 11 In this
condition, gasping for breath and in anguish of body, 12 he said,
"Tyrant, they are splendid favors that you grant us against your will,
because through these noble sufferings you give us an opportunity to
show our endurance for the law."

535

4 MACCABEES 536

Martyrdom of the sixth brother
13 When he too had died, the sixth, a mere boy, was led in. When the
tyrant inquired whether he was willing to eat and be released, he said,
14 "I am younger in age than my brothers, but I am their equal in mind.
15 Since to this end we were born and bred, we ought likewise to die
for the same principles. 16 So if you intend to torture me for not eating
defiling foods, go on torturing!" 17 When he had said this, they led
him to the wheel. 18 He was carefully stretched tight upon it, his back
was broken, and he was roasted from underneath. 19 To his back they
applied sharp spits that had been heated in the fire, and pierced his
ribs so that his entrails were burned through. 20 While being tortured
he said, "O contest befitting holiness, in which so many of us brothers
have been summoned to an arena of sufferings for religion, and in
which we have not been defeated! 21 For religious knowledge, O
tyrant, is invincible. 22 I also, equipped with nobility, will die with my
brothers, 23 and I myself will bring a great avenger upon you, you
inventor of tortures and enemy of those who are truly devout. 24 We
six boys have paralyzed your tyranny. 25 Since you have not been able
to persuade us to change our mind or to force us to eat defiling foods,
is not this your downfall? 26 Your fire is cold to us, and the catapults
painless, and your violence powerless. 27 For it is not the guards of the
tyrant but those of the divine law that are set over us; therefore,
unconquered, we hold fast to reason."
[4 Maccabees 12]
Martyrdom of the youngest brother
1 When he too, thrown into the caldron, had died a blessed death, the
seventh and youngest of all came forward. 2 Even though the tyrant
had been vehemently reproached by the brothers, he felt strong
compassion for this child when he saw that he was already in fetters.
He summoned him to come nearer and tried to persuade him, saying, 3
"You see the result of your brothers' stupidity, for they died in
torments because of their disobedience. 4 You too, if you do not obey,
will be miserably tortured and die before your time, 5 but if you yield
to persuasion you will be my friend and a leader in the government of
the kingdom." 6 When he had thus appealed to him, he sent for the

536

4 MACCABEES 537

boy's mother to show compassion on her who had been bereaved of so
many sons and to influence her to persuade the surviving son to obey
and save himself. 7 But when his mother had exhorted him in the
Hebrew language, as we shall tell a little later, 8 he said, "Let me loose,
let me speak to the king and to all his friends that are with him." 9
Extremely pleased by the boy's declaration, they freed him at once. 10
Running to the nearest of the braziers, 11 he said, "You profane tyrant,
most impious of all the wicked, since you have received good things
and also your kingdom from God, were you not ashamed to murder his
servants and torture on the wheel those who practice religion? 12
Because of this, justice has laid up for you intense and eternal fire and
tortures, and these throughout all time will never let you go. 13 As a
man, were you not ashamed, you most savage beast, to cut out the
tongues of men who have feelings like yours and are made of the same
elements as you, and to maltreat and torture them in this way? 14
Surely they by dying nobly fulfilled their service to God, but you will
wail bitterly for having killed without cause the contestants for virtue."
15 Then because he too was about to die, he said, 16 "I do not desert
the excellent example of my brothers, 17 and I call on the God of our
ancestors to be merciful to our nation; 18 but on you he will take
vengeance both in this present life and when you are dead." 19 After
he had uttered these imprecations, he flung himself into the braziers
and so ended his life.
[4 Maccabees 13]
An encomium
1 Since, then, the seven brothers despised sufferings even unto death,
everyone must concede that devout reason is sovereign over the
emotions. 2 For if they had been slaves to their emotions and had
eaten defiling food, we would say that they had been conquered by
these emotions. 3 But in fact it was not so. Instead, by reason, which is
praised before God, they prevailed over their emotions. 4 The
supremacy of the mind over these cannot be overlooked, for the
brothers mastered both emotions and pains. 5 How then can one fail
to confess the sovereignty of right reason over emotion in those who
were not turned back by fiery agonies? 6 For just as towers jutting out
over harbors hold back the threatening waves and make it calm for

537

4 MACCABEES 538

those who sail into the inner basin, 7 so the seven-towered right reason
of the youths, by fortifying the harbor of religion, conquered the
tempest of the emotions. 8 For they constituted a holy chorus of
religion and encouraged one another, saying, 9 "Brothers, let us die
like brothers for the sake of the law; let us imitate the three youths in
Assyria who despised the same ordeal of the furnace. 10 Let us not be
cowardly in the demonstration of our piety." 11 While one said,
"Courage, brother," another said, "Bear up nobly," 12 and another
reminded them, "Remember whence you came, and the father by
whose hand Isaac would have submitted to being slain for the sake of
religion." 13 Each of them and all of them together looking at one
another, cheerful and undaunted, said, "Let us with all our hearts
consecrate ourselves to God, who gave us our lives, and let us use our
bodies as a bulwark for the law. 14 Let us not fear him who thinks he is
killing us, 15 for great is the struggle of the soul and the danger of
eternal torment lying before those who transgress the commandment
of God. 16 Therefore let us put on the full armor of self-control, which
is divine reason. 17 For if we so die, Abraham and Isaac and Jacob will
welcome us, and all the fathers will praise us." 18 Those who were left
behind said to each of the brothers who were being dragged away,
"Do not put us to shame, brother, or betray the brothers who have
died before us."
19 You are not ignorant of the affection of family ties, which the divine
and all-wise Providence has bequeathed through the fathers to their
descendants and which was implanted in the mother's womb. 20 There
each of the brothers spent the same length of time and was shaped
during the same period of time; and growing from the same blood and
through the same life, they were brought to the light of day. 21 When
they were born after an equal time of gestation, they drank milk from
the same fountains. From such embraces brotherly-loving souls are
nourished; 22 and they grow stronger from this common nurture and
daily companionship, and from both general education and our
discipline in the law of God.
23 Therefore, when sympathy and brotherly affection had been so
established, the brothers were the more sympathetic to one another.
24 Since they had been educated by the same law and trained in the

538

4 MACCABEES 539

same virtues and brought up in right living, they loved one another all
the more. 25 A common zeal for nobility strengthened their goodwill
toward one another, and their concord, 26 because they could make
their brotherly love more fervent with the aid of their religion. 27 But
although nature and companionship and virtuous habits had
augmented the affection of family ties, those who were left endured
for the sake of religion, while watching their brothers being
maltreated and tortured to death.
[4 Maccabees 14]
1 Furthermore, they encouraged them to face the torture, so that they
not only despised their agonies, but also mastered the emotions of
brotherly love.
2 O reason, more royal than kings and freer than the free! 3 O sacred
and harmonious concord of the seven brothers on behalf of religion! 4
None of the seven youths proved coward or shrank from death, 5 but
all of them, as though running the course toward immortality,
hastened to death by torture. 6 Just as the hands and feet are moved
in harmony with the guidance of the mind, so those holy youths, as
though moved by an immortal spirit of devotion, agreed to go to
death for its sake. 7 O most holy seven, brothers in harmony! For just as
the seven days of creation move in choral dance around religion, 8 so
these youths, forming a chorus, encircled the sevenfold fear of tortures
and dissolved it. 9 Even now, we ourselves shudder as we hear of the
suffering of these young men; they not only saw what was happening,
not only heard the direct word of threat, but also bore the sufferings
patiently, and in agonies of fire at that. 10 What could be more
excruciatingly painful than this? For the power of fire is intense and
swift, and it consumed their bodies quickly.
Reason and maternal affection
11 Do not consider it amazing that reason had full command over these
men in their tortures, since the mind of woman despised even more
diverse agonies, 12 for the mother of the seven young men bore up
under the rackings of each one of her children.

539

4 MACCABEES 540

13 Observe how complex is a mother's love for her children, which
draws everything toward an emotion felt in her inmost parts. 14 Even
unreasoning animals, as well as human beings, have a sympathy and
parental love for their offspring. 15 For example, among birds, the ones
that are tame protect their young by building on the housetops, 16 and
the others, by building in precipitous chasms and in holes and tops of
trees, hatch the nestlings and ward off the intruder. 17 If they are not
able to keep the intruder away, they do what they can to help their
young by flying in circles around them in the anguish of love, warning
them with their own calls. 18 And why is it necessary to demonstrate
sympathy for children by the example of unreasoning animals, 19 since
even bees at the time for making honeycombs defend themselves
against intruders and, as though with an iron dart, sting those who
approach their hive and defend it even to the death? 20 But sympathy
for her children did not sway the mother of the young men; she was of
the same mind as Abraham.
[4 Maccabees 15]
An encomium praising the mother
1 O reason of the children, tyrant over the emotions! O religion, more
desirable to the mother than her children! 2 Two courses were open to
this mother, that of religion, and that of preserving her seven sons for
a time, as the tyrant had promised. 3 She loved religion more, the
religion that preserves them for eternal life according to God's
promise. 4 In what manner might I express the emotions of parents
who love their children? We impress upon the character of a small child
a wondrous likeness both of mind and of form. Especially is this true of
mothers, who because of their birth pangs have a deeper sympathy
toward their offspring than do the fathers. 5 Considering that mothers
are the weaker sex and give birth to many, they are more devoted to
their children. 6 The mother of the seven boys, more than any other
mother, loved her children. In seven pregnancies she had implanted in
herself tender love toward them, 7 and because of the many pains she
suffered with each of them she had sympathy for them; 8 yet because
of the fear of God she disdained the temporary safety of her children.
9 Not only so, but also because of the nobility of her sons and their
ready obedience to the law, she felt a greater tenderness toward them.

540

4 MACCABEES 541

10 For they were righteous and self-controlled and brave and
magnanimous, and loved their brothers and their mother, so that they
obeyed her even to death in keeping the ordinances.
11 Nevertheless, though so many factors influenced the mother to
suffer with them out of love for her children, in the case of none of
them were the various tortures strong enough to pervert her reason. 12
But each child separately and all of them together the mother urged
on to death for religion's sake. 13 O sacred nature and affection of
parental love, yearning of parents toward offspring, nurture and
indomitable suffering by mothers! 14 This mother, who saw them
tortured and burned one by one, because of religion did not change
her attitude. 15 She watched the flesh of her children being consumed
by fire, their toes and fingers scattered on the ground, and the flesh of
the head to the chin exposed like masks.
16 O mother, tried now by more bitter pains than even the birth pangs
you suffered for them! 17 O woman, who alone gave birth to such
complete devotion! 18 When the firstborn breathed his last, it did not
turn you aside, nor when the second in torments looked at you
piteously nor when the third expired; 19 nor did you weep when you
looked at the eyes of each one in his tortures gazing boldly at the same
agonies, and saw in their nostrils the signs of the approach of death. 20
When you saw the flesh of children burned upon the flesh of other
children, severed hands upon hands, scalped heads upon heads, and
corpses fallen on other corpses, and when you saw the place filled with
many spectators of the torturings, you did not shed tears. 21 Neither
the melodies of sirens nor the songs of swans attract the attention of
their hearers as did the voices of the children in torture calling to their
mother. 22 How great and how many torments the mother then
suffered as her sons were tortured on the wheel and with the hot
irons! 23 But devout reason, giving her heart a man's courage in the
very midst of her emotions, strengthened her to disregard, for the
time, her parental love.
24 Although she witnessed the destruction of seven children and the
ingenious and various rackings, this noble mother disregarded all these
because of faith in God. 25 For as in the council chamber of her own

541

4 MACCABEES 542

soul she saw mighty advocates — nature, family, parental love, and the
rackings of her children — 26 this mother held two ballots, one bearing
death and the other deliverance for her children. 27 She did not
approve the deliverance that would preserve the seven sons for a short
time, 28 but as the daughter of God-fearing Abraham she remembered
his fortitude.
29 O mother of the nation, vindicator of the law and champion of
religion, who carried away the prize of the contest in your heart! 30 O
more noble than males in steadfastness, and more courageous than
men in endurance! 31 Just as Noah's ark, carrying the world in the
universal flood, stoutly endured the waves, 32 so you, O guardian of
the law, overwhelmed from every side by the flood of your emotions
and the violent winds, the torture of your sons, endured nobly and
withstood the wintry storms that assail religion.
[4 Maccabees 16]
The mother's martyrdom
1 If, then, a woman, advanced in years and mother of seven sons,
endured seeing her children tortured to death, it must be admitted
that devout reason is sovereign over the emotions. 2 Thus I have
demonstrated not only that men have ruled over the emotions, but
also that a woman has despised the fiercest tortures. 3 The lions
surrounding Daniel were not so savage, nor was the raging fiery
furnace of Mishael so intensely hot, as was her innate parental love,
inflamed as she saw her seven sons tortured in such varied ways. 4 But
the mother quenched so many and such great emotions by devout
reason.
5 Consider this also: If this woman, though a mother, had been
fainthearted, she would have mourned over them and perhaps spoken
as follows: 6 "O how wretched am I and many times unhappy! After
bearing seven children, I am now the mother of none! 7 O seven
childbirths all in vain, seven profitless pregnancies, fruitless nurturings
and wretched nursings! 8 In vain, my sons, I endured many birth pangs
for you, and the more grievous anxieties of your upbringing. 9 Alas for
my children, some unmarried, others married and without offspring. I

542

4 MACCABEES 543

shall not see your children or have the happiness of being called
grandmother. 10 Alas, I who had so many and beautiful children am a
widow and alone, with many sorrows. 11 And when I die, I shall have
none of my sons to bury me."
12 Yet that holy and God-fearing mother did not wail with such a
lament for any of them, nor did she dissuade any of them from dying,
nor did she grieve as they were dying. 13 On the contrary, as though
having a mind like adamant and giving rebirth for immortality to the
whole number of her sons, she implored them and urged them on to
death for the sake of religion. 14 O mother, soldier of God in the cause
of religion, elder and woman! By steadfastness you have conquered
even a tyrant, and in word and deed you have proved more powerful
than a man. 15 For when you and your sons were arrested together,
you stood and watched Eleazar being tortured, and said to your sons in
the Hebrew language, 16 "My sons, noble is the contest to which you
are called to bear witness for the nation. Fight zealously for our
ancestral law. 17 For it would be shameful if, while an aged man
endures such agonies for the sake of religion, you young men were to
be terrified by tortures. 18 Remember that it is through God that you
have had a share in the world and have enjoyed life, 19 and therefore
you ought to endure any suffering for the sake of God. 20 For his sake
also our father Abraham was zealous to sacrifice his son Isaac, the
ancestor of our nation; and when Isaac saw his father's hand wielding
a knife and descending upon him, he did not cower. 21 Daniel the
righteous was thrown to the lions, and Hananiah, Azariah, and Mishael
were hurled into the fiery furnace and endured it for the sake of God.
22 You too must have the same faith in God and not be grieved. 23 It is
unreasonable for people who have religious knowledge not to
withstand pain."
24 By these words the mother of the seven encouraged and persuaded
each of her sons to die rather than violate God's commandment. 25
They knew also that those who die for the sake of God live to God, as
do Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the patriarchs.

543

4 MACCABEES 544

[4 Maccabees 17]
1 Some of the guards said that when she also was about to be seized
and put to death she threw herself into the flames so that no one
might touch her body.
A second encomium
2 O mother, who with your seven sons nullified the violence of the
tyrant, frustrated his evil designs, and showed the courage of your
faith! 3 Nobly set like a roof on the pillars of your sons, you held firm
and unswerving against the earthquake of the tortures. 4 Take
courage, therefore, O holy-minded mother, maintaining firm an
enduring hope in God. 5 The moon in heaven, with the stars, does not
stand so august as you, who, after lighting the way of your star-like
seven sons to piety, stand in honor before God and are firmly set in
heaven with them. 6 For your children were true descendants of father
Abraham.
A final encomium
7 If it were possible for us to paint the history of your religion as an
artist might, would not those who first beheld it have shuddered as
they saw the mother of the seven children enduring their varied
tortures to death for the sake of religion? 8 Indeed it would be proper
to inscribe on their tomb these words as a reminder to the people of
our nation:
9 "Here lie buried an aged priest and an aged woman and seven sons,
because of the violence of the tyrant who wished to destroy the way of
life of the Hebrews. 10 They vindicated their nation, looking to God
and enduring torture even to death."
11 Truly the contest in which they were engaged was divine, 12 for on
that day virtue gave the awards and tested them for their endurance.
The prize was immortality in endless life. 13 Eleazar was the first
contestant, the mother of the seven sons entered the competition, and
the brothers contended. 14 The tyrant was the antagonist, and the

544

4 MACCABEES 545

world and the human race were the spectators. 15 Reverence for God
was victor and gave the crown to its own athletes. 16 Who did not
admire the athletes of the divine legislation? Who were not amazed?
17 The tyrant himself and all his council marveled at their endurance, 18
because of which they now stand before the divine throne and live the
life of eternal blessedness. 19 For Moses says, "All who are consecrated
are under your hands." 20 These, then, who have been consecrated for
the sake of God, are honored, not only with this honor, but also by the
fact that because of them our enemies did not rule over our nation, 21
the tyrant was punished, and the homeland purified — they having
become, as it were, a ransom for the sin of our nation. 22 And through
the blood of those devout ones and their death as an atoning sacrifice,
divine Providence preserved Israel that previously had been mistreated.
23 For the tyrant Antiochus, when he saw the courage of their virtue
and their endurance under the tortures, proclaimed them to his
soldiers as an example for their own endurance, 24 and this made them
brave and courageous for infantry battle and siege, and he ravaged
and conquered all his enemies.
[4 Maccabees 18]
1 O Israelite children, offspring of the seed of Abraham, obey this law
and exercise piety in every way, 2 knowing that devout reason is
master of all emotions, not only of sufferings from within, but also of
those from without.
3 Therefore those who gave over their bodies in suffering for the sake
of religion were not only admired by mortals, but also were deemed
worthy to share in a divine inheritance. 4 Because of them the nation
gained peace, and by reviving observance of the law in the homeland
they ravaged the enemy. 5 The tyrant Antiochus was both punished on
earth and is being chastised after his death. Since in no way whatever
was he able to compel the Israelites to become pagans and to abandon
their ancestral customs, he left Jerusalem and marched against the
Persians.

545

4 MACCABEES 546

The mother's last words
6 The mother of seven sons expressed also these principles to her
children: 7 "I was a pure virgin and did not go outside my father's
house; but I guarded the rib from which woman was made. 8 No
seducer corrupted me on a desert plain, nor did the destroyer, the
deceitful serpent, defile the purity of my virginity. 9 In the time of my
maturity I remained with my husband, and when these sons had grown
up their father died. A happy man was he, who lived out his life with
good children, and did not have the grief of bereavement. 10 While he
was still with you, he taught you the law and the prophets. 11 He read
to you about Abel slain by Cain, and Isaac who was offered as a burnt
offering, and about Joseph in prison. 12 He told you of the zeal of
Phinehas, and he taught you about Hananiah, Azariah, and Mishael in
the fire. 13 He praised Daniel in the den of the lions and blessed him. 14
He reminded you of the scripture of Isaiah, which says, 'Even though
you go through the fire, the flame shall not consume you.' 15 He sang
to you songs of the psalmist David, who said, 'Many are the afflictions
of the righteous.' 16 He recounted to you Solomon's proverb, 'There is
a tree of life for those who do his will.' 17 He confirmed the query of
Ezekiel, 'Shall these dry bones live?' 18 For he did not forget to teach
you the song that Moses taught, which says, 19 'I kill and I make alive:
this is your life and the length of your days.'"
The conclusion
20 O bitter was that day — and yet not bitter — when that bitter
tyrant of the Greeks quenched fire with fire in his cruel caldrons, and in
his burning rage brought those seven sons of the daughter of Abraham
to the catapult and back again to more tortures, 21 pierced the pupils
of their eyes and cut out their tongues, and put them to death with
various tortures. 22 For these crimes divine justice pursued and will
pursue the accursed tyrant. 23 But the sons of Abraham with their
victorious mother are gathered together into the chorus of the fathers,
and have received pure and immortal souls from God, 24 to whom be
glory forever and ever. Amen.
Copyright ©1989, Division of Christian Education of the National Council of the Churches of Christ in
the United States of America. Used by permission. All rights reserved.

546

:::: SPACER PAGE ::::

547

THE NEW TESTAMENT
with the Apocryphal/Deuterocanonical Books

ZAINE RIDLING, Ph.D.
Editor

New Revised Standard Version

Copyright ©1989, Division of Christian Education of the National Council of the Churches
of Christ in the United States of America. Used by permission. All rights reserved.

NEW TESTAMENT, TABLE OF CONTENTS 1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
to The New Testament
Introduction to the Gospels ……………………………………..
Matthew .……………………………………………………………
Mark …………………………………………………………………
Luke .…………………………………………………………………
John .…………………………………………………………………
Acts ..…………………………………………………………………

2
8
72
115
190
240

Introduction to the Letters/Epistles in the NT ……………..…
Romans ………………………………………………………………
1 Corinthians ..………………………………………………………
2 Corinthians ….……………………………………………………
Galatians ……………………………………………………………
Ephesians ...…………………………………………………………
Philippians .…………………………………………………………
Colossians ..…………………………………………………………
1 Thessalonians .……………………………………………………
2 Thessalonians .……………………………………………………

306
310
340
368
387
400
411
420
429
436

Introduction to the Pastoral Epistles ……………..……..……..
1 Timothy …………….………………………………………………
2 Timothy ….…………………………………………………………
Titus …..………………………………………………………………

442
444
453
460

Apostolic Letters
Philemon .……………………………………………………………
Hebrews ..……………………………………………………………
James ...………………………………………………………………
1 Peter ….……………………………………………………………
2 Peter .………………………………………………………………
1 John ..………………………………………………………………
2 John ..………………………………………………………………
3 John ..………………………………………………………………
Jude …………………………………………………………………
Revelation ..…………………………………………………………

466
470
493
503
513
520
530
532
535
539

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

TH

HT

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

HT

TH

TH

TH

HT

HT

HT

TH

1

INTRO TO THE GOSPELS 2

INTRODUCTION
TO THE GOSPELS
The Literary Genre of the Gospels
The opening of Mark's Gospel, "The beginning of the good news [or
"gospel"] of Jesus Christ, the Son of God" (1.1), uses the word "gospel"
for the message about salvation through Jesus. The word "gospel" (Gk
"euangelion"; NRSV: "good news") always refers either to the act of
preaching (1 Thess 1.5, NRSV: "our messages of the gospel") or its
content (Acts 15.7, NRSV: "message of the good news"; 20.24, NRSV:
"good news"). Outside the New Testament and other early Christian
writings, the term was used for various happy announcements, such as
a military victory, the birth of a son, or a wedding. An inscription from
9 BCE uses the noun (in the plural) to refer to the past event of the
birth of the emperor Augustus: "the birthday of the god was for the
world the beginning of 'joyful messages' which have gone forth
because of him." The idea that an emperor's birth, coming of age, and
ascent to the throne was "good news" for the world would have come
to mind when Christian missionaries came preaching "good news." The
noun is not used for a literary genre until the mid-second century CE
(Justin Martyr, Dialogue with Trypho 10.2; Irenaeus, Against the
Heresies 50.26.6).
The use of the word "gospel" in Mark's introduction presumably led to
its being adopted as the designation for written accounts of the
ministry, teaching, death, and resurrection of Jesus. Short formulas in
Paul's letters show that the "good news" of the early mission focused
on the death, resurrection, and exaltation of Jesus (1 Thess 1.9-10; Rom
1.2-4; 1 Cor 15.3-5). Mark has expanded this to include Jesus' own
preaching of the kingdom of God (Mk 1.14-15). So far as we know, Mark
was the first to create a distinctive literary form by combining the
church's preaching about Jesus (his words and deeds) with a narrative

2

INTRO TO THE GOSPELS 3

account of Jesus' life and ministry. Writings that have been surmised to
predate Mark are collections of sayings with little or no narrative
framework.
By presenting a narrative about Jesus as the basis of Christian
preaching (see Lk 1.1-4), the Gospel writers (evangelists) assume that
the life of Jesus provides evidence for its claims. By providing an
account of Jesus from his emergence on the public stage through his
trial and death, Mark presents a "life" (Gk "bios") of his subject. The
ancient "bios" should not be confused with a biography, which
explicates the subject's origins, family, cultural influences, and
character development, and tends to emphasize uniqueness and
individuality. Ancient writers often characterized persons as types, and
the narratives of their lives reflected a view that individuals had fixed
characters from birth rather than personalities that developed through
living their life.
Even granting such differences, scholars disagree over the extent to
which the Gospels follow conventions of ancient biography. Because it
concerns a figure with a crucial place in the history of God's
relationship with Israel, the story of Jesus is closer to Jewish accounts of
Moses or a prophet like Elijah than to the typical Greco-Roman
biographies of rulers and philosophers (e.g., Xenophon, Agesilaus;
Isocrates, Evagoras; Tacitus, Agricola; or Lucian, Demonax), which had a
wider scope, including an account of the preliminary education of the
subject of the biography. Greco-Roman biographies were addressed to
a social and literary elite, which may explain why the Gospels,
addressed to a much broader audience, do not match them very
closely. Philo's Life of Moses adopts a Hellenistic-style laudatory
biography for a Jewish subject. Echoes of the life of Moses as related in
Exodus and other Jewish sources appear in Matthew's version of the
birth and infancy of Jesus (Mt 1-2).
Since the genre "biography" emerged from Greek historical writing,
the question of whether or not the Gospels belong to this genre often
involves a prior judgment concerning their historical plausibility.
Scholars who reject biography as a description of the Gospels often
overemphasize the ideological or legendary elements found in the

3

INTRO TO THE GOSPELS 4

narratives. They prefer to read the Gospels as etiological legends that
explain the emergence of a new religion or as ideological
representations of the christology of particular early Christian
communities. Such writings do not intend primarily to provide
historical information about their subject. Rather, they operate like
myths and symbols to support Christian beliefs and practices.
Second-century CE authors, on the other hand, both adherents of
Christianity like Justin Martyr and opponents like Celsus, presumed that
the evangelists intended to provided information. Justin Martyr's
designation of the Gospels as "memoirs" (Gk "hypomnemata"; 1
Apology 1.67.3) suggests something less than the full literary
biography, and something more like a gathering of notes about the
subject and his teaching. This perception may have been enhanced by
the fact that early Christians disseminated their writings using the
codex (similar to a bound book) rather than the scroll. Though modern
readers often think of the codex as a technological advance over the
scroll, the ancients did not. Serious literary works were copied onto
scrolls. Notes, primarily drafts, and all sorts of records were kept in
codices. Thus their physical appearance would suggest to an ancient
reader that the Gospels were something like educational handbooks or
pamphlets, not examples of high literary art. Papias's comment that
Mark is "not in order" (Eusebius, History of the Church 3.39.5) shows
that even some Christian readers considered it n unfinished
composition. Papias also noted that Matthew was a more polished
work (Eusebius, History of the Church 3.39.16). Luke's prologue states
that he intends to correct the deficiencies in earlier accounts (1.1-4).
Such concerns indicate that Mark's earliest readers treated the Gospel
as a rough life of Jesus. Such a biography invited the expansions in
content and revisions of style that Matthew and Luke subsequently
undertook.
The Sources of the Gospels
A historical genre does not necessarily guarantee historical accuracy or
reliability. Nor did the evangelists or their first readers engage in
historical analysis. Their aim was to confirm Christian faith (Lk 1.4; Jn
20.31). Scholars generally agree that the Gospels were written forty to

4

INTRO TO THE GOSPELS 5

sixty years after the death of Jesus. They thus do not present an
eyewitness or contemporary account of Jesus' life and teaching. Even
the language has changed. Though Greek had become the common
language used between groups whose primary languages were
different in the eastern Roman Empire, and inscriptions and fragments
of Greek translations of the Hebrew Bible show that Greek was used
even among Jews within Judea, Jesus, his disciples, and the crowds
would have spoken Aramaic. Despite scholarly efforts to detect an
underlying Aramaic original for Mark or Matthew, it is probable that
all the evangelists wrote in the common ("koine") Greek of their day.
Further, the vast majority of Hebrew Bible citations in the New
Testament follow the Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible (the
Septuagint).
Large sections of Matthew, Mark, and Luke repeat the stories about
and sayings of Jesus in nearly identical words. Hence these three
Gospels are referred to as "Synoptic" Gospels (from Gk "synoptikos,"
"view together"). At the linguistic level, both Luke and Matthew
improve on Markan style, smoothing out inelegant expressions and
repetitions. Luke eliminates Markan parataxis (one short phrase
following another without indicating how they are related) by
employing balancing particles and subordinating clauses. Matthew
follows Mark's outline, though the insertion of considerable sections of
discourse material may obscure the relationship for the casual reader.
Luke knows most of Mark but has no parallels to Mk 6.45-8.26;
whether Luke has chosen to omit this section or has a different version
of Mark remains unclear. Detailed analysis of the traditions shared by
Matthew, Mark, and Luke provides strong support for the view that
Mark was the earliest Gospel. But, given its rough, draft-like
composition, both Matthew and Luke revised it extensively.
Further study of additional material shared by Matthew and Luke
shows a number of close verbal parallels in passages such as the
temptation of Jesus (Mt 4.2-11; Lk 4.2-13), the Beatitudes (Lk 6.20-23; Mt
5.3, 6, 4, 11-12), the parable of the lost sheep (Lk 15.4-7; Mt 18.12-14), and
the LORD's Prayer (Lk 11.2-4; Mt 6.9-13). These parallels include various
types of sayings, controversy stories, and parables. Scholars have
hypothesized that a collection of such material must have been

5

INTRO TO THE GOSPELS 6

circulating in the early churches, and have designated it with the
symbol "Q," from the German "Quelle" ("source"). In 1945, a library of
religious treatises in Coptic was discovered near Nag Hammadi in
Egypt. They included just such a "sayings book," the Gospel of Thomas.
Subsequently, saying from a variant tradition of this Gospel in Greek
were identified among Greek papyri. The 'Gospel of Thomas' is not
"Q": Some of its sayings and parables appear to have been taken from
the Synoptic Gospels rather than from earlier oral tradition. But its
discovery provides evidence that such sayings collections existed.
Scholars presume that the Gospel writers may have had other such
notebook-like collections of items such as parables and miracle stories.
Presumably additional items, such as genealogies, canticles, and other
legends in the infancy narratives of Matthew and Luke, were not
created by the evangelists but come from earlier tradition. Similarly,
some of the material found only in Matthew or in Luke is not likely to
be the author's creation. There may also have been a pre-Markan
narrative of the passion and death of Jesus; some scholars think that
most of Mark's narrative came from such a source, while others
maintain that there is no evidence for such an account. The origin of
the story of Jesus' passion is unclear, and some details may have been
based on biblical descriptions of the suffering righteous one.
While the Synoptic Gospels have a close relationship based on the
literary relationships between them, the Fourth Gospel, the Gospel of
John, presents a much greater puzzle. Its chronology of Jesus' ministry
is quite different, as are many narrative details. Jesus spends three
years preaching, during which he journeys between Galilee and
Jerusalem. (In the Synoptic Gospels he visits Jerusalem only once, at the
end of a ministry that apparently lasted less than a year.) The episode
denouncing the sellers in the Temple, which enrages the religious
authorities and leads to his death in the Synoptics, occurs near the
beginning of the three-year ministry in John (Jn 2.13-22). John claims
that Jesus' popularity with Jerusalem crowds after he dramatically
restored Lazarus to life awakened political fears for the safety of the
nation (Jn 11.45-57; 12.9-11). John's account of the passion also differs
markedly: There is no agony; conscious of his unity with the Father and
the cross as his exaltation and return to pre-existent glory, Jesus

6

INTRO TO THE GOSPELS 7

controls all the events; he engages the Roman governor in ironic
discussion of kingship; and John has a disciple-witness, a Jerusalemite,
who does not flee with the others. Is this unnamed "disciple whom
Jesus loved" (Jn 21.7, 20; cf. 19.26; 20.2) a symbolic creation of the
Evangelist? Some scholars think so; others suggest that he was a
historical individual, the source of much of the Fourth Gospel's unique
tradition and theology, as the text alleges (19.35; 21.24). What led John
to compose such a unique variant on an outline of Jesus' life that still
has a recognizable similarity to Mark (and in some instances to Luke)?
Some scholars would use the parallels as indications of a shorter sketch
of Jesus' life known to both authors. Others suggest that the Gospels
of Mark, and perhaps Luke, were already circulating in the Evangelist's
area. He assumes that readers know some other account of Jesus' life
and teaching, and formulates a different version of who Jesus is and
what he taught based on the insight that Jesus of Nazareth was not
just a miracle-worker, a prophet, or a charismatic Jewish teacher, but
the incarnate Son of God. That claim constitutes the flash point
between Jesus and the Jewish authorities throughout the narrative.
Readers may ask similar questions for each of the Synoptics. What are
the special features in that Evangelist's presentation of Jesus and of
those who follow Jesus? Each author has done more than compile a
notebook of traditions about Jesus. Rather, each has shaped the
narrative to emphasize particular features of Jesus and his teachings.
Scholars often use those elements as clues about the church setting in
which each Gospel was written.

Copyright ©2001, New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha: New Revised Standard
Version. Ed. Michael D. Coogan. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001. Used by
permission. All rights reserved.

7

MATTHEW 8

MATTHEW
Introduction
The Gospel of Matthew highlights the Jewish origin and identity of
Jesus and his first followers more than any other piece of early
Christian literature. In Matthew Jesus is God's anointed, or messiah,
and the one who best envisions and interprets God's plan for God's
people. Jesus is presented as a great teacher of Israel like Moses for the
present age. Jesus speaks with wisdom and authority reminiscent of
Moses, unlike the teachers of Matthew's day whom the author rejects
(7.28-29; 23.2-3). The Gospel draws from Israel's history. Jesus' lineage is
traced back to Abraham. The title of the Gospel is, "the account of the
genealogy of Jesus the Messiah, the son of David, the son of Abraham"
(1.1). There is little mistaking here the Jewishness of the author, of
Jesus, and the audience envisaged in the Gospel. The author frequently
uses biblical quotations to explain and validate the actions of Jesus.
Many of these are introduced with a phrase indicating the fulfillment
of a prophecy (1.22; 2.15; 2.17; 2.23; 4.14; 8.17; 12.17; 13.35; 21.4; 27.9). The
formula citations help to ground Matthew's story within the history
and heroes of ancient Israel.
In Matthew Jesus presents an understanding of ancient history and
recent events, of the Torah, and of the future as the proper path for
Israel. This counsel is expressed, for example, in the parables unique to
Matthew in chs 20-22 and 25 and in the Sermon on the Mount (chs 5-7).
Some of Matthew's contemporaries, however, disagreed with his
understanding of Jewish history and his claims about Jesus. For this
reason Matthew is also the most contentious and polemical of the
Gospels. There was a struggle for leadership and direction following 70
CE in Israel. Matthew's community or church was in the midst of that
struggle. This tension is a defining feature of the Gospel. The central
opponents in Matthew are the Pharisees. They are characterized
hyperbolically as "hypocrites," and teachers who "lock people out of
8

MATTHEW 9

the kingdom of heaven" (23.13, 23, 25). A contemporary of Matthew,
the Jewish historian Josephus, provides another picture of the
Pharisees (Ant. 13.297, 399-417). He says Pharisees were popular with
the people. They were admired for being "the most accurate
interpreters of the law." And they played a central role in the
formation of rabbinic Judaism, a coalition that ultimately provided for
the survival of Judaism after the fall of the Temple in Jerusalem.
Pharisees also developed legal interpretations called "the traditions of
the elders" which were not recorded in the law of Moses. In Matthew's
day serious tensions developed between various Jewish groups over
which laws and traditions would govern Israel.
It is no surprise then that in Matthew we find Jesus arguing about
tradition and interpretation to an extent we do not find in other
Gospels. Jesus explicitly takes up the argument about "the tradition of
the elders" with the Pharisees in 15.1-20. He has similar disputes with
Pharisees over sabbath observance (12.1-8), divorce (19.1-9), taxes (22.1522), and the greatest commandment (22.34-40). The competition
between Matthew's community formed around Jesus and the group
represented by the Pharisees builds as the Gospel unfolds, culminating
in ch 23. Here Jesus elaborates at length on the inadequacies of the
Pharisees, their influence, and their actions.
The occasionally highly charged language in Matthew is best
understood in terms of an inter-Jewish conflict and should be
interpreted against the backdrop of the instability characteristic of
first-century Palestine. Failure to appreciate this feature of the Gospel's
setting has led at time to unfortunate misunderstandings of certain key
Matthean texts. A prominent example is the passage known as the "cry
of all the people," associated with the trial of Jesus and found only in
Matthew 27.25. Some within the Christian tradition have mistakenly
taken this passage to mean "the Jews" as a race should perpetually be
held accountable for killing Jesus (when all supporting historical
evidence holds that the Roman government put Jesus to death). In fact,
read in the context of Matthew's post-70 CE setting, 27.25 emerges as a
charge which, while caustic, is nevertheless typical of a people or group
divided against itself, as was the case in Matthew's day. Polemical

9

MATTHEW 10

passages in the Gospel should be understood within their proper social
context and not as later Christian denunciations of all Jews.
This Gospel is a presentation of the life and teachings of Jesus intended
for a particular community. Issues of local governance (18.6-20), ethics
(chs 5-7), succession and leadership (16.18-20), how to handle conflict
with opposing groups and authorities (17.15-21; 23.1-3), and how the
community should face the future are examples of the advice given
directly to Matthew's church. The author has written his story of Jesus
mindful of the predicament and problems of his own community.
While the traditional place of origin for Matthew has been considered
the city of Antioch in ancient western Syria, many now consider a
southern Galilean city, Tiberias or Sepphoris, a more likely location for
the writing of the Gospel. It was in Galilee that followers of a Pharisaic
party and devoted Jewish followers of Jesus would have encountered
and rivaled one another. The Gospel was written after the Gospel of
Mark. All but sixty verses of the Gospel of Mark appear in Matthew.
The author's modifications of Mark's story are easily identified. For
example, Matthew's depiction of Jesus' disciples, of Jewish law, and of
the community's relationship to those in power modify the earlier
Gospel of Mark. Another major source used by Matthew is the
collection of sayings of Jesus designated by scholars as "Q" (from the
German word "Quelle," meaning "source"). Luke also used this source,
as the many very close parallels found only in those two Gospels
indicate.
Matthew was written following the first Jewish revolt against Rome
and the destruction of the Temple in 70 CE by the Roman general and
eventual emperor, Titus. This monumental historical event is most likely
referred to in 21.43-44 and 22.7. In terms of Roman political history the
Gospel belongs to the end of the Flavian dynasty or shortly thereafter.
In terms of the social and religious developments in Israel, Matthew
belongs to that fluid and uncertain period between the fall of the
Jerusalem Temple in 70 and the emergence of rabbinic Judaism as the
decisive force and voice in the land between 135 and 200 CE. Matthew's
Gospel then dates from the last decade of the first century to the early
second century.

10

MATTHEW 11

[Matthew 1]
Jesus' place in Israel's genealogy
1 An account of the genealogy of Jesus the Messiah, the son of David,
the son of Abraham.
2 Abraham was the father of Isaac, and Isaac the father of Jacob, and
Jacob the father of Judah and his brothers, 3 and Judah the father of
Perez and Zerah by Tamar, and Perez the father of Hezron, and Hezron
the father of Aram, 4 and Aram the father of Aminadab, and
Aminadab the father of Nahshon, and Nahshon the father of Salmon, 5
and Salmon the father of Boaz by Rahab, and Boaz the father of Obed
by Ruth, and Obed the father of Jesse, 6 and Jesse the father of King
David.
And David was the father of Solomon by the wife of Uriah, 7 and
Solomon the father of Rehoboam, and Rehoboam the father of Abijah,
and Abijah the father of Asaph, 8 and Asaph the father of
Jehoshaphat, and Jehoshaphat the father of Joram, and Joram the
father of Uzziah, 9 and Uzziah the father of Jotham, and Jotham the
father of Ahaz, and Ahaz the father of Hezekiah, 10 and Hezekiah the
father of Manasseh, and Manasseh the father of Amos, and Amos the
father of Josiah, 11 and Josiah the father of Jechoniah and his brothers,
at the time of the deportation to Babylon.
12 And after the deportation to Babylon: Jechoniah was the father of
Salathiel, and Salathiel the father of Zerubbabel, 13 and Zerubbabel
the father of Abiud, and Abiud the father of Eliakim, and Eliakim the
father of Azor, 14 and Azor the father of Zadok, and Zadok the father
of Achim, and Achim the father of Eliud, 15 and Eliud the father of
Eleazar, and Eleazar the father of Matthan, and Matthan the father of
Jacob, 16 and Jacob the father of Joseph the husband of Mary, of
whom Jesus was born, who is called the Messiah.
17 So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen
generations; and from David to the deportation to Babylon, fourteen
generations; and from the deportation to Babylon to the Messiah,
fourteen generations.

11

MATTHEW 12

Jesus' conception and birth
18 Now the birth of Jesus the Messiah took place in this way. When his
mother Mary had been engaged to Joseph, but before they lived
together, she was found to be with child from the Holy Spirit. 19 Her
husband Joseph, being a righteous man and unwilling to expose her to
public disgrace, planned to dismiss her quietly. 20 But just when he had
resolved to do this, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream
and said, "Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to take Mary as your
wife, for the child conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit. 21 She will
bear a son, and you are to name him Jesus, for he will save his people
from their sins." 22 All this took place to fulfill what had been spoken
by the Lord through the prophet:
23 "Look, the virgin shall conceive and bear a son,
and they shall name him Emmanuel,"
which means, "God is with us." 24 When Joseph awoke from sleep, he
did as the angel of the Lord commanded him; he took her as his wife,
25 but had no marital relations with her until she had borne a son; and
he named him Jesus.
[Matthew 2]
The birth of Jesus and Herod the Great
1 In the time of King Herod, after Jesus was born in Bethlehem of
Judea, wise men from the East came to Jerusalem, 2 asking, "Where is
the child who has been born king of the Jews? For we observed his star
at its rising, and have come to pay him homage." 3 When King Herod
heard this, he was frightened, and all Jerusalem with him; 4 and calling
together all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he inquired of
them where the Messiah was to be born. 5 They told him, "In
Bethlehem of Judea; for so it has been written by the prophet:
6 'And you, Bethlehem, in the land of Judah,
are by no means least among the rulers of Judah;
for from you shall come a ruler
who is to shepherd my people Israel.'"
7 Then Herod secretly called for the wise men and learned from them
the exact time when the star had appeared. 8 Then he sent them to

12

MATTHEW 13

Bethlehem, saying, "Go and search diligently for the child; and when
you have found him, bring me word so that I may also go and pay him
homage." 9 When they had heard the king, they set out; and there,
ahead of them, went the star that they had seen at its rising, until it
stopped over the place where the child was. 10 When they saw that the
star had stopped, they were overwhelmed with joy. 11 On entering the
house, they saw the child with Mary his mother; and they knelt down
and paid him homage. Then, opening their treasure chests, they
offered him gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh. 12 And having been
warned in a dream not to return to Herod, they left for their own
country by another road.
The flight to Egypt and return
13 Now after they had left, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in
a dream and said, "Get up, take the child and his mother, and flee to
Egypt, and remain there until I tell you; for Herod is about to search for
the child, to destroy him." 14 Then Joseph got up, took the child and
his mother by night, and went to Egypt, 15 and remained there until
the death of Herod. This was to fulfill what had been spoken by the
Lord through the prophet, "Out of Egypt I have called my son."
16 When Herod saw that he had been tricked by the wise men, he was
infuriated, and he sent and killed all the children in and around
Bethlehem who were two years old or under, according to the time
that he had learned from the wise men. 17 Then was fulfilled what had
been spoken through the prophet Jeremiah:
18 "A voice was heard in Ramah,
wailing and loud lamentation,
Rachel weeping for her children;
she refused to be consoled, because they are no more."
19 When Herod died, an angel of the Lord suddenly appeared in a
dream to Joseph in Egypt and said, 20 "Get up, take the child and his
mother, and go to the land of Israel, for those who were seeking the
child's life are dead." 21 Then Joseph got up, took the child and his
mother, and went to the land of Israel. 22 But when he heard that
Archelaus was ruling over Judea in place of his father Herod, he was

13

MATTHEW 14

afraid to go there. And after being warned in a dream, he went away
to the district of Galilee. 23 There he made his home in a town called
Nazareth, so that what had been spoken through the prophets might
be fulfilled, "He will be called a Nazorean."
[Matthew 3]
Preparing the way
1 In those days John the Baptist appeared in the wilderness of Judea,
proclaiming, 2 "Repent, for the kingdom of heaven has come near." 3
This is the one of whom the prophet Isaiah spoke when he said,
"The voice of one crying out in the wilderness:
'Prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.'"
4 Now John wore clothing of camel's hair with a leather belt around
his waist, and his food was locusts and wild honey. 5 Then the people
of Jerusalem and all Judea were going out to him, and all the region
along the Jordan, 6 and they were baptized by him in the river Jordan,
confessing their sins.
7 But when he saw many Pharisees and Sadducees coming for baptism,
he said to them, "You brood of vipers! Who warned you to flee from
the wrath to come? 8 Bear fruit worthy of repentance. 9 Do not
presume to say to yourselves, 'We have Abraham as our ancestor'; for I
tell you, God is able from these stones to raise up children to Abraham.
10 Even now the ax is lying at the root of the trees; every tree
therefore that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into
the fire.
11 "I baptize you with water for repentance, but one who is more
powerful than I is coming after me; I am not worthy to carry his
sandals. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire. 12 His
winnowing fork is in his hand, and he will clear his threshing floor and
will gather his wheat into the granary; but the chaff he will burn with
unquenchable fire."

14

MATTHEW 15

Jesus' baptism
13 Then Jesus came from Galilee to John at the Jordan, to be baptized
by him. 14 John would have prevented him, saying, "I need to be
baptized by you, and do you come to me?" 15 But Jesus answered him,
"Let it be so now; for it is proper for us in this way to fulfill all
righteousness." Then he consented. 16 And when Jesus had been
baptized, just as he came up from the water, suddenly the heavens
were opened to him and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a
dove and alighting on him. 17 And a voice from heaven said, "This is
my Son, the Beloved, with whom I am well pleased."
[Matthew 4]
Jesus and the devil
1 Then Jesus was led up by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted
by the devil. 2 He fasted forty days and forty nights, and afterwards he
was famished. 3 The tempter came and said to him, "If you are the Son
of God, command these stones to become loaves of bread." 4 But he
answered, "It is written,
'One does not live by bread alone,
but by every word that comes from the mouth of God.'"
5 Then the devil took him to the holy city and placed him on the
pinnacle of the temple, 6 saying to him, "If you are the Son of God,
throw yourself down; for it is written,
'He will command his angels concerning you,'
and 'On their hands they will bear you up,
so that you will not dash your foot against a stone.'"
7 Jesus said to him, "Again it is written, 'Do not put the Lord your God
to the test.'"
8 Again, the devil took him to a very high mountain and showed him
all the kingdoms of the world and their splendor; 9 and he said to him,
"All these I will give you, if you will fall down and worship me." 10
Jesus said to him, "Away with you, Satan! for it is written,
'Worship the Lord your God,
and serve only him.'"

15

MATTHEW 16

11 Then the devil left him, and suddenly angels came and waited on
him.
The beginning of Jesus' ministry
12 Now when Jesus heard that John had been arrested, he withdrew to
Galilee. 13 He left Nazareth and made his home in Capernaum by the
sea, in the territory of Zebulun and Naphtali, 14 so that what had been
spoken through the prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled:
15 "Land of Zebulun, land of Naphtali,
on the road by the sea, across the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles
—
16 the people who sat in darkness
have seen a great light,
and for those who sat in the region and shadow of death
light has dawned."
17 From that time Jesus began to proclaim, "Repent, for the kingdom
of heaven has come near."
18 As he walked by the Sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon,
who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea
— for they were fishermen. 19 And he said to them, "Follow me, and I
will make you fish for people." 20 Immediately they left their nets and
followed him. 21 As he went from there, he saw two other brothers,
James son of Zebedee and his brother John, in the boat with their
father Zebedee, mending their nets, and he called them. 22
Immediately they left the boat and their father, and followed him.
23 Jesus went throughout Galilee, teaching in their synagogues and
proclaiming the good news of the kingdom and curing every disease
and every sickness among the people. 24 So his fame spread
throughout all Syria, and they brought to him all the sick, those who
were afflicted with various diseases and pains, demoniacs, epileptics,
and paralytics, and he cured them. 25 And great crowds followed him
from Galilee, the Decapolis, Jerusalem, Judea, and from beyond the
Jordan.

16

MATTHEW 17

[Matthew 5]
The Sermon on the Mount; the Beatitudes
1 When Jesus saw the crowds, he went up the mountain; and after he
sat down, his disciples came to him. 2 Then he began to speak, and
taught them, saying:
3 "Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
4 "Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted.
5 "Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth.
6 "Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they
will be filled.
7 "Blessed are the merciful, for they will receive mercy.
8 "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see God.
9 "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called children of God.
10 "Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness' sake, for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
11 "Blessed are you when people revile you and persecute you and
utter all kinds of evil against you falsely on my account. 12 Rejoice and
be glad, for your reward is great in heaven, for in the same way they
persecuted the prophets who were before you.
The disciple in the world
13 "You are the salt of the earth; but if salt has lost its taste, how can
its saltiness be restored? It is no longer good for anything, but is
thrown out and trampled under foot.
14 "You are the light of the world. A city built on a hill cannot be hid.
15 No one after lighting a lamp puts it under the bushel basket, but on
the lampstand, and it gives light to all in the house. 16 In the same way,

17

MATTHEW 18

let your light shine before others, so that they may see your good
works and give glory to your Father in heaven.
Jesus and the law
17 "Do not think that I have come to abolish the law or the prophets; I
have come not to abolish but to fulfill. 18 For truly I tell you, until
heaven and earth pass away, not one letter, not one stroke of a letter,
will pass from the law until all is accomplished. 19 Therefore, whoever
breaks one of the least of these commandments, and teaches others to
do the same, will be called least in the kingdom of heaven; but
whoever does them and teaches them will be called great in the
kingdom of heaven. 20 For I tell you, unless your righteousness exceeds
that of the scribes and Pharisees, you will never enter the kingdom of
heaven.
21 "You have heard that it was said to those of ancient times, 'You
shall not murder'; and 'whoever murders shall be liable to judgment.'
22 But I say to you that if you are angry with a brother or sister, you
will be liable to judgment; and if you insult a brother or sister, you will
be liable to the council; and if you say, 'You fool,' you will be liable to
the hell of fire. 23 So when you are offering your gift at the altar, if
you remember that your brother or sister has something against you,
24 leave your gift there before the altar and go; first be reconciled to
your brother or sister, and then come and offer your gift. 25 Come to
terms quickly with your accuser while you are on the way to court with
him, or your accuser may hand you over to the judge, and the judge to
the guard, and you will be thrown into prison. 26 Truly I tell you, you
will never get out until you have paid the last penny.
27 "You have heard that it was said, 'You shall not commit adultery.'
28 But I say to you that everyone who looks at a woman with lust has
already committed adultery with her in his heart. 29 If your right eye
causes you to sin, tear it out and throw it away; it is better for you to
lose one of your members than for your whole body to be thrown into
hell. 30 And if your right hand causes you to sin, cut it off and throw it
away; it is better for you to lose one of your members than for your
whole body to go into hell.

18

MATTHEW 19

31 "It was also said, 'Whoever divorces his wife, let him give her a
certificate of divorce.' 32 But I say to you that anyone who divorces his
wife, except on the ground of unchastity, causes her to commit
adultery; and whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery.
33 "Again, you have heard that it was said to those of ancient times,
'You shall not swear falsely, but carry out the vows you have made to
the Lord.' 34 But I say to you, Do not swear at all, either by heaven, for
it is the throne of God, 35 or by the earth, for it is his footstool, or by
Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King. 36 And do not swear by
your head, for you cannot make one hair white or black. 37 Let your
word be 'Yes, Yes' or 'No, No'; anything more than this comes from the
evil one.
38 "You have heard that it was said, 'An eye for an eye and a tooth for
a tooth.' 39 But I say to you, Do not resist an evildoer. But if anyone
strikes you on the right cheek, turn the other also; 40 and if anyone
wants to sue you and take your coat, give your cloak as well; 41 and if
anyone forces you to go one mile, go also the second mile. 42 Give to
everyone who begs from you, and do not refuse anyone who wants to
borrow from you.
Love and wholeness
43 "You have heard that it was said, 'You shall love your neighbor and
hate your enemy.' 44 But I say to you, Love your enemies and pray for
those who persecute you, 45 so that you may be children of your
Father in heaven; for he makes his sun rise on the evil and on the good,
and sends rain on the righteous and on the unrighteous. 46 For if you
love those who love you, what reward do you have? Do not even the
tax collectors do the same? 47 And if you greet only your brothers and
sisters, what more are you doing than others? Do not even the Gentiles
do the same? 48 Be perfect, therefore, as your heavenly Father is
perfect.

19

MATTHEW 20

[Matthew 6]
On justice and prayer
1 "Beware of practicing your piety before others in order to be seen by
them; for then you have no reward from your Father in heaven.
2 "So whenever you give alms, do not sound a trumpet before you, as
the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, so that they
may be praised by others. Truly I tell you, they have received their
reward. 3 But when you give alms, do not let your left hand know
what your right hand is doing, 4 so that your alms may be done in
secret; and your Father who sees in secret will reward you.
5 "And whenever you pray, do not be like the hypocrites; for they love
to stand and pray in the synagogues and at the street corners, so that
they may be seen by others. Truly I tell you, they have received their
reward. 6 But whenever you pray, go into your room and shut the door
and pray to your Father who is in secret; and your Father who sees in
secret will reward you.
7 "When you are praying, do not heap up empty phrases as the
Gentiles do; for they think that they will be heard because of their
many words. 8 Do not be like them, for your Father knows what you
need before you ask him.
The LORD's Prayer
9 "Pray then in this way:
Our Father in heaven,
hallowed be your name.
10
Your kingdom come.
Your will be done,
on earth as it is in heaven.
11
Give us this day our daily bread.
12
And forgive us our debts,
as we also have forgiven our debtors.
13
And do not bring us to the time of trial,
but rescue us from the evil one.

20

MATTHEW 21

14 For if you forgive others their trespasses, your heavenly Father will
also forgive you; 15 but if you do not forgive others, neither will your
Father forgive your trespasses.
Fasting
16 "And whenever you fast, do not look dismal, like the hypocrites, for
they disfigure their faces so as to show others that they are fasting.
Truly I tell you, they have received their reward. 17 But when you fast,
put oil on your head and wash your face, 18 so that your fasting may
be seen not by others but by your Father who is in secret; and your
Father who sees in secret will reward you.
Religion and possessions
19 "Do not store up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and
rust consume and where thieves break in and steal; 20 but store up for
yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust consumes
and where thieves do not break in and steal. 21 For where your
treasure is, there your heart will be also.
22 "The eye is the lamp of the body. So, if your eye is healthy, your
whole body will be full of light; 23 but if your eye is unhealthy, your
whole body will be full of darkness. If then the light in you is darkness,
how great is the darkness!
24 "No one can serve two masters; for a slave will either hate the one
and love the other, or be devoted to the one and despise the other.
You cannot serve God and wealth.
25 "Therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life, what you will eat
or what you will drink, or about your body, what you will wear. Is not
life more than food, and the body more than clothing? 26 Look at the
birds of the air; they neither sow nor reap nor gather into barns, and
yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not of more value than
they? 27 And can any of you by worrying add a single hour to your
span of life? 28 And why do you worry about clothing? Consider the
lilies of the field, how they grow; they neither toil nor spin, 29 yet I tell

21

MATTHEW 22

you, even Solomon in all his glory was not clothed like one of these. 30
But if God so clothes the grass of the field, which is alive today and
tomorrow is thrown into the oven, will he not much more clothe you
— you of little faith? 31 Therefore do not worry, saying, 'What will we
eat?' or 'What will we drink?' or 'What will we wear?' 32 For it is the
Gentiles who strive for all these things; and indeed your heavenly
Father knows that you need all these things. 33 But strive first for the
kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things will be
given to you as well.
34 "So do not worry about tomorrow, for tomorrow will bring worries
of its own. Today's trouble is enough for today.
[Matthew 7]
Making judgments within the community
1 "Do not judge, so that you may not be judged. 2 For with the
judgment you make you will be judged, and the measure you give will
be the measure you get. 3 Why do you see the speck in your neighbor's
eye, but do not notice the log in your own eye? 4 Or how can you say
to your neighbor, 'Let me take the speck out of your eye,' while the log
is in your own eye? 5 You hypocrite, first take the log out of your own
eye, and then you will see clearly to take the speck out of your
neighbor's eye.
6 "Do not give what is holy to dogs; and do not throw your pearls
before swine, or they will trample them under foot and turn and maul
you.
Concluding the Sermon on the Mount
7 "Ask, and it will be given you; search, and you will find; knock, and
the door will be opened for you. 8 For everyone who asks receives, and
everyone who searches finds, and for everyone who knocks, the door
will be opened. 9 Is there anyone among you who, if your child asks for
bread, will give a stone? 10 Or if the child asks for a fish, will give a
snake? 11 If you then, who are evil, know how to give good gifts to

22

MATTHEW 23

your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good
things to those who ask him!
12 "In everything do to others as you would have them do to you; for
this is the law and the prophets.
13 "Enter through the narrow gate; for the gate is wide and the road is
easy that leads to destruction, and there are many who take it. 14 For
the gate is narrow and the road is hard that leads to life, and there are
few who find it.
15 "Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing but
inwardly are ravenous wolves. 16 You will know them by their fruits.
Are grapes gathered from thorns, or figs from thistles? 17 In the same
way, every good tree bears good fruit, but the bad tree bears bad fruit.
18 A good tree cannot bear bad fruit, nor can a bad tree bear good
fruit. 19 Every tree that does not bear good fruit is cut down and
thrown into the fire. 20 Thus you will know them by their fruits.
21 "Not everyone who says to me, 'Lord, Lord,' will enter the kingdom
of heaven, but only the one who does the will of my Father in heaven.
22 On that day many will say to me, 'Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in
your name, and cast out demons in your name, and do many deeds of
power in your name?' 23 Then I will declare to them, 'I never knew you;
go away from me, you evildoers.'
24 "Everyone then who hears these words of mine and acts on them
will be like a wise man who built his house on rock. 25 The rain fell, the
floods came, and the winds blew and beat on that house, but it did not
fall, because it had been founded on rock. 26 And everyone who hears
these words of mine and does not act on them will be like a foolish
man who built his house on sand. 27 The rain fell, and the floods came,
and the winds blew and beat against that house, and it fell — and
great was its fall!"
28 Now when Jesus had finished saying these things, the crowds were
astounded at his teaching, 29 for he taught them as one having
authority, and not as their scribes.

23

MATTHEW 24

[Matthew 8]
Deeds of power and discipleship
1 When Jesus had come down from the mountain, great crowds
followed him; 2 and there was a leper who came to him and knelt
before him, saying, "Lord, if you choose, you can make me clean." 3 He
stretched out his hand and touched him, saying, "I do choose. Be made
clean!" Immediately his leprosy was cleansed. 4 Then Jesus said to him,
"See that you say nothing to anyone; but go, show yourself to the
priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, as a testimony to
them."
5 When he entered Capernaum, a centurion came to him, appealing to
him 6 and saying, "Lord, my servant is lying at home paralyzed, in
terrible distress." 7 And he said to him, "I will come and cure him." 8
The centurion answered, "Lord, I am not worthy to have you come
under my roof; but only speak the word, and my servant will be
healed. 9 For I also am a man under authority, with soldiers under me;
and I say to one, 'Go,' and he goes, and to another, 'Come,' and he
comes, and to my slave, 'Do this,' and the slave does it." 10 When Jesus
heard him, he was amazed and said to those who followed him, "Truly
I tell you, in no one in Israel have I found such faith. 11 I tell you, many
will come from east and west and will eat with Abraham and Isaac and
Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, 12 while the heirs of the kingdom will
be thrown into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and
gnashing of teeth." 13 And to the centurion Jesus said, "Go; let it be
done for you according to your faith." And the servant was healed in
that hour.
14 When Jesus entered Peter's house, he saw his mother-in-law lying in
bed with a fever; 15 he touched her hand, and the fever left her, and
she got up and began to serve him. 16 That evening they brought to
him many who were possessed with demons; and he cast out the spirits
with a word, and cured all who were sick. 17 This was to fulfill what
had been spoken through the prophet Isaiah, "He took our infirmities
and bore our diseases."

24

MATTHEW 25

18 Now when Jesus saw great crowds around him, he gave orders to go
over to the other side. 19 A scribe then approached and said, "Teacher,
I will follow you wherever you go." 20 And Jesus said to him, "Foxes
have holes, and birds of the air have nests; but the Son of Man has
nowhere to lay his head." 21 Another of his disciples said to him, "Lord,
first let me go and bury my father." 22 But Jesus said to him, "Follow
me, and let the dead bury their own dead."
23 And when he got into the boat, his disciples followed him. 24 A
windstorm arose on the sea, so great that the boat was being
swamped by the waves; but he was asleep. 25 And they went and woke
him up, saying, "Lord, save us! We are perishing!" 26 And he said to
them, "Why are you afraid, you of little faith?" Then he got up and
rebuked the winds and the sea; and there was a dead calm. 27 They
were amazed, saying, "What sort of man is this, that even the winds
and the sea obey him?"
28 When he came to the other side, to the country of the Gadarenes,
two demoniacs coming out of the tombs met him. They were so fierce
that no one could pass that way. 29 Suddenly they shouted, "What
have you to do with us, Son of God? Have you come here to torment us
before the time?" 30 Now a large herd of swine was feeding at some
distance from them. 31 The demons begged him, "If you cast us out,
send us into the herd of swine." 32 And he said to them, "Go!" So they
came out and entered the swine; and suddenly, the whole herd rushed
down the steep bank into the sea and perished in the water. 33 The
swineherds ran off, and on going into the town, they told the whole
story about what had happened to the demoniacs. 34 Then the whole
town came out to meet Jesus; and when they saw him, they begged
him to leave their neighborhood. [Matthew 9] 1 And after getting into
a boat he crossed the sea and came to his own town.
[Matthew 9]
Acts of power and growing tension
2 And just then some people were carrying a paralyzed man lying on a
bed. When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic, "Take heart,
son; your sins are forgiven." 3 Then some of the scribes said to

25

MATTHEW 26

themselves, "This man is blaspheming." 4 But Jesus, perceiving their
thoughts, said, "Why do you think evil in your hearts? 5 For which is
easier, to say, 'Your sins are forgiven,' or to say, 'Stand up and walk'? 6
But so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth
to forgive sins" — he then said to the paralytic — "Stand up, take your
bed and go to your home." 7 And he stood up and went to his home. 8
When the crowds saw it, they were filled with awe, and they glorified
God, who had given such authority to human beings.
9 As Jesus was walking along, he saw a man called Matthew sitting at
the tax booth; and he said to him, "Follow me." And he got up and
followed him.
10 And as he sat at dinner in the house, many tax collectors and sinners
came and were sitting with him and his disciples. 11 When the Pharisees
saw this, they said to his disciples, "Why does your teacher eat with tax
collectors and sinners?" 12 But when he heard this, he said, "Those who
are well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick. 13 Go and
learn what this means, 'I desire mercy, not sacrifice.' For I have come to
call not the righteous but sinners."
14 Then the disciples of John came to him, saying, "Why do we and the
Pharisees fast often, but your disciples do not fast?" 15 And Jesus said
to them, "The wedding guests cannot mourn as long as the
bridegroom is with them, can they? The days will come when the
bridegroom is taken away from them, and then they will fast. 16 No
one sews a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old cloak, for the patch pulls
away from the cloak, and a worse tear is made. 17 Neither is new wine
put into old wineskins; otherwise, the skins burst, and the wine is
spilled, and the skins are destroyed; but new wine is put into fresh
wineskins, and so both are preserved."
18 While he was saying these things to them, suddenly a leader of the
synagogue came in and knelt before him, saying, "My daughter has
just died; but come and lay your hand on her, and she will live." 19 And
Jesus got up and followed him, with his disciples. 20 Then suddenly a
woman who had been suffering from hemorrhages for twelve years
came up behind him and touched the fringe of his cloak, 21 for she said

26

MATTHEW 27

to herself, "If I only touch his cloak, I will be made well." 22 Jesus
turned, and seeing her he said, "Take heart, daughter; your faith has
made you well." And instantly the woman was made well. 23 When
Jesus came to the leader's house and saw the flute players and the
crowd making a commotion, 24 he said, "Go away; for the girl is not
dead but sleeping." And they laughed at him. 25 But when the crowd
had been put outside, he went in and took her by the hand, and the
girl got up. 26 And the report of this spread throughout that district.
27 As Jesus went on from there, two blind men followed him, crying
loudly, "Have mercy on us, Son of David!" 28 When he entered the
house, the blind men came to him; and Jesus said to them, "Do you
believe that I am able to do this?" They said to him, "Yes, Lord." 29
Then he touched their eyes and said, "According to your faith let it be
done to you." 30 And their eyes were opened. Then Jesus sternly
ordered them, "See that no one knows of this." 31 But they went away
and spread the news about him throughout that district.
32 After they had gone away, a demoniac who was mute was brought
to him. 33 And when the demon had been cast out, the one who had
been mute spoke; and the crowds were amazed and said, "Never has
anything like this been seen in Israel." 34 But the Pharisees said, "By
the ruler of the demons he casts out the demons."
35 Then Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in their
synagogues, and proclaiming the good news of the kingdom, and
curing every disease and every sickness. 36 When he saw the crowds, he
had compassion for them, because they were harassed and helpless,
like sheep without a shepherd. 37 Then he said to his disciples, "The
harvest is plentiful, but the laborers are few; 38 therefore ask the Lord
of the harvest to send out laborers into his harvest."
[Matthew 10]
Matthew's sending and instruction about mission
1 Then Jesus summoned his twelve disciples and gave them authority
over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to cure every disease and
every sickness. 2 These are the names of the twelve apostles: first,

27

MATTHEW 28

Simon, also known as Peter, and his brother Andrew; James son of
Zebedee, and his brother John; 3 Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and
Matthew the tax collector; James son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus; 4
Simon the Cananaean, and Judas Iscariot, the one who betrayed him.
5 These twelve Jesus sent out with the following instructions: "Go
nowhere among the Gentiles, and enter no town of the Samaritans, 6
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. 7 As you go,
proclaim the good news, 'The kingdom of heaven has come near.' 8
Cure the sick, raise the dead, cleanse the lepers, cast out demons. You
received without payment; give without payment. 9 Take no gold, or
silver, or copper in your belts, 10 no bag for your journey, or two tunics,
or sandals, or a staff; for laborers deserve their food. 11 Whatever town
or village you enter, find out who in it is worthy, and stay there until
you leave. 12 As you enter the house, greet it. 13 If the house is worthy,
let your peace come upon it; but if it is not worthy, let your peace
return to you. 14 If anyone will not welcome you or listen to your
words, shake off the dust from your feet as you leave that house or
town. 15 Truly I tell you, it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom
and Gomorrah on the day of judgment than for that town.
16 "See, I am sending you out like sheep into the midst of wolves; so be
wise as serpents and innocent as doves. 17 Beware of them, for they
will hand you over to councils and flog you in their synagogues; 18 and
you will be dragged before governors and kings because of me, as a
testimony to them and the Gentiles. 19 When they hand you over, do
not worry about how you are to speak or what you are to say; for what
you are to say will be given to you at that time; 20 for it is not you who
speak, but the Spirit of your Father speaking through you. 21 Brother
will betray brother to death, and a father his child, and children will
rise against parents and have them put to death; 22 and you will be
hated by all because of my name. But the one who endures to the end
will be saved. 23 When they persecute you in one town, flee to the
next; for truly I tell you, you will not have gone through all the towns
of Israel before the Son of Man comes.
24 "A disciple is not above the teacher, nor a slave above the master;
25 it is enough for the disciple to be like the teacher, and the slave like

28

MATTHEW 29

the master. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebul, how
much more will they malign those of his household!
26 "So have no fear of them; for nothing is covered up that will not be
uncovered, and nothing secret that will not become known. 27 What I
say to you in the dark, tell in the light; and what you hear whispered,
proclaim from the housetops. 28 Do not fear those who kill the body
but cannot kill the soul; rather fear him who can destroy both soul and
body in hell. 29 Are not two sparrows sold for a penny? Yet not one of
them will fall to the ground apart from your Father. 30 And even the
hairs of your head are all counted. 31 So do not be afraid; you are of
more value than many sparrows.
32 "Everyone therefore who acknowledges me before others, I also will
acknowledge before my Father in heaven; 33 but whoever denies me
before others, I also will deny before my Father in heaven.
34 "Do not think that I have come to bring peace to the earth; I have
not come to bring peace, but a sword.
35

For I have come to set a man against his father,
and a daughter against her mother,
and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law;
36 and one's foes will be members of one's own household.
37 Whoever loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me;
and whoever loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me;
38 and whoever does not take up the cross and follow me is not
worthy of me. 39 Those who find their life will lose it, and those who
lose their life for my sake will find it.
40 "Whoever welcomes you welcomes me, and whoever welcomes me
welcomes the one who sent me. 41 Whoever welcomes a prophet in
the name of a prophet will receive a prophet's reward; and whoever
welcomes a righteous person in the name of a righteous person will
receive the reward of the righteous; 42 and whoever gives even a cup
of cold water to one of these little ones in the name of a disciple —
truly I tell you, none of these will lose their reward."

29

MATTHEW 30

[Matthew 11]
Jesus and John the Baptist
1 Now when Jesus had finished instructing his twelve disciples, he went
on from there to teach and proclaim his message in their cities.
2 When John heard in prison what the Messiah was doing, he sent
word by his disciples 3 and said to him, "Are you the one who is to
come, or are we to wait for another?" 4 Jesus answered them, "Go and
tell John what you hear and see: 5 the blind receive their sight, the
lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised,
and the poor have good news brought to them. 6 And blessed is
anyone who takes no offense at me."
7 As they went away, Jesus began to speak to the crowds about John:
"What did you go out into the wilderness to look at? A reed shaken by
the wind? 8 What then did you go out to see? Someone dressed in soft
robes? Look, those who wear soft robes are in royal palaces. 9 What
then did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a
prophet. 10 This is the one about whom it is written,
'See, I am sending my messenger ahead of you,
who will prepare your way before you.'
11 Truly I tell you, among those born of women no one has arisen
greater than John the Baptist; yet the least in the kingdom of heaven is
greater than he. 12 From the days of John the Baptist until now the
kingdom of heaven has suffered violence, and the violent take it by
force. 13 For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John came;
14 and if you are willing to accept it, he is Elijah who is to come. 15 Let
anyone with ears listen!
16 "But to what will I compare this generation? It is like children sitting
in the marketplaces and calling to one another,
17 'We played the flute for you, and you did not dance;
we wailed, and you did not mourn.'
18 For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, 'He has a
demon'; 19 the Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say,
'Look, a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!'
Yet wisdom is vindicated by her deeds."

30

MATTHEW 31

Denunciation and true discipleship
20 Then he began to reproach the cities in which most of his deeds of
power had been done, because they did not repent. 21 "Woe to you,
Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the deeds of power done in
you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long
ago in sackcloth and ashes. 22 But I tell you, on the day of judgment it
will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon than for you. 23 And you,
Capernaum,
will you be exalted to heaven?
No, you will be brought down to Hades.
For if the deeds of power done in you had been done in Sodom, it
would have remained until this day. 24 But I tell you that on the day of
judgment it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom than for
you."
25 At that time Jesus said, "I thank you, Father, Lord of heaven and
earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and the
intelligent and have revealed them to infants; 26 yes, Father, for such
was your gracious will. 27 All things have been handed over to me by
my Father; and no one knows the Son except the Father, and no one
knows the Father except the Son and anyone to whom the Son chooses
to reveal him.
28 "Come to me, all you that are weary and are carrying heavy
burdens, and I will give you rest. 29 Take my yoke upon you, and learn
from me; for I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest
for your souls. 30 For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light."
[Matthew 12]
Jesus and the Pharisees; sabbath laws
1 At that time Jesus went through the grainfields on the sabbath; his
disciples were hungry, and they began to pluck heads of grain and to
eat. 2 When the Pharisees saw it, they said to him, "Look, your disciples
are doing what is not lawful to do on the sabbath." 3 He said to them,
"Have you not read what David did when he and his companions were
hungry? 4 He entered the house of God and ate the bread of the

31

MATTHEW 32

Presence, which it was not lawful for him or his companions to eat, but
only for the priests. 5 Or have you not read in the law that on the
sabbath the priests in the temple break the sabbath and yet are
guiltless? 6 I tell you, something greater than the temple is here. 7 But
if you had known what this means, 'I desire mercy and not sacrifice,'
you would not have condemned the guiltless. 8 For the Son of Man is
lord of the sabbath."
A sabbath healing
9 He left that place and entered their synagogue; 10 a man was there
with a withered hand, and they asked him, "Is it lawful to cure on the
sabbath?" so that they might accuse him. 11 He said to them, "Suppose
one of you has only one sheep and it falls into a pit on the sabbath;
will you not lay hold of it and lift it out? 12 How much more valuable is
a human being than a sheep! So it is lawful to do good on the
sabbath." 13 Then he said to the man, "Stretch out your hand." He
stretched it out, and it was restored, as sound as the other. 14 But the
Pharisees went out and conspired against him, how to destroy him.
Justice and healing for many
15 When Jesus became aware of this, he departed. Many crowds
followed him, and he cured all of them, 16 and he ordered them not to
make him known. 17 This was to fulfill what had been spoken through
the prophet Isaiah:
18 "Here is my servant, whom I have chosen,
my beloved, with whom my soul is well pleased.
I will put my Spirit upon him,
and he will proclaim justice to the Gentiles.
19 He will not wrangle or cry aloud,
nor will anyone hear his voice in the streets.
20 He will not break a bruised reed
or quench a smoldering wick
until he brings justice to victory.
21
And in his name the Gentiles will hope."

32

MATTHEW 33

The relationship between words and deeds
22 Then they brought to him a demoniac who was blind and mute; and
he cured him, so that the one who had been mute could speak and see.
23 All the crowds were amazed and said, "Can this be the Son of
David?" 24 But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, "It is only by
Beelzebul, the ruler of the demons, that this fellow casts out the
demons." 25 He knew what they were thinking and said to them,
"Every kingdom divided against itself is laid waste, and no city or
house divided against itself will stand. 26 If Satan casts out Satan, he is
divided against himself; how then will his kingdom stand? 27 If I cast
out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your own exorcists cast them
out? Therefore they will be your judges. 28 But if it is by the Spirit of
God that I cast out demons, then the kingdom of God has come to you.
29 Or how can one enter a strong man's house and plunder his
property, without first tying up the strong man? Then indeed the
house can be plundered. 30 Whoever is not with me is against me, and
whoever does not gather with me scatters. 31 Therefore I tell you,
people will be forgiven for every sin and blasphemy, but blasphemy
against the Spirit will not be forgiven. 32 Whoever speaks a word
against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but whoever speaks against
the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven, either in this age or in the age to
come.
33 "Either make the tree good, and its fruit good; or make the tree
bad, and its fruit bad; for the tree is known by its fruit. 34 You brood
of vipers! How can you speak good things, when you are evil? For out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. 35 The good person
brings good things out of a good treasure, and the evil person brings
evil things out of an evil treasure. 36 I tell you, on the day of judgment
you will have to give an account for every careless word you utter; 37
for by your words you will be justified, and by your words you will be
condemned."

33

MATTHEW 34

Seeking a sign
38 Then some of the scribes and Pharisees said to him, "Teacher, we
wish to see a sign from you." 39 But he answered them, "An evil and
adulterous generation asks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it
except the sign of the prophet Jonah. 40 For just as Jonah was three
days and three nights in the belly of the sea monster, so for three days
and three nights the Son of Man will be in the heart of the earth. 41
The people of Nineveh will rise up at the judgment with this
generation and condemn it, because they repented at the
proclamation of Jonah, and see, something greater than Jonah is here!
42 The queen of the South will rise up at the judgment with this
generation and condemn it, because she came from the ends of the
earth to listen to the wisdom of Solomon, and see, something greater
than Solomon is here!
43 "When the unclean spirit has gone out of a person, it wanders
through waterless regions looking for a resting place, but it finds none.
44 Then it says, 'I will return to my house from which I came.' When it
comes, it finds it empty, swept, and put in order. 45 Then it goes and
brings along seven other spirits more evil than itself, and they enter
and live there; and the last state of that person is worse than the first.
So will it be also with this evil generation."
Jesus' true family
46 While he was still speaking to the crowds, his mother and his
brothers were standing outside, wanting to speak to him. 47 Someone
told him, "Look, your mother and your brothers are standing outside,
wanting to speak to you." 48 But to the one who had told him this,
Jesus replied, "Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?" 49 And
pointing to his disciples, he said, "Here are my mother and my
brothers! 50 For whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is my
brother and sister and mother."

34

MATTHEW 35

[Matthew 13]
Teaching in parables
1 That same day Jesus went out of the house and sat beside the sea. 2
Such great crowds gathered around him that he got into a boat and
sat there, while the whole crowd stood on the beach. 3 And he told
them many things in parables, saying: "Listen! A sower went out to
sow. 4 And as he sowed, some seeds fell on the path, and the birds
came and ate them up. 5 Other seeds fell on rocky ground, where they
did not have much soil, and they sprang up quickly, since they had no
depth of soil. 6 But when the sun rose, they were scorched; and since
they had no root, they withered away. 7 Other seeds fell among
thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked them. 8 Other seeds fell on
good soil and brought forth grain, some a hundredfold, some sixty,
some thirty. 9 Let anyone with ears listen!"
10 Then the disciples came and asked him, "Why do you speak to them
in parables?" 11 He answered, "To you it has been given to know the
secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it has not been given. 12
For to those who have, more will be given, and they will have an
abundance; but from those who have nothing, even what they have
will be taken away. 13 The reason I speak to them in parables is that
'seeing they do not perceive, and hearing they do not listen, nor do
they understand.' 14 With them indeed is fulfilled the prophecy of
Isaiah that says:
'You will indeed listen, but never understand,
and you will indeed look, but never perceive.
15 For this people's heart has grown dull,
and their ears are hard of hearing,
and they have shut their eyes;
so that they might not look with their eyes,
and listen with their ears,
and understand with their heart and turn —
and I would heal them.'
16 But blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear.
17 Truly I tell you, many prophets and righteous people longed to see
what you see, but did not see it, and to hear what you hear, but did
not hear it.

35

MATTHEW 36

18 "Hear then the parable of the sower. 19 When anyone hears the
word of the kingdom and does not understand it, the evil one comes
and snatches away what is sown in the heart; this is what was sown on
the path. 20 As for what was sown on rocky ground, this is the one
who hears the word and immediately receives it with joy; 21 yet such a
person has no root, but endures only for a while, and when trouble or
persecution arises on account of the word, that person immediately
falls away. 22 As for what was sown among thorns, this is the one who
hears the word, but the cares of the world and the lure of wealth
choke the word, and it yields nothing. 23 But as for what was sown on
good soil, this is the one who hears the word and understands it, who
indeed bears fruit and yields, in one case a hundredfold, in another
sixty, and in another thirty."
24 He put before them another parable: "The kingdom of heaven may
be compared to someone who sowed good seed in his field; 25 but
while everybody was asleep, an enemy came and sowed weeds among
the wheat, and then went away. 26 So when the plants came up and
bore grain, then the weeds appeared as well. 27 And the slaves of the
householder came and said to him, 'Master, did you not sow good seed
in your field? Where, then, did these weeds come from?' 28 He
answered, 'An enemy has done this.' The slaves said to him, 'Then do
you want us to go and gather them?' 29 But he replied, 'No; for in
gathering the weeds you would uproot the wheat along with them. 30
Let both of them grow together until the harvest; and at harvest time I
will tell the reapers, Collect the weeds first and bind them in bundles
to be burned, but gather the wheat into my barn.'"
31 He put before them another parable: "The kingdom of heaven is like
a mustard seed that someone took and sowed in his field; 32 it is the
smallest of all the seeds, but when it has grown it is the greatest of
shrubs and becomes a tree, so that the birds of the air come and make
nests in its branches."
33 He told them another parable: "The kingdom of heaven is like yeast
that a woman took and mixed in with three measures of flour until all
of it was leavened."

36

MATTHEW 37

34 Jesus told the crowds all these things in parables; without a parable
he told them nothing. 35 This was to fulfill what had been spoken
through the prophet:
"I will open my mouth to speak in parables;
I will proclaim what has been hidden from the foundation
of the world."
36 Then he left the crowds and went into the house. And his disciples
approached him, saying, "Explain to us the parable of the weeds of the
field." 37 He answered, "The one who sows the good seed is the Son of
Man; 38 the field is the world, and the good seed are the children of
the kingdom; the weeds are the children of the evil one, 39 and the
enemy who sowed them is the devil; the harvest is the end of the age,
and the reapers are angels. 40 Just as the weeds are collected and
burned up with fire, so will it be at the end of the age. 41 The Son of
Man will send his angels, and they will collect out of his kingdom all
causes of sin and all evildoers, 42 and they will throw them into the
furnace of fire, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth. 43
Then the righteous will shine like the sun in the kingdom of their
Father. Let anyone with ears listen!
44 "The kingdom of heaven is like treasure hidden in a field, which
someone found and hid; then in his joy he goes and sells all that he has
and buys that field.
45 "Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant in search of fine
pearls; 46 on finding one pearl of great value, he went and sold all that
he had and bought it.
47 "Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net that was thrown into
the sea and caught fish of every kind; 48 when it was full, they drew it
ashore, sat down, and put the good into baskets but threw out the
bad. 49 So it will be at the end of the age. The angels will come out
and separate the evil from the righteous 50 and throw them into the
furnace of fire, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

37

MATTHEW 38

51 "Have you understood all this?" They answered, "Yes." 52 And he
said to them, "Therefore every scribe who has been trained for the
kingdom of heaven is like the master of a household who brings out of
his treasure what is new and what is old." 53 When Jesus had finished
these parables, he left that place.
Jesus' rejection in Nazareth
54 He came to his hometown and began to teach the people in their
synagogue, so that they were astounded and said, "Where did this
man get this wisdom and these deeds of power? 55 Is not this the
carpenter's son? Is not his mother called Mary? And are not his
brothers James and Joseph and Simon and Judas? 56 And are not all his
sisters with us? Where then did this man get all this?" 57 And they took
offense at him. But Jesus said to them, "Prophets are not without
honor except in their own country and in their own house." 58 And he
did not do many deeds of power there, because of their unbelief.
[Matthew 14]
The death of John the Baptist
1 At that time Herod the ruler heard reports about Jesus; 2 and he said
to his servants, "This is John the Baptist; he has been raised from the
dead, and for this reason these powers are at work in him." 3 For
Herod had arrested John, bound him, and put him in prison on account
of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife, 4 because John had been telling
him, "It is not lawful for you to have her." 5 Though Herod wanted to
put him to death, he feared the crowd, because they regarded him as a
prophet. 6 But when Herod's birthday came, the daughter of Herodias
danced before the company, and she pleased Herod 7 so much that he
promised on oath to grant her whatever she might ask. 8 Prompted by
her mother, she said, "Give me the head of John the Baptist here on a
platter." 9 The king was grieved, yet out of regard for his oaths and for
the guests, he commanded it to be given; 10 he sent and had John
beheaded in the prison. 11 The head was brought on a platter and
given to the girl, who brought it to her mother. 12 His disciples came
and took the body and buried it; then they went and told Jesus.

38

MATTHEW 39

The miraculous feeding
13 Now when Jesus heard this, he withdrew from there in a boat to a
deserted place by himself. But when the crowds heard it, they followed
him on foot from the towns. 14 When he went ashore, he saw a great
crowd; and he had compassion for them and cured their sick. 15 When
it was evening, the disciples came to him and said, "This is a deserted
place, and the hour is now late; send the crowds away so that they may
go into the villages and buy food for themselves." 16 Jesus said to
them, "They need not go away; you give them something to eat." 17
They replied, "We have nothing here but five loaves and two fish." 18
And he said, "Bring them here to me." 19 Then he ordered the crowds
to sit down on the grass. Taking the five loaves and the two fish, he
looked up to heaven, and blessed and broke the loaves, and gave them
to the disciples, and the disciples gave them to the crowds. 20 And all
ate and were filled; and they took up what was left over of the broken
pieces, twelve baskets full. 21 And those who ate were about five
thousand men, besides women and children.
Jesus' dominion over nature
22 Immediately he made the disciples get into the boat and go on
ahead to the other side, while he dismissed the crowds. 23 And after he
had dismissed the crowds, he went up the mountain by himself to pray.
When evening came, he was there alone, 24 but by this time the boat,
battered by the waves, was far from the land, for the wind was against
them. 25 And early in the morning he came walking toward them on
the sea. 26 But when the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they
were terrified, saying, "It is a ghost!" And they cried out in fear. 27 But
immediately Jesus spoke to them and said, "Take heart, it is I; do not
be afraid."
28 Peter answered him, "Lord, if it is you, command me to come to you
on the water." 29 He said, "Come." So Peter got out of the boat,
started walking on the water, and came toward Jesus. 30 But when he
noticed the strong wind, he became frightened, and beginning to sink,
he cried out, "Lord, save me!" 31 Jesus immediately reached out his
hand and caught him, saying to him, "You of little faith, why did you

39

MATTHEW 40

doubt?" 32 When they got into the boat, the wind ceased. 33 And
those in the boat worshiped him, saying, "Truly you are the Son of
God."
34 When they had crossed over, they came to land at Gennesaret. 35
After the people of that place recognized him, they sent word
throughout the region and brought all who were sick to him, 36 and
begged him that they might touch even the fringe of his cloak; and all
who touched it were healed.
[Matthew 15]
Conflict over tradition and authority
1 Then Pharisees and scribes came to Jesus from Jerusalem and said, 2
"Why do your disciples break the tradition of the elders? For they do
not wash their hands before they eat." 3 He answered them, "And why
do you break the commandment of God for the sake of your tradition?
4 For God said, 'Honor your father and your mother,' and, 'Whoever
speaks evil of father or mother must surely die.' 5 But you say that
whoever tells father or mother, 'Whatever support you might have had
from me is given to God,' then that person need not honor the father.
6 So, for the sake of your tradition, you make void the word of God. 7
You hypocrites! Isaiah prophesied rightly about you when he said:
8 'This people honors me with their lips,
but their hearts are far from me;
9 in vain do they worship me,
teaching human precepts as doctrines.'"
10 Then he called the crowd to him and said to them, "Listen and
understand: 11 it is not what goes into the mouth that defiles a person,
but it is what comes out of the mouth that defiles." 12 Then the
disciples approached and said to him, "Do you know that the Pharisees
took offense when they heard what you said?" 13 He answered, "Every
plant that my heavenly Father has not planted will be uprooted. 14 Let
them alone; they are blind guides of the blind. And if one blind person
guides another, both will fall into a pit." 15 But Peter said to him,
"Explain this parable to us." 16 Then he said, "Are you also still without
understanding? 17 Do you not see that whatever goes into the mouth

40

MATTHEW 41

enters the stomach, and goes out into the sewer? 18 But what comes
out of the mouth proceeds from the heart, and this is what defiles. 19
For out of the heart come evil intentions, murder, adultery, fornication,
theft, false witness, slander. 20 These are what defile a person, but to
eat with unwashed hands does not defile."
The Canaanite woman and her daughter
21 Jesus left that place and went away to the district of Tyre and Sidon.
22 Just then a Canaanite woman from that region came out and
started shouting, "Have mercy on me, Lord, Son of David; my daughter
is tormented by a demon." 23 But he did not answer her at all. And his
disciples came and urged him, saying, "Send her away, for she keeps
shouting after us." 24 He answered, "I was sent only to the lost sheep
of the house of Israel." 25 But she came and knelt before him, saying,
"Lord, help me." 26 He answered, "It is not fair to take the children's
food and throw it to the dogs." 27 She said, "Yes, Lord, yet even the
dogs eat the crumbs that fall from their masters' table." 28 Then Jesus
answered her, "Woman, great is your faith! Let it be done for you as
you wish." And her daughter was healed instantly.
Further healings
29 After Jesus had left that place, he passed along the Sea of Galilee,
and he went up the mountain, where he sat down. 30 Great crowds
came to him, bringing with them the lame, the maimed, the blind, the
mute, and many others. They put them at his feet, and he cured them,
31 so that the crowd was amazed when they saw the mute speaking,
the maimed whole, the lame walking, and the blind seeing. And they
praised the God of Israel.
The second feeding
32 Then Jesus called his disciples to him and said, "I have compassion
for the crowd, because they have been with me now for three days and
have nothing to eat; and I do not want to send them away hungry, for
they might faint on the way." 33 The disciples said to him, "Where are
we to get enough bread in the desert to feed so great a crowd?" 34

41

MATTHEW 42

Jesus asked them, "How many loaves have you?" They said, "Seven,
and a few small fish." 35 Then ordering the crowd to sit down on the
ground, 36 he took the seven loaves and the fish; and after giving
thanks he broke them and gave them to the disciples, and the disciples
gave them to the crowds. 37 And all of them ate and were filled; and
they took up the broken pieces left over, seven baskets full. 38 Those
who had eaten were four thousand men, besides women and children.
39 After sending away the crowds, he got into the boat and went to
the region of Magadan.
[Matthew 16]
Conflict with Pharisees and Sadducees
1 The Pharisees and Sadducees came, and to test Jesus they asked him
to show them a sign from heaven. 2 He answered them, "When it is
evening, you say, 'It will be fair weather, for the sky is red.' 3 And in
the morning, 'It will be stormy today, for the sky is red and
threatening.' You know how to interpret the appearance of the sky,
but you cannot interpret the signs of the times. 4 An evil and
adulterous generation asks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it
except the sign of Jonah." Then he left them and went away.
5 When the disciples reached the other side, they had forgotten to
bring any bread. 6 Jesus said to them, "Watch out, and beware of the
yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees." 7 They said to one another, "It
is because we have brought no bread." 8 And becoming aware of it,
Jesus said, "You of little faith, why are you talking about having no
bread? 9 Do you still not perceive? Do you not remember the five
loaves for the five thousand, and how many baskets you gathered? 10
Or the seven loaves for the four thousand, and how many baskets you
gathered? 11 How could you fail to perceive that I was not speaking
about bread? Beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees!" 12
Then they understood that he had not told them to beware of the
yeast of bread, but of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.

42

MATTHEW 43

Peter's confession at Caesarea Philippi
13 Now when Jesus came into the district of Caesarea Philippi, he asked
his disciples, "Who do people say that the Son of Man is?" 14 And they
said, "Some say John the Baptist, but others Elijah, and still others
Jeremiah or one of the prophets." 15 He said to them, "But who do you
say that I am?" 16 Simon Peter answered, "You are the Messiah, the
Son of the living God." 17 And Jesus answered him, "Blessed are you,
Simon son of Jonah! For flesh and blood has not revealed this to you,
but my Father in heaven. 18 And I tell you, you are Peter, and on this
rock I will build my church, and the gates of Hades will not prevail
against it. 19 I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever
you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven." 20 Then he sternly
ordered the disciples not to tell anyone that he was the Messiah.
Jesus' rebuke of Peter and the nature of discipleship
21 From that time on, Jesus began to show his disciples that he must go
to Jerusalem and undergo great suffering at the hands of the elders
and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and on the third day be
raised. 22 And Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him, saying,
"God forbid it, Lord! This must never happen to you." 23 But he turned
and said to Peter, "Get behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to
me; for you are setting your mind not on divine things but on human
things."
24 Then Jesus told his disciples, "If any want to become my followers,
let them deny themselves and take up their cross and follow me. 25 For
those who want to save their life will lose it, and those who lose their
life for my sake will find it. 26 For what will it profit them if they gain
the whole world but forfeit their life? Or what will they give in return
for their life?
27 "For the Son of Man is to come with his angels in the glory of his
Father, and then he will repay everyone for what has been done. 28
Truly I tell you, there are some standing here who will not taste death
before they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom."

43

MATTHEW 44

[Matthew 17]
The Transfiguration
1 Six days later, Jesus took with him Peter and James and his brother
John and led them up a high mountain, by themselves. 2 And he was
transfigured before them, and his face shone like the sun, and his
clothes became dazzling white. 3 Suddenly there appeared to them
Moses and Elijah, talking with him. 4 Then Peter said to Jesus, "Lord, it
is good for us to be here; if you wish, I will make three dwellings here,
one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah." 5 While he was still
speaking, suddenly a bright cloud overshadowed them, and from the
cloud a voice said, "This is my Son, the Beloved; with him I am well
pleased; listen to him!" 6 When the disciples heard this, they fell to the
ground and were overcome by fear. 7 But Jesus came and touched
them, saying, "Get up and do not be afraid." 8 And when they looked
up, they saw no one except Jesus himself alone.
The importance of John the Baptist
9 As they were coming down the mountain, Jesus ordered them, "Tell
no one about the vision until after the Son of Man has been raised
from the dead." 10 And the disciples asked him, "Why, then, do the
scribes say that Elijah must come first?" 11 He replied, "Elijah is indeed
coming and will restore all things; 12 but I tell you that Elijah has
already come, and they did not recognize him, but they did to him
whatever they pleased. So also the Son of Man is about to suffer at
their hands." 13 Then the disciples understood that he was speaking to
them about John the Baptist.
Faith and acts of power
14 When they came to the crowd, a man came to him, knelt before
him, 15 and said, "Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is an epileptic
and he suffers terribly; he often falls into the fire and often into the
water. 16 And I brought him to your disciples, but they could not cure
him." 17 Jesus answered, "You faithless and perverse generation, how
much longer must I be with you? How much longer must I put up with
you? Bring him here to me." 18 And Jesus rebuked the demon, and it

44

MATTHEW 45

came out of him, and the boy was cured instantly. 19 Then the disciples
came to Jesus privately and said, "Why could we not cast it out?" 20 He
said to them, "Because of your little faith. For truly I tell you, if you
have faith the size of a mustard seed, you will say to this mountain,
'Move from here to there,' and it will move; and nothing will be
impossible for you."
Jesus' second prediction of betrayal and death
22 As they were gathering in Galilee, Jesus said to them, "The Son of
Man is going to be betrayed into human hands, 23 and they will kill
him, and on the third day he will be raised." And they were greatly
distressed.
The question of taxes
24 When they reached Capernaum, the collectors of the temple tax
came to Peter and said, "Does your teacher not pay the temple tax?"
25 He said, "Yes, he does." And when he came home, Jesus spoke of it
first, asking, "What do you think, Simon? From whom do kings of the
earth take toll or tribute? From their children or from others?" 26
When Peter said, "From others," Jesus said to him, "Then the children
are free. 27 However, so that we do not give offense to them, go to the
sea and cast a hook; take the first fish that comes up; and when you
open its mouth, you will find a coin; take that and give it to them for
you and me."
[Matthew 18]
The fourth discourse; the question about genuine greatness
1 At that time the disciples came to Jesus and asked, "Who is the
greatest in the kingdom of heaven?" 2 He called a child, whom he put
among them, 3 and said, "Truly I tell you, unless you change and
become like children, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven. 4
Whoever becomes humble like this child is the greatest in the kingdom
of heaven. 5 Whoever welcomes one such child in my name welcomes
me.

45

MATTHEW 46

6 "If any of you put a stumbling block before one of these little ones
who believe in me, it would be better for you if a great millstone were
fastened around your neck and you were drowned in the depth of the
sea. 7 Woe to the world because of stumbling blocks! Occasions for
stumbling are bound to come, but woe to the one by whom the
stumbling block comes!
8 "If your hand or your foot causes you to stumble, cut it off and throw
it away; it is better for you to enter life maimed or lame than to have
two hands or two feet and to be thrown into the eternal fire. 9 And if
your eye causes you to stumble, tear it out and throw it away; it is
better for you to enter life with one eye than to have two eyes and to
be thrown into the hell of fire.
Life and relationships within the church
10 "Take care that you do not despise one of these little ones; for, I tell
you, in heaven their angels continually see the face of my Father in
heaven. 12 What do you think? If a shepherd has a hundred sheep, and
one of them has gone astray, does he not leave the ninety-nine on the
mountains and go in search of the one that went astray? 13 And if he
finds it, truly I tell you, he rejoices over it more than over the ninetynine that never went astray. 14 So it is not the will of your Father in
heaven that one of these little ones should be lost.
15 "If another member of the church sins against you, go and point out
the fault when the two of you are alone. If the member listens to you,
you have regained that one. 16 But if you are not listened to, take one
or two others along with you, so that every word may be confirmed by
the evidence of two or three witnesses. 17 If the member refuses to
listen to them, tell it to the church; and if the offender refuses to listen
even to the church, let such a one be to you as a Gentile and a tax
collector. 18 Truly I tell you, whatever you bind on earth will be bound
in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.
19 Again, truly I tell you, if two of you agree on earth about anything
you ask, it will be done for you by my Father in heaven. 20 For where
two or three are gathered in my name, I am there among them."

46

MATTHEW 47

21 Then Peter came and said to him, "Lord, if another member of the
church sins against me, how often should I forgive? As many as seven
times?" 22 Jesus said to him, "Not seven times, but, I tell you, seventyseven times.
23 "For this reason the kingdom of heaven may be compared to a king
who wished to settle accounts with his slaves. 24 When he began the
reckoning, one who owed him ten thousand talents was brought to
him; 25 and, as he could not pay, his lord ordered him to be sold,
together with his wife and children and all his possessions, and
payment to be made. 26 So the slave fell on his knees before him,
saying, 'Have patience with me, and I will pay you everything.' 27 And
out of pity for him, the lord of that slave released him and forgave him
the debt. 28 But that same slave, as he went out, came upon one of his
fellow slaves who owed him a hundred denarii; and seizing him by the
throat, he said, 'Pay what you owe.' 29 Then his fellow slave fell down
and pleaded with him, 'Have patience with me, and I will pay you.' 30
But he refused; then he went and threw him into prison until he would
pay the debt. 31 When his fellow slaves saw what had happened, they
were greatly distressed, and they went and reported to their lord all
that had taken place. 32 Then his lord summoned him and said to him,
'You wicked slave! I forgave you all that debt because you pleaded
with me. 33 Should you not have had mercy on your fellow slave, as I
had mercy on you?' 34 And in anger his lord handed him over to be
tortured until he would pay his entire debt. 35 So my heavenly Father
will also do to every one of you, if you do not forgive your brother or
sister from your heart."
[Matthew 19]
Continued legal debate with some of the Pharisees
1 When Jesus had finished saying these things, he left Galilee and went
to the region of Judea beyond the Jordan. 2 Large crowds followed
him, and he cured them there.
3 Some Pharisees came to him, and to test him they asked, "Is it lawful
for a man to divorce his wife for any cause?" 4 He answered, "Have
you not read that the one who made them at the beginning 'made

47

MATTHEW 48

them male and female,' 5 and said, 'For this reason a man shall leave
his father and mother and be joined to his wife, and the two shall
become one flesh'? 6 So they are no longer two, but one flesh.
Therefore what God has joined together, let no one separate." 7 They
said to him, "Why then did Moses command us to give a certificate of
dismissal and to divorce her?" 8 He said to them, "It was because you
were so hard-hearted that Moses allowed you to divorce your wives,
but from the beginning it was not so. 9 And I say to you, whoever
divorces his wife, except for unchastity, and marries another commits
adultery."
10 His disciples said to him, "If such is the case of a man with his wife, it
is better not to marry." 11 But he said to them, "Not everyone can
accept this teaching, but only those to whom it is given. 12 For there
are eunuchs who have been so from birth, and there are eunuchs who
have been made eunuchs by others, and there are eunuchs who have
made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. Let
anyone accept this who can."
Questions pertaining to eternal life
13 Then little children were being brought to him in order that he
might lay his hands on them and pray. The disciples spoke sternly to
those who brought them; 14 but Jesus said, "Let the little children
come to me, and do not stop them; for it is to such as these that the
kingdom of heaven belongs." 15 And he laid his hands on them and
went on his way.
16 Then someone came to him and said, "Teacher, what good deed
must I do to have eternal life?" 17 And he said to him, "Why do you ask
me about what is good? There is only one who is good. If you wish to
enter into life, keep the commandments." 18 He said to him, "Which
ones?" And Jesus said, "You shall not murder; You shall not commit
adultery; You shall not steal; You shall not bear false witness; 19 Honor
your father and mother; also, You shall love your neighbor as
yourself." 20 The young man said to him, "I have kept all these; what
do I still lack?" 21 Jesus said to him, "If you wish to be perfect, go, sell
your possessions, and give the money to the poor, and you will have

48

MATTHEW 49

treasure in heaven; then come, follow me." 22 When the young man
heard this word, he went away grieving, for he had many possessions.
23 Then Jesus said to his disciples, "Truly I tell you, it will be hard for a
rich person to enter the kingdom of heaven. 24 Again I tell you, it is
easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for someone
who is rich to enter the kingdom of God." 25 When the disciples heard
this, they were greatly astounded and said, "Then who can be saved?"
26 But Jesus looked at them and said, "For mortals it is impossible, but
for God all things are possible."
27 Then Peter said in reply, "Look, we have left everything and
followed you. What then will we have?" 28 Jesus said to them, "Truly I
tell you, at the renewal of all things, when the Son of Man is seated on
the throne of his glory, you who have followed me will also sit on
twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. 29 And everyone
who has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or
children or fields, for my name's sake, will receive a hundredfold, and
will inherit eternal life. 30 But many who are first will be last, and the
last will be first.
[Matthew 20]
The laborers in the vineyard
1 "For the kingdom of heaven is like a landowner who went out early
in the morning to hire laborers for his vineyard. 2 After agreeing with
the laborers for the usual daily wage, he sent them into his vineyard. 3
When he went out about nine o'clock, he saw others standing idle in
the marketplace; 4 and he said to them, 'You also go into the vineyard,
and I will pay you whatever is right.' So they went. 5 When he went
out again about noon and about three o'clock, he did the same. 6 And
about five o'clock he went out and found others standing around; and
he said to them, 'Why are you standing here idle all day?' 7 They said
to him, 'Because no one has hired us.' He said to them, 'You also go
into the vineyard.' 8 When evening came, the owner of the vineyard
said to his manager, 'Call the laborers and give them their pay,
beginning with the last and then going to the first.' 9 When those
hired about five o'clock came, each of them received the usual daily

49

MATTHEW 50

wage. 10 Now when the first came, they thought they would receive
more; but each of them also received the usual daily wage. 11 And
when they received it, they grumbled against the landowner, 12 saying,
'These last worked only one hour, and you have made them equal to us
who have borne the burden of the day and the scorching heat.' 13 But
he replied to one of them, 'Friend, I am doing you no wrong; did you
not agree with me for the usual daily wage? 14 Take what belongs to
you and go; I choose to give to this last the same as I give to you. 15 Am
I not allowed to do what I choose with what belongs to me? Or are you
envious because I am generous?' 16 So the last will be first, and the first
will be last."
Jesus anticipates his death and resurrection
17 While Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve disciples
aside by themselves, and said to them on the way, 18 "See, we are
going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be handed over to the
chief priests and scribes, and they will condemn him to death; 19 then
they will hand him over to the Gentiles to be mocked and flogged and
crucified; and on the third day he will be raised."
Service as greatness
20 Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee came to him with her sons,
and kneeling before him, she asked a favor of him. 21 And he said to
her, "What do you want?" She said to him, "Declare that these two
sons of mine will sit, one at your right hand and one at your left, in
your kingdom." 22 But Jesus answered, "You do not know what you
are asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I am about to drink?"
They said to him, "We are able." 23 He said to them, "You will indeed
drink my cup, but to sit at my right hand and at my left, this is not
mine to grant, but it is for those for whom it has been prepared by my
Father."
24 When the ten heard it, they were angry with the two brothers. 25
But Jesus called them to him and said, "You know that the rulers of the
Gentiles lord it over them, and their great ones are tyrants over them.
26 It will not be so among you; but whoever wishes to be great among

50

MATTHEW 51

you must be your servant, 27 and whoever wishes to be first among
you must be your slave; 28 just as the Son of Man came not to be
served but to serve, and to give his life a ransom for many."
Seeking help from the Son of David
29 As they were leaving Jericho, a large crowd followed him. 30 There
were two blind men sitting by the roadside. When they heard that
Jesus was passing by, they shouted, "Lord, have mercy on us, Son of
David!" 31 The crowd sternly ordered them to be quiet; but they
shouted even more loudly, "Have mercy on us, Lord, Son of David!" 32
Jesus stood still and called them, saying, "What do you want me to do
for you?" 33 They said to him, "Lord, let our eyes be opened." 34
Moved with compassion, Jesus touched their eyes. Immediately they
regained their sight and followed him.
[Matthew 21]
Jesus' entry into Jerusalem
1 When they had come near Jerusalem and had reached Bethphage, at
the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two disciples, 2 saying to them, "Go
into the village ahead of you, and immediately you will find a donkey
tied, and a colt with her; untie them and bring them to me. 3 If anyone
says anything to you, just say this, 'The Lord needs them.' And he will
send them immediately." 4 This took place to fulfill what had been
spoken through the prophet, saying,
5 "Tell the daughter of Zion,
Look, your king is coming to you,
humble, and mounted on a donkey,
and on a colt, the foal of a donkey."
6 The disciples went and did as Jesus had directed them; 7 they brought
the donkey and the colt, and put their cloaks on them, and he sat on
them. 8 A very large crowd spread their cloaks on the road, and others
cut branches from the trees and spread them on the road. 9 The
crowds that went ahead of him and that followed were shouting,
"Hosanna to the Son of David!
Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord!
Hosanna in the highest heaven!"

51

MATTHEW 52

10 When he entered Jerusalem, the whole city was in turmoil, asking,
"Who is this?" 11 The crowds were saying, "This is the prophet Jesus
from Nazareth in Galilee."
Jesus' confrontations in the Temple
12 Then Jesus entered the temple and drove out all who were selling
and buying in the temple, and he overturned the tables of the money
changers and the seats of those who sold doves. 13 He said to them, "It
is written,
'My house shall be called a house of prayer';
but you are making it a den of robbers."
14 The blind and the lame came to him in the temple, and he cured
them. 15 But when the chief priests and the scribes saw the amazing
things that he did, and heard the children crying out in the temple,
"Hosanna to the Son of David," they became angry 16 and said to him,
"Do you hear what these are saying?" Jesus said to them, "Yes; have
you never read,
'Out of the mouths of infants and nursing babies
you have prepared praise for yourself'?"
17 He left them, went out of the city to Bethany, and spent the night
there.
18 In the morning, when he returned to the city, he was hungry. 19 And
seeing a fig tree by the side of the road, he went to it and found
nothing at all on it but leaves. Then he said to it, "May no fruit ever
come from you again!" And the fig tree withered at once. 20 When
the disciples saw it, they were amazed, saying, "How did the fig tree
wither at once?" 21 Jesus answered them, "Truly I tell you, if you have
faith and do not doubt, not only will you do what has been done to
the fig tree, but even if you say to this mountain, 'Be lifted up and
thrown into the sea,' it will be done. 22 Whatever you ask for in prayer
with faith, you will receive."
23 When he entered the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the
people came to him as he was teaching, and said, "By what authority
are you doing these things, and who gave you this authority?" 24 Jesus

52

MATTHEW 53

said to them, "I will also ask you one question; if you tell me the
answer, then I will also tell you by what authority I do these things. 25
Did the baptism of John come from heaven, or was it of human
origin?" And they argued with one another, "If we say, 'From heaven,'
he will say to us, 'Why then did you not believe him?' 26 But if we say,
'Of human origin,' we are afraid of the crowd; for all regard John as a
prophet." 27 So they answered Jesus, "We do not know." And he said
to them, "Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing these
things.
Tax collectors, prostitutes, and the kingdom of God
28 "What do you think? A man had two sons; he went to the first and
said, 'Son, go and work in the vineyard today.' 29 He answered, 'I will
not'; but later he changed his mind and went. 30 The father went to
the second and said the same; and he answered, 'I go, sir'; but he did
not go. 31 Which of the two did the will of his father?" They said, "The
first." Jesus said to them, "Truly I tell you, the tax collectors and the
prostitutes are going into the kingdom of God ahead of you. 32 For
John came to you in the way of righteousness and you did not believe
him, but the tax collectors and the prostitutes believed him; and even
after you saw it, you did not change your minds and believe him.
The parable of the wicked tenants
33 "Listen to another parable. There was a landowner who planted a
vineyard, put a fence around it, dug a wine press in it, and built a
watchtower. Then he leased it to tenants and went to another country.
34 When the harvest time had come, he sent his slaves to the tenants
to collect his produce. 35 But the tenants seized his slaves and beat
one, killed another, and stoned another. 36 Again he sent other slaves,
more than the first; and they treated them in the same way. 37 Finally
he sent his son to them, saying, 'They will respect my son.' 38 But when
the tenants saw the son, they said to themselves, 'This is the heir; come,
let us kill him and get his inheritance.' 39 So they seized him, threw
him out of the vineyard, and killed him. 40 Now when the owner of
the vineyard comes, what will he do to those tenants?" 41 They said to
him, "He will put those wretches to a miserable death, and lease the

53

MATTHEW 54

vineyard to other tenants who will give him the produce at the harvest
time."
42 Jesus said to them, "Have you never read in the scriptures:
'The stone that the builders rejected
has become the cornerstone;
this was the LORD's doing,
and it is amazing in our eyes'?
43 Therefore I tell you, the kingdom of God will be taken away from
you and given to a people that produces the fruits of the kingdom. 44
The one who falls on this stone will be broken to pieces; and it will
crush anyone on whom it falls."
45 When the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his parables, they
realized that he was speaking about them. 46 They wanted to arrest
him, but they feared the crowds, because they regarded him as a
prophet.
[Matthew 22]
The wedding feast
1 Once more Jesus spoke to them in parables, saying: 2 "The kingdom
of heaven may be compared to a king who gave a wedding banquet
for his son. 3 He sent his slaves to call those who had been invited to
the wedding banquet, but they would not come. 4 Again he sent other
slaves, saying, 'Tell those who have been invited: Look, I have prepared
my dinner, my oxen and my fat calves have been slaughtered, and
everything is ready; come to the wedding banquet.' 5 But they made
light of it and went away, one to his farm, another to his business, 6
while the rest seized his slaves, mistreated them, and killed them. 7 The
king was enraged. He sent his troops, destroyed those murderers, and
burned their city. 8 Then he said to his slaves, 'The wedding is ready,
but those invited were not worthy. 9 Go therefore into the main
streets, and invite everyone you find to the wedding banquet.' 10
Those slaves went out into the streets and gathered all whom they
found, both good and bad; so the wedding hall was filled with guests.

54

MATTHEW 55

11 "But when the king came in to see the guests, he noticed a man
there who was not wearing a wedding robe, 12 and he said to him,
'Friend, how did you get in here without a wedding robe?' And he was
speechless. 13 Then the king said to the attendants, 'Bind him hand and
foot, and throw him into the outer darkness, where there will be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.' 14 For many are called, but few are
chosen."
A series of debates with the local leaders
15 Then the Pharisees went and plotted to entrap him in what he said.
16 So they sent their disciples to him, along with the Herodians, saying,
"Teacher, we know that you are sincere, and teach the way of God in
accordance with truth, and show deference to no one; for you do not
regard people with partiality. 17 Tell us, then, what you think. Is it
lawful to pay taxes to the emperor, or not?" 18 But Jesus, aware of
their malice, said, "Why are you putting me to the test, you hypocrites?
19 Show me the coin used for the tax." And they brought him a
denarius. 20 Then he said to them, "Whose head is this, and whose
title?" 21 They answered, "The emperor's." Then he said to them, "Give
therefore to the emperor the things that are the emperor's, and to
God the things that are God's." 22 When they heard this, they were
amazed; and they left him and went away.
23 The same day some Sadducees came to him, saying there is no
resurrection; and they asked him a question, saying, 24 "Teacher,
Moses said, 'If a man dies childless, his brother shall marry the widow,
and raise up children for his brother.' 25 Now there were seven
brothers among us; the first married, and died childless, leaving the
widow to his brother. 26 The second did the same, so also the third,
down to the seventh. 27 Last of all, the woman herself died. 28 In the
resurrection, then, whose wife of the seven will she be? For all of them
had married her."
29 Jesus answered them, "You are wrong, because you know neither
the scriptures nor the power of God. 30 For in the resurrection they
neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven.
31 And as for the resurrection of the dead, have you not read what was

55

MATTHEW 56

said to you by God, 32 'I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob'? He is God not of the dead, but of the living." 33
And when the crowd heard it, they were astounded at his teaching.
34 When the Pharisees heard that he had silenced the Sadducees, they
gathered together, 35 and one of them, a lawyer, asked him a question
to test him. 36 "Teacher, which commandment in the law is the
greatest?" 37 He said to him, "'You shall love the Lord your God with
all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind.' 38 This is
the greatest and first commandment. 39 And a second is like it: 'You
shall love your neighbor as yourself.' 40 On these two commandments
hang all the law and the prophets."
41 Now while the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them
this question: 42 "What do you think of the Messiah? Whose son is
he?" They said to him, "The son of David." 43 He said to them, "How is
it then that David by the Spirit calls him Lord, saying,
44 'The Lord said to my Lord,
"Sit at my right hand,
until I put your enemies under your feet"'?
45 If David thus calls him Lord, how can he be his son?" 46 No one was
able to give him an answer, nor from that day did anyone dare to ask
him any more questions.
[Matthew 23]
The fifth discourse
1 Then Jesus said to the crowds and to his disciples, 2 "The scribes and
the Pharisees sit on Moses' seat; 3 therefore, do whatever they teach
you and follow it; but do not do as they do, for they do not practice
what they teach. 4 They tie up heavy burdens, hard to bear, and lay
them on the shoulders of others; but they themselves are unwilling to
lift a finger to move them. 5 They do all their deeds to be seen by
others; for they make their phylacteries broad and their fringes long. 6
They love to have the place of honor at banquets and the best seats in
the synagogues, 7 and to be greeted with respect in the marketplaces,
and to have people call them rabbi. 8 But you are not to be called
rabbi, for you have one teacher, and you are all students. 9 And call no

56

MATTHEW 57

one your father on earth, for you have one Father — the one in
heaven. 10 Nor are you to be called instructors, for you have one
instructor, the Messiah. 11 The greatest among you will be your servant.
12 All who exalt themselves will be humbled, and all who humble
themselves will be exalted.
13 "But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you lock
people out of the kingdom of heaven. For you do not go in yourselves,
and when others are going in, you stop them. 15 Woe to you, scribes
and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you cross sea and land to make a single
convert, and you make the new convert twice as much a child of hell as
yourselves.
16 "Woe to you, blind guides, who say, 'Whoever swears by the
sanctuary is bound by nothing, but whoever swears by the gold of the
sanctuary is bound by the oath.' 17 You blind fools! For which is
greater, the gold or the sanctuary that has made the gold sacred? 18
And you say, 'Whoever swears by the altar is bound by nothing, but
whoever swears by the gift that is on the altar is bound by the oath.' 19
How blind you are! For which is greater, the gift or the altar that
makes the gift sacred? 20 So whoever swears by the altar, swears by it
and by everything on it; 21 and whoever swears by the sanctuary,
swears by it and by the one who dwells in it; 22 and whoever swears by
heaven, swears by the throne of God and by the one who is seated
upon it.
23 "Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you tithe mint,
dill, and cummin, and have neglected the weightier matters of the law:
justice and mercy and faith. It is these you ought to have practiced
without neglecting the others. 24 You blind guides! You strain out a
gnat but swallow a camel!
25 "Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you clean the
outside of the cup and of the plate, but inside they are full of greed
and self-indulgence. 26 You blind Pharisee! First clean the inside of the
cup, so that the outside also may become clean.

57

MATTHEW 58

27 "Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you are like
whitewashed tombs, which on the outside look beautiful, but inside
they are full of the bones of the dead and of all kinds of filth. 28 So
you also on the outside look righteous to others, but inside you are full
of hypocrisy and lawlessness.
29 "Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you build the
tombs of the prophets and decorate the graves of the righteous, 30
and you say, 'If we had lived in the days of our ancestors, we would not
have taken part with them in shedding the blood of the prophets.' 31
Thus you testify against yourselves that you are descendants of those
who murdered the prophets. 32 Fill up, then, the measure of your
ancestors. 33 You snakes, you brood of vipers! How can you escape
being sentenced to hell? 34 Therefore I send you prophets, sages, and
scribes, some of whom you will kill and crucify, and some you will flog
in your synagogues and pursue from town to town, 35 so that upon
you may come all the righteous blood shed on earth, from the blood of
righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah son of Barachiah, whom you
murdered between the sanctuary and the altar. 36 Truly I tell you, all
this will come upon this generation.
37 "Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the city that kills the prophets and stones
those who are sent to it! How often have I desired to gather your
children together as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, and you
were not willing! 38 See, your house is left to you, desolate. 39 For I tell
you, you will not see me again until you say, 'Blessed is the one who
comes in the name of the Lord.'"
[Matthew 24]
Eschatological discourse
1 As Jesus came out of the temple and was going away, his disciples
came to point out to him the buildings of the temple. 2 Then he asked
them, "You see all these, do you not? Truly I tell you, not one stone
will be left here upon another; all will be thrown down."
3 When he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples came to
him privately, saying, "Tell us, when will this be, and what will be the

58

MATTHEW 59

sign of your coming and of the end of the age?" 4 Jesus answered
them, "Beware that no one leads you astray. 5 For many will come in
my name, saying, 'I am the Messiah!' and they will lead many astray. 6
And you will hear of wars and rumors of wars; see that you are not
alarmed; for this must take place, but the end is not yet. 7 For nation
will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and there will
be famines and earthquakes in various places: 8 all this is but the
beginning of the birth pangs.
9 "Then they will hand you over to be tortured and will put you to
death, and you will be hated by all nations because of my name. 10
Then many will fall away, and they will betray one another and hate
one another. 11 And many false prophets will arise and lead many
astray. 12 And because of the increase of lawlessness, the love of many
will grow cold. 13 But the one who endures to the end will be saved. 14
And this good news of the kingdom will be proclaimed throughout the
world, as a testimony to all the nations; and then the end will come.
15 "So when you see the desolating sacrilege standing in the holy
place, as was spoken of by the prophet Daniel (let the reader
understand), 16 then those in Judea must flee to the mountains; 17 the
one on the housetop must not go down to take what is in the house;
18 the one in the field must not turn back to get a coat. 19 Woe to
those who are pregnant and to those who are nursing infants in those
days! 20 Pray that your flight may not be in winter or on a sabbath. 21
For at that time there will be great suffering, such as has not been
from the beginning of the world until now, no, and never will be. 22
And if those days had not been cut short, no one would be saved; but
for the sake of the elect those days will be cut short. 23 Then if anyone
says to you, 'Look! Here is the Messiah!' or 'There he is!' — do not
believe it. 24 For false messiahs and false prophets will appear and
produce great signs and omens, to lead astray, if possible, even the
elect. 25 Take note, I have told you beforehand. 26 So, if they say to
you, 'Look! He is in the wilderness,' do not go out. If they say, 'Look!
He is in the inner rooms,' do not believe it. 27 For as the lightning
comes from the east and flashes as far as the west, so will be the
coming of the Son of Man. 28 Wherever the corpse is, there the
vultures will gather.

59

MATTHEW 60

29 "Immediately after the suffering of those days
the sun will be darkened,
and the moon will not give its light;
the stars will fall from heaven,
and the powers of heaven will be shaken.
30 Then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in heaven, and then all
the tribes of the earth will mourn, and they will see 'the Son of Man
coming on the clouds of heaven' with power and great glory. 31 And
he will send out his angels with a loud trumpet call, and they will
gather his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the
other.
32 "From the fig tree learn its lesson: as soon as its branch becomes
tender and puts forth its leaves, you know that summer is near. 33 So
also, when you see all these things, you know that he is near, at the
very gates. 34 Truly I tell you, this generation will not pass away until
all these things have taken place. 35 Heaven and earth will pass away,
but my words will not pass away.
36 "But about that day and hour no one knows, neither the angels of
heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father. 37 For as the days of Noah
were, so will be the coming of the Son of Man. 38 For as in those days
before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in
marriage, until the day Noah entered the ark, 39 and they knew
nothing until the flood came and swept them all away, so too will be
the coming of the Son of Man. 40 Then two will be in the field; one
will be taken and one will be left. 41 Two women will be grinding meal
together; one will be taken and one will be left. 42 Keep awake
therefore, for you do not know on what day your Lord is coming. 43
But understand this: if the owner of the house had known in what part
of the night the thief was coming, he would have stayed awake and
would not have let his house be broken into. 44 Therefore you also
must be ready, for the Son of Man is coming at an unexpected hour.
45 "Who then is the faithful and wise slave, whom his master has put
in charge of his household, to give the other slaves their allowance of
food at the proper time? 46 Blessed is that slave whom his master will
find at work when he arrives. 47 Truly I tell you, he will put that one in

60

MATTHEW 61

charge of all his possessions. 48 But if that wicked slave says to himself,
'My master is delayed,' 49 and he begins to beat his fellow slaves, and
eats and drinks with drunkards, 50 the master of that slave will come
on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour that he does not
know. 51 He will cut him in pieces and put him with the hypocrites,
where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
[Matthew 25]
The parable of the ten maidens
1 "Then the kingdom of heaven will be like this. Ten bridesmaids took
their lamps and went to meet the bridegroom. 2 Five of them were
foolish, and five were wise. 3 When the foolish took their lamps, they
took no oil with them; 4 but the wise took flasks of oil with their
lamps. 5 As the bridegroom was delayed, all of them became drowsy
and slept. 6 But at midnight there was a shout, 'Look! Here is the
bridegroom! Come out to meet him.' 7 Then all those bridesmaids got
up and trimmed their lamps. 8 The foolish said to the wise, 'Give us
some of your oil, for our lamps are going out.' 9 But the wise replied,
'No! there will not be enough for you and for us; you had better go to
the dealers and buy some for yourselves.' 10 And while they went to
buy it, the bridegroom came, and those who were ready went with
him into the wedding banquet; and the door was shut. 11 Later the
other bridesmaids came also, saying, 'Lord, lord, open to us.' 12 But he
replied, 'Truly I tell you, I do not know you.' 13 Keep awake therefore,
for you know neither the day nor the hour.
The parable of the talents
14 "For it is as if a man, going on a journey, summoned his slaves and
entrusted his property to them; 15 to one he gave five talents, to
another two, to another one, to each according to his ability. Then he
went away. 16 The one who had received the five talents went off at
once and traded with them, and made five more talents. 17 In the same
way, the one who had the two talents made two more talents. 18 But
the one who had received the one talent went off and dug a hole in
the ground and hid his master's money. 19 After a long time the master
of those slaves came and settled accounts with them. 20 Then the one

61

MATTHEW 62

who had received the five talents came forward, bringing five more
talents, saying, 'Master, you handed over to me five talents; see, I have
made five more talents.' 21 His master said to him, 'Well done, good
and trustworthy slave; you have been trustworthy in a few things, I will
put you in charge of many things; enter into the joy of your master.' 22
And the one with the two talents also came forward, saying, 'Master,
you handed over to me two talents; see, I have made two more
talents.' 23 His master said to him, 'Well done, good and trustworthy
slave; you have been trustworthy in a few things, I will put you in
charge of many things; enter into the joy of your master.' 24 Then the
one who had received the one talent also came forward, saying,
'Master, I knew that you were a harsh man, reaping where you did not
sow, and gathering where you did not scatter seed; 25 so I was afraid,
and I went and hid your talent in the ground. Here you have what is
yours.' 26 But his master replied, 'You wicked and lazy slave! You
knew, did you, that I reap where I did not sow, and gather where I did
not scatter? 27 Then you ought to have invested my money with the
bankers, and on my return I would have received what was my own
with interest. 28 So take the talent from him, and give it to the one
with the ten talents. 29 For to all those who have, more will be given,
and they will have an abundance; but from those who have nothing,
even what they have will be taken away. 30 As for this worthless slave,
throw him into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.'
The judgment
31 "When the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the angels with
him, then he will sit on the throne of his glory. 32 All the nations will
be gathered before him, and he will separate people one from another
as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats, 33 and he will put
the sheep at his right hand and the goats at the left. 34 Then the king
will say to those at his right hand, 'Come, you that are blessed by my
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of
the world; 35 for I was hungry and you gave me food, I was thirsty and
you gave me something to drink, I was a stranger and you welcomed
me, 36 I was naked and you gave me clothing, I was sick and you took
care of me, I was in prison and you visited me.' 37 Then the righteous

62

MATTHEW 63

will answer him, 'Lord, when was it that we saw you hungry and gave
you food, or thirsty and gave you something to drink? 38 And when
was it that we saw you a stranger and welcomed you, or naked and
gave you clothing? 39 And when was it that we saw you sick or in
prison and visited you?' 40 And the king will answer them, 'Truly I tell
you, just as you did it to one of the least of these who are members of
my family, you did it to me.' 41 Then he will say to those at his left
hand, 'You that are accursed, depart from me into the eternal fire
prepared for the devil and his angels; 42 for I was hungry and you gave
me no food, I was thirsty and you gave me nothing to drink, 43 I was a
stranger and you did not welcome me, naked and you did not give me
clothing, sick and in prison and you did not visit me.' 44 Then they also
will answer, 'Lord, when was it that we saw you hungry or thirsty or a
stranger or naked or sick or in prison, and did not take care of you?' 45
Then he will answer them, 'Truly I tell you, just as you did not do it to
one of the least of these, you did not do it to me.' 46 And these will go
away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life."
[Matthew 26]
Approaching death and Judas's betrayal
1 When Jesus had finished saying all these things, he said to his
disciples, 2 "You know that after two days the Passover is coming, and
the Son of Man will be handed over to be crucified."
3 Then the chief priests and the elders of the people gathered in the
palace of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas, 4 and they
conspired to arrest Jesus by stealth and kill him. 5 But they said, "Not
during the festival, or there may be a riot among the people."
6 Now while Jesus was at Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, 7 a
woman came to him with an alabaster jar of very costly ointment, and
she poured it on his head as he sat at the table. 8 But when the
disciples saw it, they were angry and said, "Why this waste? 9 For this
ointment could have been sold for a large sum, and the money given
to the poor." 10 But Jesus, aware of this, said to them, "Why do you
trouble the woman? She has performed a good service for me. 11 For
you always have the poor with you, but you will not always have me. 12

63

MATTHEW 64

By pouring this ointment on my body she has prepared me for burial.
13 Truly I tell you, wherever this good news is proclaimed in the whole
world, what she has done will be told in remembrance of her."
14 Then one of the twelve, who was called Judas Iscariot, went to the
chief priests 15 and said, "What will you give me if I betray him to
you?" They paid him thirty pieces of silver. 16 And from that moment
he began to look for an opportunity to betray him.
Preparation for the Passover and the Last Supper
17 On the first day of Unleavened Bread the disciples came to Jesus,
saying, "Where do you want us to make the preparations for you to
eat the Passover?" 18 He said, "Go into the city to a certain man, and
say to him, 'The Teacher says, My time is near; I will keep the Passover
at your house with my disciples.'" 19 So the disciples did as Jesus had
directed them, and they prepared the Passover meal.
20 When it was evening, he took his place with the twelve; 21 and
while they were eating, he said, "Truly I tell you, one of you will betray
me." 22 And they became greatly distressed and began to say to him
one after another, "Surely not I, Lord?" 23 He answered, "The one who
has dipped his hand into the bowl with me will betray me. 24 The Son
of Man goes as it is written of him, but woe to that one by whom the
Son of Man is betrayed! It would have been better for that one not to
have been born." 25 Judas, who betrayed him, said, "Surely not I,
Rabbi?" He replied, "You have said so."
26 While they were eating, Jesus took a loaf of bread, and after
blessing it he broke it, gave it to the disciples, and said, "Take, eat; this
is my body." 27 Then he took a cup, and after giving thanks he gave it
to them, saying, "Drink from it, all of you; 28 for this is my blood of the
covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins. 29 I
tell you, I will never again drink of this fruit of the vine until that day
when I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom."
30 When they had sung the hymn, they went out to the Mount of
Olives.

64

MATTHEW 65

Temptation, betrayal, and desertion
31 Then Jesus said to them, "You will all become deserters because of
me this night; for it is written,
'I will strike the shepherd,
and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.'
32 But after I am raised up, I will go ahead of you to Galilee." 33 Peter
said to him, "Though all become deserters because of you, I will never
desert you." 34 Jesus said to him, "Truly I tell you, this very night,
before the cock crows, you will deny me three times." 35 Peter said to
him, "Even though I must die with you, I will not deny you." And so
said all the disciples.
36 Then Jesus went with them to a place called Gethsemane; and he
said to his disciples, "Sit here while I go over there and pray." 37 He
took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be
grieved and agitated. 38 Then he said to them, "I am deeply grieved,
even to death; remain here, and stay awake with me." 39 And going a
little farther, he threw himself on the ground and prayed, "My Father,
if it is possible, let this cup pass from me; yet not what I want but what
you want." 40 Then he came to the disciples and found them sleeping;
and he said to Peter, "So, could you not stay awake with me one hour?
41 Stay awake and pray that you may not come into the time of trial;
the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak." 42 Again he went
away for the second time and prayed, "My Father, if this cannot pass
unless I drink it, your will be done." 43 Again he came and found them
sleeping, for their eyes were heavy. 44 So leaving them again, he went
away and prayed for the third time, saying the same words. 45 Then he
came to the disciples and said to them, "Are you still sleeping and
taking your rest? See, the hour is at hand, and the Son of Man is
betrayed into the hands of sinners. 46 Get up, let us be going. See, my
betrayer is at hand."
47 While he was still speaking, Judas, one of the twelve, arrived; with
him was a large crowd with swords and clubs, from the chief priests
and the elders of the people. 48 Now the betrayer had given them a
sign, saying, "The one I will kiss is the man; arrest him." 49 At once he
came up to Jesus and said, "Greetings, Rabbi!" and kissed him. 50 Jesus

65

MATTHEW 66

said to him, "Friend, do what you are here to do." Then they came and
laid hands on Jesus and arrested him. 51 Suddenly, one of those with
Jesus put his hand on his sword, drew it, and struck the slave of the
high priest, cutting off his ear. 52 Then Jesus said to him, "Put your
sword back into its place; for all who take the sword will perish by the
sword. 53 Do you think that I cannot appeal to my Father, and he will
at once send me more than twelve legions of angels? 54 But how then
would the scriptures be fulfilled, which say it must happen in this
way?" 55 At that hour Jesus said to the crowds, "Have you come out
with swords and clubs to arrest me as though I were a bandit? Day
after day I sat in the temple teaching, and you did not arrest me. 56
But all this has taken place, so that the scriptures of the prophets may
be fulfilled." Then all the disciples deserted him and fled.
Leveling charges against Jesus
57 Those who had arrested Jesus took him to Caiaphas the high priest,
in whose house the scribes and the elders had gathered. 58 But Peter
was following him at a distance, as far as the courtyard of the high
priest; and going inside, he sat with the guards in order to see how this
would end. 59 Now the chief priests and the whole council were
looking for false testimony against Jesus so that they might put him to
death, 60 but they found none, though many false witnesses came
forward. At last two came forward 61 and said, "This fellow said, 'I am
able to destroy the temple of God and to build it in three days.'" 62
The high priest stood up and said, "Have you no answer? What is it
that they testify against you?" 63 But Jesus was silent. Then the high
priest said to him, "I put you under oath before the living God, tell us if
you are the Messiah, the Son of God." 64 Jesus said to him, "You have
said so. But I tell you,
From now on you will see the Son of Man
seated at the right hand of Power
and coming on the clouds of heaven."
65 Then the high priest tore his clothes and said, "He has blasphemed!
Why do we still need witnesses? You have now heard his blasphemy.
66 What is your verdict?" They answered, "He deserves death." 67
Then they spat in his face and struck him; and some slapped him, 68
saying, "Prophesy to us, you Messiah! Who is it that struck you?"

66

MATTHEW 67

69 Now Peter was sitting outside in the courtyard. A servant-girl came
to him and said, "You also were with Jesus the Galilean." 70 But he
denied it before all of them, saying, "I do not know what you are
talking about." 71 When he went out to the porch, another servant-girl
saw him, and she said to the bystanders, "This man was with Jesus of
Nazareth." 72 Again he denied it with an oath, "I do not know the
man." 73 After a little while the bystanders came up and said to Peter,
"Certainly you are also one of them, for your accent betrays you." 74
Then he began to curse, and he swore an oath, "I do not know the
man!" At that moment the cock crowed. 75 Then Peter remembered
what Jesus had said: "Before the cock crows, you will deny me three
times." And he went out and wept bitterly.
[Matthew 27]
The trial of Jesus
1 When morning came, all the chief priests and the elders of the people
conferred together against Jesus in order to bring about his death. 2
They bound him, led him away, and handed him over to Pilate the
governor.
3 When Judas, his betrayer, saw that Jesus was condemned, he
repented and brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the chief
priests and the elders. 4 He said, "I have sinned by betraying innocent
blood." But they said, "What is that to us? See to it yourself." 5
Throwing down the pieces of silver in the temple, he departed; and he
went and hanged himself. 6 But the chief priests, taking the pieces of
silver, said, "It is not lawful to put them into the treasury, since they
are blood money." 7 After conferring together, they used them to buy
the potter's field as a place to bury foreigners. 8 For this reason that
field has been called the Field of Blood to this day. 9 Then was fulfilled
what had been spoken through the prophet Jeremiah, "And they took
the thirty pieces of silver, the price of the one on whom a price had
been set, on whom some of the people of Israel had set a price, 10 and
they gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord commanded me."

67

MATTHEW 68

11 Now Jesus stood before the governor; and the governor asked him,
"Are you the King of the Jews?" Jesus said, "You say so." 12 But when
he was accused by the chief priests and elders, he did not answer. 13
Then Pilate said to him, "Do you not hear how many accusations they
make against you?" 14 But he gave him no answer, not even to a single
charge, so that the governor was greatly amazed.
15 Now at the festival the governor was accustomed to release a
prisoner for the crowd, anyone whom they wanted. 16 At that time
they had a notorious prisoner, called Jesus Barabbas. 17 So after they
had gathered, Pilate said to them, "Whom do you want me to release
for you, Jesus Barabbas or Jesus who is called the Messiah?" 18 For he
realized that it was out of jealousy that they had handed him over. 19
While he was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent word to him,
"Have nothing to do with that innocent man, for today I have suffered
a great deal because of a dream about him." 20 Now the chief priests
and the elders persuaded the crowds to ask for Barabbas and to have
Jesus killed. 21 The governor again said to them, "Which of the two do
you want me to release for you?" And they said, "Barabbas." 22 Pilate
said to them, "Then what should I do with Jesus who is called the
Messiah?" All of them said, "Let him be crucified!" 23 Then he asked,
"Why, what evil has he done?" But they shouted all the more, "Let him
be crucified!"
24 So when Pilate saw that he could do nothing, but rather that a riot
was beginning, he took some water and washed his hands before the
crowd, saying, "I am innocent of this man's blood; see to it yourselves."
25 Then the people as a whole answered, "His blood be on us and on
our children!" 26 So he released Barabbas for them; and after flogging
Jesus, he handed him over to be crucified.
27 Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the governor's
headquarters, and they gathered the whole cohort around him. 28
They stripped him and put a scarlet robe on him, 29 and after twisting
some thorns into a crown, they put it on his head. They put a reed in
his right hand and knelt before him and mocked him, saying, "Hail,
King of the Jews!" 30 They spat on him, and took the reed and struck

68

MATTHEW 69

him on the head. 31 After mocking him, they stripped him of the robe
and put his own clothes on him. Then they led him away to crucify him.
The crucifixion
32 As they went out, they came upon a man from Cyrene named
Simon; they compelled this man to carry his cross. 33 And when they
came to a place called Golgotha (which means Place of a Skull), 34 they
offered him wine to drink, mixed with gall; but when he tasted it, he
would not drink it. 35 And when they had crucified him, they divided
his clothes among themselves by casting lots; 36 then they sat down
there and kept watch over him. 37 Over his head they put the charge
against him, which read, "This is Jesus, the King of the Jews."
38 Then two bandits were crucified with him, one on his right and one
on his left. 39 Those who passed by derided him, shaking their heads
40 and saying, "You who would destroy the temple and build it in
three days, save yourself! If you are the Son of God, come down from
the cross." 41 In the same way the chief priests also, along with the
scribes and elders, were mocking him, saying, 42 "He saved others; he
cannot save himself. He is the King of Israel; let him come down from
the cross now, and we will believe in him. 43 He trusts in God; let God
deliver him now, if he wants to; for he said, 'I am God's Son.'" 44 The
bandits who were crucified with him also taunted him in the same way.
45 From noon on, darkness came over the whole land until three in the
afternoon. 46 And about three o'clock Jesus cried with a loud voice,
"Eli, Eli, lema sabachthani?" that is, "My God, my God, why have you
forsaken me?" 47 When some of the bystanders heard it, they said,
"This man is calling for Elijah." 48 At once one of them ran and got a
sponge, filled it with sour wine, put it on a stick, and gave it to him to
drink. 49 But the others said, "Wait, let us see whether Elijah will come
to save him." 50 Then Jesus cried again with a loud voice and breathed
his last. 51 At that moment the curtain of the temple was torn in two,
from top to bottom. The earth shook, and the rocks were split. 52 The
tombs also were opened, and many bodies of the saints who had fallen
asleep were raised. 53 After his resurrection they came out of the
tombs and entered the holy city and appeared to many. 54 Now when

69

MATTHEW 70

the centurion and those with him, who were keeping watch over Jesus,
saw the earthquake and what took place, they were terrified and said,
"Truly this man was God's Son!"
The burial
55 Many women were also there, looking on from a distance; they had
followed Jesus from Galilee and had provided for him. 56 Among them
were Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and
the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
57 When it was evening, there came a rich man from Arimathea,
named Joseph, who was also a disciple of Jesus. 58 He went to Pilate
and asked for the body of Jesus; then Pilate ordered it to be given to
him. 59 So Joseph took the body and wrapped it in a clean linen cloth
60 and laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn in the rock. He
then rolled a great stone to the door of the tomb and went away. 61
Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were there, sitting opposite the
tomb.
62 The next day, that is, after the day of Preparation, the chief priests
and the Pharisees gathered before Pilate 63 and said, "Sir, we
remember what that impostor said while he was still alive, 'After three
days I will rise again.' 64 Therefore command the tomb to be made
secure until the third day; otherwise his disciples may go and steal him
away, and tell the people, 'He has been raised from the dead,' and the
last deception would be worse than the first." 65 Pilate said to them,
"You have a guard of soldiers; go, make it as secure as you can." 66 So
they went with the guard and made the tomb secure by sealing the
stone.
[Matthew 28]
Empty tomb, appearance, and commission
1 After the sabbath, as the first day of the week was dawning, Mary
Magdalene and the other Mary went to see the tomb. 2 And suddenly
there was a great earthquake; for an angel of the Lord, descending
from heaven, came and rolled back the stone and sat on it. 3 His

70

MATTHEW 71

appearance was like lightning, and his clothing white as snow. 4 For
fear of him the guards shook and became like dead men. 5 But the
angel said to the women, "Do not be afraid; I know that you are
looking for Jesus who was crucified. 6 He is not here; for he has been
raised, as he said. Come, see the place where he lay. 7 Then go quickly
and tell his disciples, 'He has been raised from the dead, and indeed he
is going ahead of you to Galilee; there you will see him.' This is my
message for you." 8 So they left the tomb quickly with fear and great
joy, and ran to tell his disciples. 9 Suddenly Jesus met them and said,
"Greetings!" And they came to him, took hold of his feet, and
worshiped him. 10 Then Jesus said to them, "Do not be afraid; go and
tell my brothers to go to Galilee; there they will see me."
11 While they were going, some of the guard went into the city and
told the chief priests everything that had happened. 12 After the priests
had assembled with the elders, they devised a plan to give a large sum
of money to the soldiers, 13 telling them, "You must say, 'His disciples
came by night and stole him away while we were asleep.' 14 If this
comes to the governor's ears, we will satisfy him and keep you out of
trouble." 15 So they took the money and did as they were directed.
And this story is still told among the Jews to this day.
16 Now the eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain to which
Jesus had directed them. 17 When they saw him, they worshiped him;
but some doubted. 18 And Jesus came and said to them, "All authority
in heaven and on earth has been given to me. 19 Go therefore and
make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, 20 and teaching them to obey
everything that I have commanded you. And remember, I am with you
always, to the end of the age."

71

MARK 72

MARK
Introduction
Modern readers often take the Gospel according to Mark as a story of
Christian discipleship, but is much more than that. Mark is a story of
conflict — or rather of multiple conflicts. That is why it is so exciting to
read and why it has such a compelling message. In the dominant
conflict that builds to a climax throughout the Gospel, Jesus' challenge
to the high priestly rulers and their Roman imperial overlords escalates
from his preaching and practice of the kingdom of God in the village
gatherings of Galilee to his dramatic demonstration against the Temple
and confrontational challenge to the rulers in Jerusalem. That results in
his torturous crucifixion by the Romans as an insurrectionary. In Jesus'
exorcisms, moreover, God is winning the struggle with Satan and the
demonic "unclean spirits" that have taken possession of the people like
an occupying Roman legion. Surprisingly, however, a conflict between
Jesus and the very disciples he designates as representative of the
renewed people of Israel also develops in the course of the story.
Although Jesus teaches them the mystery of the kingdom, they
persistently fail to understand what he is teaching and doing — that
the "kingdom of heaven/god" is already here (in their hearts and
minds), but not yet (among the people and society) — so much so that
by the end they betray, deny, and desert him. By contrast with the
misunderstanding and faithless disciples, women, who play an
increasingly prominent role in Mark's story, serve as models of
faithfulness.
The Gospel story unfolds in an escalating series of steps. After Jesus'
baptism by John, he proclaims the kingdom of God and manifests its
miraculous power in the village gatherings of Galilee as the renewal of
Israel, over against the Jerusalem priestly establishment and its
representatives, the scribes and the Pharisees (chs 1-3). In the first long
speech of the Gospel, Jesus then teaches the mysterious plan of the
72

MARK 73

kingdom in parables to his disciples and others in the movement (4.134). Jesus continues his program of the renewal of Israel in a sustained
program of sea crossings, exorcisms, healings, and wilderness feedings
reminiscent of the activities of Moses and Elijah (the great prophets of
the past who, respectively, founded and renewed Israel), along with
continuing disputes with the scribes and Pharisees (4.35-8.21). In the
next step of the story, one framed by healings of blind men that
highlights the disciples' misunderstanding, Jesus repeatedly makes
that, besides being a new prophet equal in significance to Moses and
Elijah in his restoration of covenantal Israel, it is necessary that he carry
out the agenda of a martyr-messiah of Israel who must be condemned
by the rulers, be killed, and rise again (8.22-10.52). After his dramatic
messianic entry into Jerusalem and his provocative prophetic
condemnation of the Temple, Jesus confronts the Jerusalem priestly
establishment and their representatives (chs 11-12). In a second major
speech, Jesus warns the disciples about fanatical misinterpretation of
the coming political struggles (ch 13). In the final section of the Gospel,
following Jesus' last meal with the disciples and his betrayal and arrest
by the rulers' posse, he is accused of treason, blashpemy, and
insurrection, condemned, and turned over to Pilate, the Roman
governor, who orders him executed by crucifixion (chs 14-15). The
Gospel then ends abruptly with the story of the empty tomb and the
women's fear (16.1-8). Because the Gospel presents a sustained
narrative of escalating conflicts, it should be read as a whole so
components are understood in their connection with the overall story.
The Gospel of Mark presents Jesus' preaching and manifestation of the
kingdom of God as a decisive development in the history of Israel, not
as the beginning of a new religion. Indeed, in this story religion is
inseparable from the social, political, economic, even the physiological
aspects of life. Throughout the Gospel, Jesus is portrayed and
presented in terms of popular Israelite memories of the great prophets,
especially Moses, who had led Israel's Exodus from subjection to alien
rule in Egypt; Elijah, who had led the renewal of Israel in resistance to
oppressive monarchs; and Jeremiah, who proclaimed God's judgment
on the Temple and the rulers based there. At the beginning, in the
middle, and especially toward the end, Mark also presents Jesus as a
specially designated son of God, or king. Jesus, however, turns out to

73

MARK 74

be a messiah (anointed one) who is also a martyr, in contrast to the
disciples' expectations. And Jesus as both prophet and martyr-messiah
is pointedly distinguished from the expectations of elite, scribal culture
(see esp. 9.11-13; 12-35-37).
Although the Gospel is anonymous, an ancient tradition ascribes it to
John Mark (mentioned in Acts 12.12; 15.37), who is supposed to have
composed it at Rome as a summary of Peter's preaching (see 1 Pet 5.13).
Modern scholars, however, find little evidence to support this tradition.
Mark is by far the shortest of the four canonical Gospels and is
generally thought to be the earliest, and to have been used in the
composition of both Matthew and Luke. Because of the vague and
indefinite references to the destruction of Jerusalem in Mark 13
(contrast Mt 22.7; Lk 19.43), the Gospel is thought to have been
composed just prior to the widespread Jewish popular revolt that
began in 66 CE and the Roman reconquest and destruction of
Jerusalem and the Temple in 70 CE. The language of the Gospel is that
of common spoken Greek. Its style features rapid sequences of brief
and vivid concrete episodes linked simply by "and" or "and
immediately," often deleted in translation for less awkward reading in
English. The narrative often shifts from the past tense into the present
tense, enlivening the action. The contents of the Gospel consist mostly
of stories about Jesus' actions and disputes with scribes and Pharisees,
including some of Jesus' sayings, with two speeches (one mostly of
parables) that interrupt the rapid flow of episodes. Mark appears to
have drawn upon a rich variety of oral traditions of Jesus' actions and
teachings, including chains of miracle stories, sets of parables, and
stories of controversies with the Pharisees. The overall narrative weaves
several sequences of episodes together into a complex plot with several
interrelated themes and conflicts. In the earliest manuscripts, Mark
ends abruptly at 16.8. This (apparently original) open ending invites the
reader to continue the story of Jesus and the kingdom. In some later
manuscripts Mark's story was "completed" with resurrection
appearances of amalgamated elements from the other canonical
Gospels, to make it conform to their common pattern.

74

MARK 75

[Mark 1]
Preparing the way of the Lord
1 The beginning of the good news of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.
John's baptism of repentance
2 As it is written in the prophet Isaiah,
"See, I am sending my messenger ahead of you,
who will prepare your way;
3 the voice of one crying out in the wilderness:
'Prepare the way of the Lord,
make his paths straight,'"
4 John the baptizer appeared in the wilderness, proclaiming a baptism
of repentance for the forgiveness of sins. 5 And people from the whole
Judean countryside and all the people of Jerusalem were going out to
him, and were baptized by him in the river Jordan, confessing their
sins. 6 Now John was clothed with camel's hair, with a leather belt
around his waist, and he ate locusts and wild honey. 7 He proclaimed,
"The one who is more powerful than I is coming after me; I am not
worthy to stoop down and untie the thong of his sandals. 8 I have
baptized you with water; but he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit."
Jesus' baptism
9 In those days Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee and was baptized
by John in the Jordan. 10 And just as he was coming up out of the
water, he saw the heavens torn apart and the Spirit descending like a
dove on him. 11 And a voice came from heaven, "You are my Son, the
Beloved; with you I am well pleased."
Jesus' tests and trials
12 And the Spirit immediately drove him out into the wilderness. 13 He
was in the wilderness forty days, tempted by Satan; and he was with
the wild beasts; and the angels waited on him.

75

MARK 76

Proclaiming and manifesting the kingdom of God as the renewal of
Israel, over against the Jerusalem priestly rulers; Jesus' opening
proclamation of the kingdom of God
14 Now after John was arrested, Jesus came to Galilee, proclaiming the
good news of God, 15 and saying, "The time is fulfilled, and the
kingdom of God has come near; repent, and believe in the good
news."
Call of disciples
16 As Jesus passed along the Sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and his
brother Andrew casting a net into the sea — for they were fishermen.
17 And Jesus said to them, "Follow me and I will make you fish for
people." 18 And immediately they left their nets and followed him. 19
As he went a little farther, he saw James son of Zebedee and his
brother John, who were in their boat mending the nets. 20
Immediately he called them; and they left their father Zebedee in the
boat with the hired men, and followed him.
Exorcism and teaching with authority
21 They went to Capernaum; and when the sabbath came, he entered
the synagogue and taught. 22 They were astounded at his teaching, for
he taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes. 23 Just
then there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit, 24 and
he cried out, "What have you to do with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have
you come to destroy us? I know who you are, the Holy One of God." 25
But Jesus rebuked him, saying, "Be silent, and come out of him!" 26
And the unclean spirit, convulsing him and crying with a loud voice,
came out of him. 27 They were all amazed, and they kept on asking
one another, "What is this? A new teaching — with authority! He
commands even the unclean spirits, and they obey him." 28 At once his
fame began to spread throughout the surrounding region of Galilee.

76

MARK 77

Healings and exorcisms
29 As soon as they left the synagogue, they entered the house of
Simon and Andrew, with James and John. 30 Now Simon's mother-inlaw was in bed with a fever, and they told him about her at once. 31 He
came and took her by the hand and lifted her up. Then the fever left
her, and she began to serve them.
32 That evening, at sundown, they brought to him all who were sick or
possessed with demons. 33 And the whole city was gathered around
the door. 34 And he cured many who were sick with various diseases,
and cast out many demons; and he would not permit the demons to
speak, because they knew him.
Summary of Jesus' activity
35 In the morning, while it was still very dark, he got up and went out
to a deserted place, and there he prayed. 36 And Simon and his
companions hunted for him. 37 When they found him, they said to
him, "Everyone is searching for you." 38 He answered, "Let us go on to
the neighboring towns, so that I may proclaim the message there also;
for that is what I came out to do." 39 And he went throughout Galilee,
proclaiming the message in their synagogues and casting out demons.
Healing a leper
40 A leper came to him begging him, and kneeling he said to him, "If
you choose, you can make me clean." 41 Moved with pity, Jesus
stretched out his hand and touched him, and said to him, "I do choose.
Be made clean!" 42 Immediately the leprosy left him, and he was made
clean. 43 After sternly warning him he sent him away at once, 44
saying to him, "See that you say nothing to anyone; but go, show
yourself to the priest, and offer for your cleansing what Moses
commanded, as a testimony to them." 45 But he went out and began
to proclaim it freely, and to spread the word, so that Jesus could no
longer go into a town openly, but stayed out in the country; and
people came to him from every quarter.

77

MARK 78

[Mark 2]
Healing paralysis and forgiveness of sins
1 When he returned to Capernaum after some days, it was reported
that he was at home. 2 So many gathered around that there was no
longer room for them, not even in front of the door; and he was
speaking the word to them. 3 Then some people came, bringing to him
a paralyzed man, carried by four of them. 4 And when they could not
bring him to Jesus because of the crowd, they removed the roof above
him; and after having dug through it, they let down the mat on which
the paralytic lay. 5 When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic,
"Son, your sins are forgiven." 6 Now some of the scribes were sitting
there, questioning in their hearts, 7 "Why does this fellow speak in this
way? It is blasphemy! Who can forgive sins but God alone?" 8 At once
Jesus perceived in his spirit that they were discussing these questions
among themselves; and he said to them, "Why do you raise such
questions in your hearts? 9 Which is easier, to say to the paralytic,
'Your sins are forgiven,' or to say, 'Stand up and take your mat and
walk'? 10 But so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority
on earth to forgive sins" — he said to the paralytic — 11 "I say to you,
stand up, take your mat and go to your home." 12 And he stood up,
and immediately took the mat and went out before all of them; so that
they were all amazed and glorified God, saying, "We have never seen
anything like this!"
Eating with sinners
13 Jesus went out again beside the sea; the whole crowd gathered
around him, and he taught them. 14 As he was walking along, he saw
Levi son of Alphaeus sitting at the tax booth, and he said to him,
"Follow me." And he got up and followed him.
15 And as he sat at dinner in Levi's house, many tax collectors and
sinners were also sitting with Jesus and his disciples — for there were
many who followed him. 16 When the scribes of the Pharisees saw that
he was eating with sinners and tax collectors, they said to his disciples,
"Why does he eat with tax collectors and sinners?" 17 When Jesus
heard this, he said to them, "Those who are well have no need of a

78

MARK 79

physician, but those who are sick; I have come to call not the righteous
but sinners."
Fasting
18 Now John's disciples and the Pharisees were fasting; and people
came and said to him, "Why do John's disciples and the disciples of the
Pharisees fast, but your disciples do not fast?" 19 Jesus said to them,
"The wedding guests cannot fast while the bridegroom is with them,
can they? As long as they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot
fast. 20 The days will come when the bridegroom is taken away from
them, and then they will fast on that day.
21 "No one sews a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old cloak; otherwise,
the patch pulls away from it, the new from the old, and a worse tear is
made. 22 And no one puts new wine into old wineskins; otherwise, the
wine will burst the skins, and the wine is lost, and so are the skins; but
one puts new wine into fresh wineskins."
The sabbath and hunger
23 One sabbath he was going through the grainfields; and as they
made their way his disciples began to pluck heads of grain. 24 The
Pharisees said to him, "Look, why are they doing what is not lawful on
the sabbath?" 25 And he said to them, "Have you never read what
David did when he and his companions were hungry and in need of
food? 26 He entered the house of God, when Abiathar was high priest,
and ate the bread of the Presence, which it is not lawful for any but
the priests to eat, and he gave some to his companions." 27 Then he
said to them, "The sabbath was made for humankind, and not
humankind for the sabbath; 28 so the Son of Man is lord even of the
sabbath."
[Mark 3]
Healing on the sabbath
1 Again he entered the synagogue, and a man was there who had a
withered hand. 2 They watched him to see whether he would cure him

79

MARK 80

on the sabbath, so that they might accuse him. 3 And he said to the
man who had the withered hand, "Come forward." 4 Then he said to
them, "Is it lawful to do good or to do harm on the sabbath, to save
life or to kill?" But they were silent. 5 He looked around at them with
anger; he was grieved at their hardness of heart and said to the man,
"Stretch out your hand." He stretched it out, and his hand was
restored. 6 The Pharisees went out and immediately conspired with the
Herodians against him, how to destroy him.
Summary of Jesus' activity
7 Jesus departed with his disciples to the sea, and a great multitude
from Galilee followed him; 8 hearing all that he was doing, they came
to him in great numbers from Judea, Jerusalem, Idumea, beyond the
Jordan, and the region around Tyre and Sidon. 9 He told his disciples to
have a boat ready for him because of the crowd, so that they would
not crush him; 10 for he had cured many, so that all who had diseases
pressed upon him to touch him. 11 Whenever the unclean spirits saw
him, they fell down before him and shouted, "You are the Son of
God!" 12 But he sternly ordered them not to make him known.
Appointing the twelve
13 He went up the mountain and called to him those whom he wanted,
and they came to him. 14 And he appointed twelve, whom he also
named apostles, to be with him, and to be sent out to proclaim the
message, 15 and to have authority to cast out demons. 16 So he
appointed the twelve: Simon (to whom he gave the name Peter); 17
James son of Zebedee and John the brother of James (to whom he
gave the name Boanerges, that is, Sons of Thunder); 18 and Andrew,
and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James
son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus, and Simon the Cananaean, 19 and
Judas Iscariot, who betrayed him.
Defeat of Satan and the new community
Then he went home; 20 and the crowd came together again, so that
they could not even eat. 21 When his family heard it, they went out to

80

MARK 81

restrain him, for people were saying, "He has gone out of his mind." 22
And the scribes who came down from Jerusalem said, "He has
Beelzebul, and by the ruler of the demons he casts out demons." 23
And he called them to him, and spoke to them in parables, "How can
Satan cast out Satan? 24 If a kingdom is divided against itself, that
kingdom cannot stand. 25 And if a house is divided against itself, that
house will not be able to stand. 26 And if Satan has risen up against
himself and is divided, he cannot stand, but his end has come. 27 But
no one can enter a strong man's house and plunder his property
without first tying up the strong man; then indeed the house can be
plundered.
28 "Truly I tell you, people will be forgiven for their sins and whatever
blasphemies they utter; 29 but whoever blasphemes against the Holy
Spirit can never have forgiveness, but is guilty of an eternal sin" — 30
for they had said, "He has an unclean spirit."
31 Then his mother and his brothers came; and standing outside, they
sent to him and called him. 32 A crowd was sitting around him; and
they said to him, "Your mother and your brothers and sisters are
outside, asking for you." 33 And he replied, "Who are my mother and
my brothers?" 34 And looking at those who sat around him, he said,
"Here are my mother and my brothers! 35 Whoever does the will of
God is my brother and sister and mother."
[Mark 4]
Teaching the mystery of the kingdom of God in parables
1 Again he began to teach beside the sea. Such a very large crowd
gathered around him that he got into a boat on the sea and sat there,
while the whole crowd was beside the sea on the land. 2 He began to
teach them many things in parables, and in his teaching he said to
them: 3 "Listen! A sower went out to sow. 4 And as he sowed, some
seed fell on the path, and the birds came and ate it up. 5 Other seed
fell on rocky ground, where it did not have much soil, and it sprang up
quickly, since it had no depth of soil. 6 And when the sun rose, it was
scorched; and since it had no root, it withered away. 7 Other seed fell
among thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked it, and it yielded no

81

MARK 82

grain. 8 Other seed fell into good soil and brought forth grain,
growing up and increasing and yielding thirty and sixty and a
hundredfold." 9 And he said, "Let anyone with ears to hear listen!"
10 When he was alone, those who were around him along with the
twelve asked him about the parables. 11 And he said to them, "To you
has been given the secret of the kingdom of God, but for those
outside, everything comes in parables; 12 in order that
'they may indeed look, but not perceive,
and may indeed listen, but not understand;
so that they may not turn again and be forgiven.'"
13 And he said to them, "Do you not understand this parable? Then
how will you understand all the parables? 14 The sower sows the word.
15 These are the ones on the path where the word is sown: when they
hear, Satan immediately comes and takes away the word that is sown
in them. 16 And these are the ones sown on rocky ground: when they
hear the word, they immediately receive it with joy. 17 But they have
no root, and endure only for a while; then, when trouble or
persecution arises on account of the word, immediately they fall away.
18 And others are those sown among the thorns: these are the ones
who hear the word, 19 but the cares of the world, and the lure of
wealth, and the desire for other things come in and choke the word,
and it yields nothing. 20 And these are the ones sown on the good soil:
they hear the word and accept it and bear fruit, thirty and sixty and a
hundredfold."
21 He said to them, "Is a lamp brought in to be put under the bushel
basket, or under the bed, and not on the lampstand? 22 For there is
nothing hidden, except to be disclosed; nor is anything secret, except
to come to light. 23 Let anyone with ears to hear listen!" 24 And he
said to them, "Pay attention to what you hear; the measure you give
will be the measure you get, and still more will be given you. 25 For to
those who have, more will be given; and from those who have
nothing, even what they have will be taken away."

82

MARK 83

26 He also said, "The kingdom of God is as if someone would scatter
seed on the ground, 27 and would sleep and rise night and day, and
the seed would sprout and grow, he does not know how. 28 The earth
produces of itself, first the stalk, then the head, then the full grain in
the head. 29 But when the grain is ripe, at once he goes in with his
sickle, because the harvest has come."
30 He also said, "With what can we compare the kingdom of God, or
what parable will we use for it? 31 It is like a mustard seed, which,
when sown upon the ground, is the smallest of all the seeds on earth;
32 yet when it is sown it grows up and becomes the greatest of all
shrubs, and puts forth large branches, so that the birds of the air can
make nests in its shade."
33 With many such parables he spoke the word to them, as they were
able to hear it; 34 he did not speak to them except in parables, but he
explained everything in private to his disciples.
Continuing the prophetic renewal of Israel (and other peoples) despite
opposition and the disciples' misunderstanding; First sea crossing
35 On that day, when evening had come, he said to them, "Let us go
across to the other side." 36 And leaving the crowd behind, they took
him with them in the boat, just as he was. Other boats were with him.
37 A great windstorm arose, and the waves beat into the boat, so that
the boat was already being swamped. 38 But he was in the stern,
asleep on the cushion; and they woke him up and said to him,
"Teacher, do you not care that we are perishing?" 39 He woke up and
rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, "Peace! Be still!" Then the wind
ceased, and there was a dead calm. 40 He said to them, "Why are you
afraid? Have you still no faith?" 41 And they were filled with great awe
and said to one another, "Who then is this, that even the wind and the
sea obey him?"

83

MARK 84

[Mark 5]
Exorcism of the demon whose name is "Legion"
1 They came to the other side of the sea, to the country of the
Gerasenes. 2 And when he had stepped out of the boat, immediately a
man out of the tombs with an unclean spirit met him. 3 He lived
among the tombs; and no one could restrain him any more, even with
a chain; 4 for he had often been restrained with shackles and chains,
but the chains he wrenched apart, and the shackles he broke in pieces;
and no one had the strength to subdue him. 5 Night and day among
the tombs and on the mountains he was always howling and bruising
himself with stones. 6 When he saw Jesus from a distance, he ran and
bowed down before him; 7 and he shouted at the top of his voice,
"What have you to do with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I
adjure you by God, do not torment me." 8 For he had said to him,
"Come out of the man, you unclean spirit!" 9 Then Jesus asked him,
"What is your name?" He replied, "My name is Legion; for we are
many." 10 He begged him earnestly not to send them out of the
country. 11 Now there on the hillside a great herd of swine was
feeding; 12 and the unclean spirits begged him, "Send us into the
swine; let us enter them." 13 So he gave them permission. And the
unclean spirits came out and entered the swine; and the herd,
numbering about two thousand, rushed down the steep bank into the
sea, and were drowned in the sea.
14 The swineherds ran off and told it in the city and in the country.
Then people came to see what it was that had happened. 15 They came
to Jesus and saw the demoniac sitting there, clothed and in his right
mind, the very man who had had the legion; and they were afraid. 16
Those who had seen what had happened to the demoniac and to the
swine reported it. 17 Then they began to beg Jesus to leave their
neighborhood. 18 As he was getting into the boat, the man who had
been possessed by demons begged him that he might be with him. 19
But Jesus refused, and said to him, "Go home to your friends, and tell
them how much the Lord has done for you, and what mercy he has
shown you." 20 And he went away and began to proclaim in the
Decapolis how much Jesus had done for him; and everyone was
amazed.

84

MARK 85

Healings of Jairus's daughter and hemorrhaging woman
21 When Jesus had crossed again in the boat to the other side, a great
crowd gathered around him; and he was by the sea. 22 Then one of the
leaders of the synagogue named Jairus came and, when he saw him,
fell at his feet 23 and begged him repeatedly, "My little daughter is at
the point of death. Come and lay your hands on her, so that she may
be made well, and live." 24 So he went with him.
And a large crowd followed him and pressed in on him. 25 Now there
was a woman who had been suffering from hemorrhages for twelve
years. 26 She had endured much under many physicians, and had spent
all that she had; and she was no better, but rather grew worse. 27 She
had heard about Jesus, and came up behind him in the crowd and
touched his cloak, 28 for she said, "If I but touch his clothes, I will be
made well." 29 Immediately her hemorrhage stopped; and she felt in
her body that she was healed of her disease. 30 Immediately aware
that power had gone forth from him, Jesus turned about in the crowd
and said, "Who touched my clothes?" 31 And his disciples said to him,
"You see the crowd pressing in on you; how can you say, 'Who touched
me?'" 32 He looked all around to see who had done it. 33 But the
woman, knowing what had happened to her, came in fear and
trembling, fell down before him, and told him the whole truth. 34 He
said to her, "Daughter, your faith has made you well; go in peace, and
be healed of your disease."
35 While he was still speaking, some people came from the leader's
house to say, "Your daughter is dead. Why trouble the teacher any
further?" 36 But overhearing what they said, Jesus said to the leader of
the synagogue, "Do not fear, only believe." 37 He allowed no one to
follow him except Peter, James, and John, the brother of James. 38
When they came to the house of the leader of the synagogue, he saw a
commotion, people weeping and wailing loudly. 39 When he had
entered, he said to them, "Why do you make a commotion and weep?
The child is not dead but sleeping." 40 And they laughed at him. Then
he put them all outside, and took the child's father and mother and
those who were with him, and went in where the child was. 41 He took
her by the hand and said to her, "Talitha cum," which means, "Little

85

MARK 86

girl, get up!" 42 And immediately the girl got up and began to walk
about (she was twelve years of age). At this they were overcome with
amazement. 43 He strictly ordered them that no one should know this,
and told them to give her something to eat.
[Mark 6]
Rejection in his hometown
1 He left that place and came to his hometown, and his disciples
followed him. 2 On the sabbath he began to teach in the synagogue,
and many who heard him were astounded. They said, "Where did this
man get all this? What is this wisdom that has been given to him?
What deeds of power are being done by his hands! 3 Is not this the
carpenter, the son of Mary and brother of James and Joses and Judas
and Simon, and are not his sisters here with us?" And they took
offense at him. 4 Then Jesus said to them, "Prophets are not without
honor, except in their hometown, and among their own kin, and in
their own house." 5 And he could do no deed of power there, except
that he laid his hands on a few sick people and cured them. 6 And he
was amazed at their unbelief.
Commissioning the twelve
Then he went about among the villages teaching. 7 He called the
twelve and began to send them out two by two, and gave them
authority over the unclean spirits. 8 He ordered them to take nothing
for their journey except a staff; no bread, no bag, no money in their
belts; 9 but to wear sandals and not to put on two tunics. 10 He said to
them, "Wherever you enter a house, stay there until you leave the
place. 11 If any place will not welcome you and they refuse to hear you,
as you leave, shake off the dust that is on your feet as a testimony
against them." 12 So they went out and proclaimed that all should
repent. 13 They cast out many demons, and anointed with oil many
who were sick and cured them.

86

MARK 87

Herod's execution of John
14 King Herod heard of it, for Jesus' name had become known. Some
were saying, "John the baptizer has been raised from the dead; and for
this reason these powers are at work in him." 15 But others said, "It is
Elijah." And others said, "It is a prophet, like one of the prophets of
old." 16 But when Herod heard of it, he said, "John, whom I beheaded,
has been raised."
17 For Herod himself had sent men who arrested John, bound him, and
put him in prison on account of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife,
because Herod had married her. 18 For John had been telling Herod,
"It is not lawful for you to have your brother's wife." 19 And Herodias
had a grudge against him, and wanted to kill him. But she could not,
20 for Herod feared John, knowing that he was a righteous and holy
man, and he protected him. When he heard him, he was greatly
perplexed; and yet he liked to listen to him. 21 But an opportunity
came when Herod on his birthday gave a banquet for his courtiers and
officers and for the leaders of Galilee. 22 When his daughter Herodias
came in and danced, she pleased Herod and his guests; and the king
said to the girl, "Ask me for whatever you wish, and I will give it." 23
And he solemnly swore to her, "Whatever you ask me, I will give you,
even half of my kingdom." 24 She went out and said to her mother,
"What should I ask for?" She replied, "The head of John the baptizer."
25 Immediately she rushed back to the king and requested, "I want you
to give me at once the head of John the Baptist on a platter." 26 The
king was deeply grieved; yet out of regard for his oaths and for the
guests, he did not want to refuse her. 27 Immediately the king sent a
soldier of the guard with orders to bring John's head. He went and
beheaded him in the prison, 28 brought his head on a platter, and
gave it to the girl. Then the girl gave it to her mother. 29 When his
disciples heard about it, they came and took his body, and laid it in a
tomb.
Wilderness feeding of five thousand
30 The apostles gathered around Jesus, and told him all that they had
done and taught. 31 He said to them, "Come away to a deserted place

87

MARK 88

all by yourselves and rest a while." For many were coming and going,
and they had no leisure even to eat. 32 And they went away in the
boat to a deserted place by themselves. 33 Now many saw them going
and recognized them, and they hurried there on foot from all the
towns and arrived ahead of them. 34 As he went ashore, he saw a
great crowd; and he had compassion for them, because they were like
sheep without a shepherd; and he began to teach them many things.
35 When it grew late, his disciples came to him and said, "This is a
deserted place, and the hour is now very late; 36 send them away so
that they may go into the surrounding country and villages and buy
something for themselves to eat." 37 But he answered them, "You give
them something to eat." They said to him, "Are we to go and buy two
hundred denarii worth of bread, and give it to them to eat?" 38 And
he said to them, "How many loaves have you? Go and see." When they
had found out, they said, "Five, and two fish." 39 Then he ordered
them to get all the people to sit down in groups on the green grass. 40
So they sat down in groups of hundreds and of fifties. 41 Taking the
five loaves and the two fish, he looked up to heaven, and blessed and
broke the loaves, and gave them to his disciples to set before the
people; and he divided the two fish among them all. 42 And all ate and
were filled; 43 and they took up twelve baskets full of broken pieces
and of the fish. 44 Those who had eaten the loaves numbered five
thousand men.
Second sea crossing
45 Immediately he made his disciples get into the boat and go on
ahead to the other side, to Bethsaida, while he dismissed the crowd. 46
After saying farewell to them, he went up on the mountain to pray.
47 When evening came, the boat was out on the sea, and he was alone
on the land. 48 When he saw that they were straining at the oars
against an adverse wind, he came towards them early in the morning,
walking on the sea. He intended to pass them by. 49 But when they
saw him walking on the sea, they thought it was a ghost and cried out;
50 for they all saw him and were terrified. But immediately he spoke to
them and said, "Take heart, it is I; do not be afraid." 51 Then he got
into the boat with them and the wind ceased. And they were utterly

88

MARK 89

astounded, 52 for they did not understand about the loaves, but their
hearts were hardened.
A summary passage
53 When they had crossed over, they came to land at Gennesaret and
moored the boat. 54 When they got out of the boat, people at once
recognized him, 55 and rushed about that whole region and began to
bring the sick on mats to wherever they heard he was. 56 And
wherever he went, into villages or cities or farms, they laid the sick in
the marketplaces, and begged him that they might touch even the
fringe of his cloak; and all who touched it were healed.
[Mark 7]
Traditions of the elders vs. the commandment of God
1 Now when the Pharisees and some of the scribes who had come from
Jerusalem gathered around him, 2 they noticed that some of his
disciples were eating with defiled hands, that is, without washing
them. 3 (For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, do not eat unless they
thoroughly wash their hands, thus observing the tradition of the
elders; 4 and they do not eat anything from the market unless they
wash it; and there are also many other traditions that they observe, the
washing of cups, pots, and bronze kettles.) 5 So the Pharisees and the
scribes asked him, "Why do your disciples not live according to the
tradition of the elders, but eat with defiled hands?" 6 He said to them,
"Isaiah prophesied rightly about you hypocrites, as it is written,
'This people honors me with their lips,
but their hearts are far from me;
7 in vain do they worship me,
teaching human precepts as doctrines.'
8 You abandon the commandment of God and hold to human
tradition."
9 Then he said to them, "You have a fine way of rejecting the
commandment of God in order to keep your tradition! 10 For Moses
said, 'Honor your father and your mother'; and, 'Whoever speaks evil
of father or mother must surely die.' 11 But you say that if anyone tells

89

MARK 90

father or mother, 'Whatever support you might have had from me is
Corban' (that is, an offering to God) — 12 then you no longer permit
doing anything for a father or mother, 13 thus making void the word
of God through your tradition that you have handed on. And you do
many things like this."
14 Then he called the crowd again and said to them, "Listen to me, all
of you, and understand: 15 there is nothing outside a person that by
going in can defile, but the things that come out are what defile."
17 When he had left the crowd and entered the house, his disciples
asked him about the parable. 18 He said to them, "Then do you also
fail to understand? Do you not see that whatever goes into a person
from outside cannot defile, 19 since it enters, not the heart but the
stomach, and goes out into the sewer?" (Thus he declared all foods
clean.) 20 And he said, "It is what comes out of a person that defiles. 21
For it is from within, from the human heart, that evil intentions come:
fornication, theft, murder, 22 adultery, avarice, wickedness, deceit,
licentiousness, envy, slander, pride, folly. 23 All these evil things come
from within, and they defile a person."
The Syrophoenician woman
24 From there he set out and went away to the region of Tyre. He
entered a house and did not want anyone to know he was there. Yet
he could not escape notice, 25 but a woman whose little daughter had
an unclean spirit immediately heard about him, and she came and
bowed down at his feet. 26 Now the woman was a Gentile, of
Syrophoenician origin. She begged him to cast the demon out of her
daughter. 27 He said to her, "Let the children be fed first, for it is not
fair to take the children's food and throw it to the dogs." 28 But she
answered him, "Sir, even the dogs under the table eat the children's
crumbs." 29 Then he said to her, "For saying that, you may go — the
demon has left your daughter." 30 So she went home, found the child
lying on the bed, and the demon gone.

90

MARK 91

Healing the deaf
31 Then he returned from the region of Tyre, and went by way of Sidon
towards the Sea of Galilee, in the region of the Decapolis. 32 They
brought to him a deaf man who had an impediment in his speech; and
they begged him to lay his hand on him. 33 He took him aside in
private, away from the crowd, and put his fingers into his ears, and he
spat and touched his tongue. 34 Then looking up to heaven, he sighed
and said to him, "Ephphatha," that is, "Be opened." 35 And
immediately his ears were opened, his tongue was released, and he
spoke plainly. 36 Then Jesus ordered them to tell no one; but the more
he ordered them, the more zealously they proclaimed it. 37 They were
astounded beyond measure, saying, "He has done everything well; he
even makes the deaf to hear and the mute to speak."
[Mark 8]
Wilderness feeding of four thousand
1 In those days when there was again a great crowd without anything
to eat, he called his disciples and said to them, 2 "I have compassion for
the crowd, because they have been with me now for three days and
have nothing to eat. 3 If I send them away hungry to their homes, they
will faint on the way — and some of them have come from a great
distance." 4 His disciples replied, "How can one feed these people with
bread here in the desert?" 5 He asked them, "How many loaves do you
have?" They said, "Seven." 6 Then he ordered the crowd to sit down
on the ground; and he took the seven loaves, and after giving thanks
he broke them and gave them to his disciples to distribute; and they
distributed them to the crowd. 7 They had also a few small fish; and
after blessing them, he ordered that these too should be distributed. 8
They ate and were filled; and they took up the broken pieces left over,
seven baskets full. 9 Now there were about four thousand people. And
he sent them away. 10 And immediately he got into the boat with his
disciples and went to the district of Dalmanutha.

91

MARK 92

No sign will be given
11 The Pharisees came and began to argue with him, asking him for a
sign from heaven, to test him. 12 And he sighed deeply in his spirit and
said, "Why does this generation ask for a sign? Truly I tell you, no sign
will be given to this generation." 13 And he left them, and getting into
the boat again, he went across to the other side.
The disciples misunderstand
14 Now the disciples had forgotten to bring any bread; and they had
only one loaf with them in the boat. 15 And he cautioned them, saying,
"Watch out — beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and the yeast of
Herod." 16 They said to one another, "It is because we have no bread."
17 And becoming aware of it, Jesus said to them, "Why are you talking
about having no bread? Do you still not perceive or understand? Are
your hearts hardened? 18 Do you have eyes, and fail to see? Do you
have ears, and fail to hear? And do you not remember? 19 When I
broke the five loaves for the five thousand, how many baskets full of
broken pieces did you collect?" They said to him, "Twelve." 20 "And
the seven for the four thousand, how many baskets full of broken
pieces did you collect?" And they said to him, "Seven." 21 Then he said
to them, "Do you not yet understand?"
Jesus confirms and continues his prophetic role in the renewal of Israel
while announcing his agenda as martyr-messiah to the misconceiving
disciples; Healing of a blind man
22 They came to Bethsaida. Some people brought a blind man to him
and begged him to touch him. 23 He took the blind man by the hand
and led him out of the village; and when he had put saliva on his eyes
and laid his hands on him, he asked him, "Can you see anything?" 24
And the man looked up and said, "I can see people, but they look like
trees, walking." 25 Then Jesus laid his hands on his eyes again; and he
looked intently and his sight was restored, and he saw everything
clearly. 26 Then he sent him away to his home, saying, "Do not even go
into the village."

92

MARK 93

Jesus' first announcement and Peter's misunderstanding
27 Jesus went on with his disciples to the villages of Caesarea Philippi;
and on the way he asked his disciples, "Who do people say that I am?"
28 And they answered him, "John the Baptist; and others, Elijah; and
still others, one of the prophets." 29 He asked them, "But who do you
say that I am?" Peter answered him, "You are the Messiah." 30 And he
sternly ordered them not to tell anyone about him.
31 Then he began to teach them that the Son of Man must undergo
great suffering, and be rejected by the elders, the chief priests, and the
scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again. 32 He said all this
quite openly. And Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him. 33
But turning and looking at his disciples, he rebuked Peter and said,
"Get behind me, Satan! For you are setting your mind not on divine
things but on human things."
The cost of following Jesus
34 He called the crowd with his disciples, and said to them, "If any
want to become my followers, let them deny themselves and take up
their cross and follow me. 35 For those who want to save their life will
lose it, and those who lose their life for my sake, and for the sake of
the gospel, will save it. 36 For what will it profit them to gain the
whole world and forfeit their life? 37 Indeed, what can they give in
return for their life? 38 Those who are ashamed of me and of my
words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of them the Son of Man
will also be ashamed when he comes in the glory of his Father with the
holy angels." [Mark 9] 1 And he said to them, "Truly I tell you, there are
some standing here who will not taste death until they see that the
kingdom of God has come with power."
[Mark 9]
Transfiguration of Jesus
2 Six days later, Jesus took with him Peter and James and John, and led
them up a high mountain apart, by themselves. And he was
transfigured before them, 3 and his clothes became dazzling white,

93

MARK 94

such as no one on earth could bleach them. 4 And there appeared to
them Elijah with Moses, who were talking with Jesus. 5 Then Peter said
to Jesus, "Rabbi, it is good for us to be here; let us make three
dwellings, one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah." 6 He did not
know what to say, for they were terrified. 7 Then a cloud
overshadowed them, and from the cloud there came a voice, "This is
my Son, the Beloved; listen to him!" 8 Suddenly when they looked
around, they saw no one with them any more, but only Jesus.
Correction of scribal teaching about Elijah
9 As they were coming down the mountain, he ordered them to tell no
one about what they had seen, until after the Son of Man had risen
from the dead. 10 So they kept the matter to themselves, questioning
what this rising from the dead could mean. 11 Then they asked him,
"Why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?" 12 He said to
them, "Elijah is indeed coming first to restore all things. How then is it
written about the Son of Man, that he is to go through many
sufferings and be treated with contempt? 13 But I tell you that Elijah
has come, and they did to him whatever they pleased, as it is written
about him."
Healing of epileptic child
14 When they came to the disciples, they saw a great crowd around
them, and some scribes arguing with them. 15 When the whole crowd
saw him, they were immediately overcome with awe, and they ran
forward to greet him. 16 He asked them, "What are you arguing about
with them?" 17 Someone from the crowd answered him, "Teacher, I
brought you my son; he has a spirit that makes him unable to speak; 18
and whenever it seizes him, it dashes him down; and he foams and
grinds his teeth and becomes rigid; and I asked your disciples to cast it
out, but they could not do so." 19 He answered them, "You faithless
generation, how much longer must I be among you? How much longer
must I put up with you? Bring him to me." 20 And they brought the
boy to him. When the spirit saw him, immediately it convulsed the boy,
and he fell on the ground and rolled about, foaming at the mouth. 21
Jesus asked the father, "How long has this been happening to him?"

94

MARK 95

And he said, "From childhood. 22 It has often cast him into the fire and
into the water, to destroy him; but if you are able to do anything, have
pity on us and help us." 23 Jesus said to him, "If you are able! — All
things can be done for the one who believes." 24 Immediately the
father of the child cried out, "I believe; help my unbelief!" 25 When
Jesus saw that a crowd came running together, he rebuked the unclean
spirit, saying to it, "You spirit that keeps this boy from speaking and
hearing, I command you, come out of him, and never enter him
again!" 26 After crying out and convulsing him terribly, it came out,
and the boy was like a corpse, so that most of them said, "He is dead."
27 But Jesus took him by the hand and lifted him up, and he was able
to stand. 28 When he had entered the house, his disciples asked him
privately, "Why could we not cast it out?" 29 He said to them, "This
kind can come out only through prayer."
Second announcement and misunderstanding
30 They went on from there and passed through Galilee. He did not
want anyone to know it; 31 for he was teaching his disciples, saying to
them, "The Son of Man is to be betrayed into human hands, and they
will kill him, and three days after being killed, he will rise again." 32
But they did not understand what he was saying and were afraid to ask
him.
33 Then they came to Capernaum; and when he was in the house he
asked them, "What were you arguing about on the way?" 34 But they
were silent, for on the way they had argued with one another who was
the greatest. 35 He sat down, called the twelve, and said to them,
"Whoever wants to be first must be last of all and servant of all." 36
Then he took a little child and put it among them; and taking it in his
arms, he said to them, 37 "Whoever welcomes one such child in my
name welcomes me, and whoever welcomes me welcomes not me but
the one who sent me."
Unknown exorcist
38 John said to him, "Teacher, we saw someone casting out demons in
your name, and we tried to stop him, because he was not following

95

MARK 96

us." 39 But Jesus said, "Do not stop him; for no one who does a deed
of power in my name will be able soon afterward to speak evil of me.
40 Whoever is not against us is for us. 41 For truly I tell you, whoever
gives you a cup of water to drink because you bear the name of Christ
will by no means lose the reward.
Warning on discipline
42 "If any of you put a stumbling block before one of these little ones
who believe in me, it would be better for you if a great millstone were
hung around your neck and you were thrown into the sea. 43 If your
hand causes you to stumble, cut it off; it is better for you to enter life
maimed than to have two hands and to go to hell, to the
unquenchable fire. 45 And if your foot causes you to stumble, cut it
off; it is better for you to enter life lame than to have two feet and to
be thrown into hell. 47 And if your eye causes you to stumble, tear it
out; it is better for you to enter the kingdom of God with one eye than
to have two eyes and to be thrown into hell, 48 where their worm
never dies, and the fire is never quenched.
49 "For everyone will be salted with fire. 50 Salt is good; but if salt has
lost its saltiness, how can you season it? Have salt in yourselves, and be
at peace with one another."
[Mark 10]
Marriage and children in the kingdom
1 He left that place and went to the region of Judea and beyond the
Jordan. And crowds again gathered around him; and, as was his
custom, he again taught them.
2 Some Pharisees came, and to test him they asked, "Is it lawful for a
man to divorce his wife?" 3 He answered them, "What did Moses
command you?" 4 They said, "Moses allowed a man to write a
certificate of dismissal and to divorce her." 5 But Jesus said to them,
"Because of your hardness of heart he wrote this commandment for
you. 6 But from the beginning of creation, 'God made them male and
female.' 7 'For this reason a man shall leave his father and mother and

96

MARK 97

be joined to his wife, 8 and the two shall become one flesh.' So they
are no longer two, but one flesh. 9 Therefore what God has joined
together, let no one separate."
10 Then in the house the disciples asked him again about this matter. 11
He said to them, "Whoever divorces his wife and marries another
commits adultery against her; 12 and if she divorces her husband and
marries another, she commits adultery."
13 People were bringing little children to him in order that he might
touch them; and the disciples spoke sternly to them. 14 But when Jesus
saw this, he was indignant and said to them, "Let the little children
come to me; do not stop them; for it is to such as these that the
kingdom of God belongs. 15 Truly I tell you, whoever does not receive
the kingdom of God as a little child will never enter it." 16 And he took
them up in his arms, laid his hands on them, and blessed them.
Egalitarian economic relations in the kingdom
17 As he was setting out on a journey, a man ran up and knelt before
him, and asked him, "Good Teacher, what must I do to inherit eternal
life?" 18 Jesus said to him, "Why do you call me good? No one is good
but God alone. 19 You know the commandments: 'You shall not
murder; You shall not commit adultery; You shall not steal; You shall
not bear false witness; You shall not defraud; Honor your father and
mother.'" 20 He said to him, "Teacher, I have kept all these since my
youth." 21 Jesus, looking at him, loved him and said, "You lack one
thing; go, sell what you own, and give the money to the poor, and you
will have treasure in heaven; then come, follow me." 22 When he
heard this, he was shocked and went away grieving, for he had many
possessions.
23 Then Jesus looked around and said to his disciples, "How hard it will
be for those who have wealth to enter the kingdom of God!" 24 And
the disciples were perplexed at these words. But Jesus said to them
again, "Children, how hard it is to enter the kingdom of God! 25 It is
easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for someone
who is rich to enter the kingdom of God." 26 They were greatly

97

MARK 98

astounded and said to one another, "Then who can be saved?" 27 Jesus
looked at them and said, "For mortals it is impossible, but not for God;
for God all things are possible."
28 Peter began to say to him, "Look, we have left everything and
followed you." 29 Jesus said, "Truly I tell you, there is no one who has
left house or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or
fields, for my sake and for the sake of the good news, 30 who will not
receive a hundredfold now in this age — houses, brothers and sisters,
mothers and children, and fields, with persecutions — and in the age
to come eternal life. 31 But many who are first will be last, and the last
will be first."
Egalitarian social-political relations in the kingdom and the third
announcement and misunderstanding
32 They were on the road, going up to Jerusalem, and Jesus was
walking ahead of them; they were amazed, and those who followed
were afraid. He took the twelve aside again and began to tell them
what was to happen to him, 33 saying, "See, we are going up to
Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be handed over to the chief priests
and the scribes, and they will condemn him to death; then they will
hand him over to the Gentiles; 34 they will mock him, and spit upon
him, and flog him, and kill him; and after three days he will rise again."
35 James and John, the sons of Zebedee, came forward to him and said
to him, "Teacher, we want you to do for us whatever we ask of you."
36 And he said to them, "What is it you want me to do for you?" 37
And they said to him, "Grant us to sit, one at your right hand and one
at your left, in your glory." 38 But Jesus said to them, "You do not
know what you are asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I drink,
or be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?" 39 They
replied, "We are able." Then Jesus said to them, "The cup that I drink
you will drink; and with the baptism with which I am baptized, you will
be baptized; 40 but to sit at my right hand or at my left is not mine to
grant, but it is for those for whom it has been prepared."

98

MARK 99

41 When the ten heard this, they began to be angry with James and
John. 42 So Jesus called them and said to them, "You know that among
the Gentiles those whom they recognize as their rulers lord it over
them, and their great ones are tyrants over them. 43 But it is not so
among you; but whoever wishes to become great among you must be
your servant, 44 and whoever wishes to be first among you must be
slave of all. 45 For the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve,
and to give his life a ransom for many."
Healing of the blind Bartimaeus
46 They came to Jericho. As he and his disciples and a large crowd were
leaving Jericho, Bartimaeus son of Timaeus, a blind beggar, was sitting
by the roadside. 47 When he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he
began to shout out and say, "Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!"
48 Many sternly ordered him to be quiet, but he cried out even more
loudly, "Son of David, have mercy on me!" 49 Jesus stood still and said,
"Call him here." And they called the blind man, saying to him, "Take
heart; get up, he is calling you." 50 So throwing off his cloak, he
sprang up and came to Jesus. 51 Then Jesus said to him, "What do you
want me to do for you?" The blind man said to him, "My teacher, let
me see again." 52 Jesus said to him, "Go; your faith has made you
well." Immediately he regained his sight and followed him on the way.
[Mark 11]
Confronting the rulers and ruling institutions in Jerusalem; A messianic
demonstration
1 When they were approaching Jerusalem, at Bethphage and Bethany,
near the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples 2 and said to
them, "Go into the village ahead of you, and immediately as you enter
it, you will find tied there a colt that has never been ridden; untie it
and bring it. 3 If anyone says to you, 'Why are you doing this?' just say
this, 'The Lord needs it and will send it back here immediately.'" 4 They
went away and found a colt tied near a door, outside in the street. As
they were untying it, 5 some of the bystanders said to them, "What are
you doing, untying the colt?" 6 They told them what Jesus had said;
and they allowed them to take it. 7 Then they brought the colt to Jesus

99

MARK 100

and threw their cloaks on it; and he sat on it. 8 Many people spread
their cloaks on the road, and others spread leafy branches that they
had cut in the fields. 9 Then those who went ahead and those who
followed were shouting,
"Hosanna!
Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord!
10
Blessed is the coming kingdom of our ancestor David!
Hosanna in the highest heaven!"
11 Then he entered Jerusalem and went into the temple; and when he
had looked around at everything, as it was already late, he went out to
Bethany with the twelve.
Prophetic demonstration against the Temple
12 On the following day, when they came from Bethany, he was
hungry. 13 Seeing in the distance a fig tree in leaf, he went to see
whether perhaps he would find anything on it. When he came to it, he
found nothing but leaves, for it was not the season for figs. 14 He said
to it, "May no one ever eat fruit from you again." And his disciples
heard it.
15 Then they came to Jerusalem. And he entered the temple and began
to drive out those who were selling and those who were buying in the
temple, and he overturned the tables of the money changers and the
seats of those who sold doves; 16 and he would not allow anyone to
carry anything through the temple. 17 He was teaching and saying, "Is
it not written,
'My house shall be called a house of prayer for all the nations'?
But you have made it a den of robbers."
18 And when the chief priests and the scribes heard it, they kept
looking for a way to kill him; for they were afraid of him, because the
whole crowd was spellbound by his teaching. 19 And when evening
came, Jesus and his disciples went out of the city.
20 In the morning as they passed by, they saw the fig tree withered
away to its roots. 21 Then Peter remembered and said to him, "Rabbi,
look! The fig tree that you cursed has withered." 22 Jesus answered

100

MARK 101

them, "Have faith in God. 23 Truly I tell you, if you say to this
mountain, 'Be taken up and thrown into the sea,' and if you do not
doubt in your heart, but believe that what you say will come to pass, it
will be done for you. 24 So I tell you, whatever you ask for in prayer,
believe that you have received it, and it will be yours.
25 "Whenever you stand praying, forgive, if you have anything against
anyone; so that your Father in heaven may also forgive you your
trespasses."
Jesus' authority
27 Again they came to Jerusalem. As he was walking in the temple, the
chief priests, the scribes, and the elders came to him 28 and said, "By
what authority are you doing these things? Who gave you this
authority to do them?" 29 Jesus said to them, "I will ask you one
question; answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these
things. 30 Did the baptism of John come from heaven, or was it of
human origin? Answer me." 31 They argued with one another, "If we
say, 'From heaven,' he will say, 'Why then did you not believe him?' 32
But shall we say, 'Of human origin'?" — they were afraid of the crowd,
for all regarded John as truly a prophet. 33 So they answered Jesus,
"We do not know." And Jesus said to them, "Neither will I tell you by
what authority I am doing these things."
[Mark 12]
Parable in the vineyard
1 Then he began to speak to them in parables. "A man planted a
vineyard, put a fence around it, dug a pit for the wine press, and built
a watchtower; then he leased it to tenants and went to another
country. 2 When the season came, he sent a slave to the tenants to
collect from them his share of the produce of the vineyard. 3 But they
seized him, and beat him, and sent him away empty-handed. 4 And
again he sent another slave to them; this one they beat over the head
and insulted. 5 Then he sent another, and that one they killed. And so
it was with many others; some they beat, and others they killed. 6 He
had still one other, a beloved son. Finally he sent him to them, saying,

101

MARK 102

'They will respect my son.' 7 But those tenants said to one another,
'This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.'
8 So they seized him, killed him, and threw him out of the vineyard. 9
What then will the owner of the vineyard do? He will come and
destroy the tenants and give the vineyard to others. 10 Have you not
read this scripture:
'The stone that the builders rejected
has become the cornerstone;
11 this was the LORD's doing,
and it is amazing in our eyes'?"
12 When they realized that he had told this parable against them, they
wanted to arrest him, but they feared the crowd. So they left him and
went away.
Paying taxes to the emperor
13 Then they sent to him some Pharisees and some Herodians to trap
him in what he said. 14 And they came and said to him, "Teacher, we
know that you are sincere, and show deference to no one; for you do
not regard people with partiality, but teach the way of God in
accordance with truth. Is it lawful to pay taxes to the emperor, or not?
15 Should we pay them, or should we not?" But knowing their
hypocrisy, he said to them, "Why are you putting me to the test? Bring
me a denarius and let me see it." 16 And they brought one. Then he
said to them, "Whose head is this, and whose title?" They answered,
"The emperor's." 17 Jesus said to them, "Give to the emperor the
things that are the emperor's, and to God the things that are God's."
And they were utterly amazed at him.
Dispute with the Sadducees
18 Some Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came to him and
asked him a question, saying, 19 "Teacher, Moses wrote for us that if a
man's brother dies, leaving a wife but no child, the man shall marry the
widow and raise up children for his brother. 20 There were seven
brothers; the first married and, when he died, left no children; 21 and
the second married the widow and died, leaving no children; and the

102

MARK 103

third likewise; 22 none of the seven left children. Last of all the woman
herself died. 23 In the resurrection whose wife will she be? For the
seven had married her."
24 Jesus said to them, "Is not this the reason you are wrong, that you
know neither the scriptures nor the power of God? 25 For when they
rise from the dead, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but
are like angels in heaven. 26 And as for the dead being raised, have
you not read in the book of Moses, in the story about the bush, how
God said to him, 'I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob'? 27 He is God not of the dead, but of the living; you are
quite wrong."
Love your neighbor
28 One of the scribes came near and heard them disputing with one
another, and seeing that he answered them well, he asked him,
"Which commandment is the first of all?" 29 Jesus answered, "The first
is, 'Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is one; 30 you shall love
the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with
all your mind, and with all your strength.' 31 The second is this, 'You
shall love your neighbor as yourself.' There is no other commandment
greater than these." 32 Then the scribe said to him, "You are right,
Teacher; you have truly said that 'he is one, and besides him there is no
other'; 33 and 'to love him with all the heart, and with all the
understanding, and with all the strength,' and 'to love one's neighbor
as oneself,' — this is much more important than all whole burnt
offerings and sacrifices." 34 When Jesus saw that he answered wisely,
he said to him, "You are not far from the kingdom of God." After that
no one dared to ask him any question.
How can the messiah be David's son?
35 While Jesus was teaching in the temple, he said, "How can the
scribes say that the Messiah is the son of David? 36 David himself, by
the Holy Spirit, declared,

103

MARK 104

'The Lord said to my Lord,
"Sit at my right hand,
until I put your enemies under your feet."'
37 David himself calls him Lord; so how can he be his son?" And the
large crowd was listening to him with delight.
Beware of the scribes
38 As he taught, he said, "Beware of the scribes, who like to walk
around in long robes, and to be greeted with respect in the
marketplaces, 39 and to have the best seats in the synagogues and
places of honor at banquets! 40 They devour widows' houses and for
the sake of appearance say long prayers. They will receive the greater
condemnation."
41 He sat down opposite the treasury, and watched the crowd putting
money into the treasury. Many rich people put in large sums. 42 A poor
widow came and put in two small copper coins, which are worth a
penny. 43 Then he called his disciples and said to them, "Truly I tell
you, this poor widow has put in more than all those who are
contributing to the treasury. 44 For all of them have contributed out of
their abundance; but she out of her poverty has put in everything she
had, all she had to live on."
[Mark 13]
Destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple
1 As he came out of the temple, one of his disciples said to him, "Look,
Teacher, what large stones and what large buildings!" 2 Then Jesus
asked him, "Do you see these great buildings? Not one stone will be
left here upon another; all will be thrown down."
Exhortation not to be distracted from the movement by distressing
events
3 When he was sitting on the Mount of Olives opposite the temple,
Peter, James, John, and Andrew asked him privately, 4 "Tell us, when
will this be, and what will be the sign that all these things are about to

104

MARK 105

be accomplished?" 5 Then Jesus began to say to them, "Beware that no
one leads you astray. 6 Many will come in my name and say, 'I am he!'
and they will lead many astray. 7 When you hear of wars and rumors of
wars, do not be alarmed; this must take place, but the end is still to
come. 8 For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom; there will be earthquakes in various places; there will be
famines. This is but the beginning of the birth pangs.
9 "As for yourselves, beware; for they will hand you over to councils;
and you will be beaten in synagogues; and you will stand before
governors and kings because of me, as a testimony to them. 10 And the
good news must first be proclaimed to all nations. 11 When they bring
you to trial and hand you over, do not worry beforehand about what
you are to say; but say whatever is given you at that time, for it is not
you who speak, but the Holy Spirit. 12 Brother will betray brother to
death, and a father his child, and children will rise against parents and
have them put to death; 13 and you will be hated by all because of my
name. But the one who endures to the end will be saved.
14 "But when you see the desolating sacrilege set up where it ought
not to be (let the reader understand), then those in Judea must flee to
the mountains; 15 the one on the housetop must not go down or enter
the house to take anything away; 16 the one in the field must not turn
back to get a coat. 17 Woe to those who are pregnant and to those
who are nursing infants in those days! 18 Pray that it may not be in
winter. 19 For in those days there will be suffering, such as has not
been from the beginning of the creation that God created until now,
no, and never will be. 20 And if the Lord had not cut short those days,
no one would be saved; but for the sake of the elect, whom he chose,
he has cut short those days. 21 And if anyone says to you at that time,
'Look! Here is the Messiah!' or 'Look! There he is!' — do not believe it.
22 False messiahs and false prophets will appear and produce signs and
omens, to lead astray, if possible, the elect. 23 But be alert; I have
already told you everything.
24 "But in those days, after that suffering,
the sun will be darkened,
and the moon will not give its light,

105

MARK 106

25 and the stars will be falling from heaven,
and the powers in the heavens will be shaken.
26 Then they will see 'the Son of Man coming in clouds' with great
power and glory. 27 Then he will send out the angels, and gather his
elect from the four winds, from the ends of the earth to the ends of
heaven.
28 "From the fig tree learn its lesson: as soon as its branch becomes
tender and puts forth its leaves, you know that summer is near. 29 So
also, when you see these things taking place, you know that he is near,
at the very gates. 30 Truly I tell you, this generation will not pass away
until all these things have taken place. 31 Heaven and earth will pass
away, but my words will not pass away.
32 "But about that day or hour no one knows, neither the angels in
heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father. 33 Beware, keep alert; for
you do not know when the time will come. 34 It is like a man going on
a journey, when he leaves home and puts his slaves in charge, each
with his work, and commands the doorkeeper to be on the watch. 35
Therefore, keep awake — for you do not know when the master of the
house will come, in the evening, or at midnight, or at cockcrow, or at
dawn, 36 or else he may find you asleep when he comes suddenly. 37
And what I say to you I say to all: Keep awake."
[Mark 14]
Jesus' death as martyr-messiah
1 It was two days before the Passover and the festival of Unleavened
Bread. The chief priests and the scribes were looking for a way to arrest
Jesus by stealth and kill him; 2 for they said, "Not during the festival, or
there may be a riot among the people."
Anointing for burial
3 While he was at Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat at
the table, a woman came with an alabaster jar of very costly ointment
of nard, and she broke open the jar and poured the ointment on his
head. 4 But some were there who said to one another in anger, "Why

106

MARK 107

was the ointment wasted in this way? 5 For this ointment could have
been sold for more than three hundred denarii, and the money given
to the poor." And they scolded her. 6 But Jesus said, "Let her alone;
why do you trouble her? She has performed a good service for me. 7
For you always have the poor with you, and you can show kindness to
them whenever you wish; but you will not always have me. 8 She has
done what she could; she has anointed my body beforehand for its
burial. 9 Truly I tell you, wherever the good news is proclaimed in the
whole world, what she has done will be told in remembrance of her."
Prediction of betrayal
10 Then Judas Iscariot, who was one of the twelve, went to the chief
priests in order to betray him to them. 11 When they heard it, they
were greatly pleased, and promised to give him money. So he began to
look for an opportunity to betray him.
The Last Supper
12 On the first day of Unleavened Bread, when the Passover lamb is
sacrificed, his disciples said to him, "Where do you want us to go and
make the preparations for you to eat the Passover?" 13 So he sent two
of his disciples, saying to them, "Go into the city, and a man carrying a
jar of water will meet you; follow him, 14 and wherever he enters, say
to the owner of the house, 'The Teacher asks, Where is my guest room
where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?' 15 He will show you a
large room upstairs, furnished and ready. Make preparations for us
there." 16 So the disciples set out and went to the city, and found
everything as he had told them; and they prepared the Passover meal.
17 When it was evening, he came with the twelve. 18 And when they
had taken their places and were eating, Jesus said, "Truly I tell you, one
of you will betray me, one who is eating with me." 19 They began to
be distressed and to say to him one after another, "Surely, not I?" 20
He said to them, "It is one of the twelve, one who is dipping bread into
the bowl with me. 21 For the Son of Man goes as it is written of him,
but woe to that one by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would
have been better for that one not to have been born."

107

MARK 108

22 While they were eating, he took a loaf of bread, and after blessing
it he broke it, gave it to them, and said, "Take; this is my body." 23
Then he took a cup, and after giving thanks he gave it to them, and all
of them drank from it. 24 He said to them, "This is my blood of the
covenant, which is poured out for many. 25 Truly I tell you, I will never
again drink of the fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it new in
the kingdom of God."
Agony and betrayal in Gethsemane
26 When they had sung the hymn, they went out to the Mount of
Olives. 27 And Jesus said to them, "You will all become deserters; for it
is written,
'I will strike the shepherd,
and the sheep will be scattered.'
28 But after I am raised up, I will go before you to Galilee." 29 Peter
said to him, "Even though all become deserters, I will not." 30 Jesus
said to him, "Truly I tell you, this day, this very night, before the cock
crows twice, you will deny me three times." 31 But he said vehemently,
"Even though I must die with you, I will not deny you." And all of them
said the same.
32 They went to a place called Gethsemane; and he said to his disciples,
"Sit here while I pray." 33 He took with him Peter and James and John,
and began to be distressed and agitated. 34 And he said to them, "I am
deeply grieved, even to death; remain here, and keep awake." 35 And
going a little farther, he threw himself on the ground and prayed that,
if it were possible, the hour might pass from him. 36 He said, "Abba,
Father, for you all things are possible; remove this cup from me; yet,
not what I want, but what you want." 37 He came and found them
sleeping; and he said to Peter, "Simon, are you asleep? Could you not
keep awake one hour? 38 Keep awake and pray that you may not
come into the time of trial; the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is
weak." 39 And again he went away and prayed, saying the same
words. 40 And once more he came and found them sleeping, for their
eyes were very heavy; and they did not know what to say to him. 41 He
came a third time and said to them, "Are you still sleeping and taking
your rest? Enough! The hour has come; the Son of Man is betrayed into

108

MARK 109

the hands of sinners. 42 Get up, let us be going. See, my betrayer is at
hand."
43 Immediately, while he was still speaking, Judas, one of the twelve,
arrived; and with him there was a crowd with swords and clubs, from
the chief priests, the scribes, and the elders. 44 Now the betrayer had
given them a sign, saying, "The one I will kiss is the man; arrest him
and lead him away under guard." 45 So when he came, he went up to
him at once and said, "Rabbi!" and kissed him. 46 Then they laid hands
on him and arrested him. 47 But one of those who stood near drew his
sword and struck the slave of the high priest, cutting off his ear. 48
Then Jesus said to them, "Have you come out with swords and clubs to
arrest me as though I were a bandit? 49 Day after day I was with you in
the temple teaching, and you did not arrest me. But let the scriptures
be fulfilled." 50 All of them deserted him and fled.
51 A certain young man was following him, wearing nothing but a
linen cloth. They caught hold of him, 52 but he left the linen cloth and
ran off naked.
Jesus condemned by chief priests and council and Peter's denial
53 They took Jesus to the high priest; and all the chief priests, the
elders, and the scribes were assembled. 54 Peter had followed him at a
distance, right into the courtyard of the high priest; and he was sitting
with the guards, warming himself at the fire. 55 Now the chief priests
and the whole council were looking for testimony against Jesus to put
him to death; but they found none. 56 For many gave false testimony
against him, and their testimony did not agree. 57 Some stood up and
gave false testimony against him, saying, 58 "We heard him say, 'I will
destroy this temple that is made with hands, and in three days I will
build another, not made with hands.'" 59 But even on this point their
testimony did not agree. 60 Then the high priest stood up before them
and asked Jesus, "Have you no answer? What is it that they testify
against you?" 61 But he was silent and did not answer. Again the high
priest asked him, "Are you the Messiah, the Son of the Blessed One?"

109

MARK 110

62 Jesus said, "I am; and
'you will see the Son of Man
seated at the right hand of the Power,'
and 'coming with the clouds of heaven.'"
63 Then the high priest tore his clothes and said, "Why do we still need
witnesses? 64 You have heard his blasphemy! What is your decision?"
All of them condemned him as deserving death. 65 Some began to spit
on him, to blindfold him, and to strike him, saying to him, "Prophesy!"
The guards also took him over and beat him.
66 While Peter was below in the courtyard, one of the servant-girls of
the high priest came by. 67 When she saw Peter warming himself, she
stared at him and said, "You also were with Jesus, the man from
Nazareth." 68 But he denied it, saying, "I do not know or understand
what you are talking about." And he went out into the forecourt. Then
the cock crowed. 69 And the servant-girl, on seeing him, began again
to say to the bystanders, "This man is one of them." 70 But again he
denied it. Then after a little while the bystanders again said to Peter,
"Certainly you are one of them; for you are a Galilean." 71 But he
began to curse, and he swore an oath, "I do not know this man you are
talking about." 72 At that moment the cock crowed for the second
time. Then Peter remembered that Jesus had said to him, "Before the
cock crows twice, you will deny me three times." And he broke down
and wept.
[Mark 15]
Jesus condemned by Pilate
1 As soon as it was morning, the chief priests held a consultation with
the elders and scribes and the whole council. They bound Jesus, led him
away, and handed him over to Pilate. 2 Pilate asked him, "Are you the
King of the Jews?" He answered him, "You say so." 3 Then the chief
priests accused him of many things. 4 Pilate asked him again, "Have
you no answer? See how many charges they bring against you." 5 But
Jesus made no further reply, so that Pilate was amazed.

110

MARK 111

6 Now at the festival he used to release a prisoner for them, anyone for
whom they asked. 7 Now a man called Barabbas was in prison with the
rebels who had committed murder during the insurrection. 8 So the
crowd came and began to ask Pilate to do for them according to his
custom. 9 Then he answered them, "Do you want me to release for you
the King of the Jews?" 10 For he realized that it was out of jealousy
that the chief priests had handed him over. 11 But the chief priests
stirred up the crowd to have him release Barabbas for them instead. 12
Pilate spoke to them again, "Then what do you wish me to do with the
man you call the King of the Jews?" 13 They shouted back, "Crucify
him!" 14 Pilate asked them, "Why, what evil has he done?" But they
shouted all the more, "Crucify him!" 15 So Pilate, wishing to satisfy the
crowd, released Barabbas for them; and after flogging Jesus, he
handed him over to be crucified.
The crucifixion
16 Then the soldiers led him into the courtyard of the palace (that is,
the governor's headquarters); and they called together the whole
cohort. 17 And they clothed him in a purple cloak; and after twisting
some thorns into a crown, they put it on him. 18 And they began
saluting him, "Hail, King of the Jews!" 19 They struck his head with a
reed, spat upon him, and knelt down in homage to him. 20 After
mocking him, they stripped him of the purple cloak and put his own
clothes on him. Then they led him out to crucify him.
21 They compelled a passer-by, who was coming in from the country, to
carry his cross; it was Simon of Cyrene, the father of Alexander and
Rufus. 22 Then they brought Jesus to the place called Golgotha (which
means the place of a skull). 23 And they offered him wine mixed with
myrrh; but he did not take it. 24 And they crucified him, and divided
his clothes among them, casting lots to decide what each should take.
25 It was nine o'clock in the morning when they crucified him. 26 The
inscription of the charge against him read, "The King of the Jews." 27
And with him they crucified two bandits, one on his right and one on
his left. 29 Those who passed by derided him, shaking their heads and
saying, "Aha! You who would destroy the temple and build it in three

111

MARK 112

days, 30 save yourself, and come down from the cross!" 31 In the same
way the chief priests, along with the scribes, were also mocking him
among themselves and saying, "He saved others; he cannot save
himself. 32 Let the Messiah, the King of Israel, come down from the
cross now, so that we may see and believe." Those who were crucified
with him also taunted him.
33 When it was noon, darkness came over the whole land until three in
the afternoon. 34 At three o'clock Jesus cried out with a loud voice,
"Eloi, Eloi, lema sabachthani?" which means, "My God, my God, why
have you forsaken me?" 35 When some of the bystanders heard it, they
said, "Listen, he is calling for Elijah." 36 And someone ran, filled a
sponge with sour wine, put it on a stick, and gave it to him to drink,
saying, "Wait, let us see whether Elijah will come to take him down."
37 Then Jesus gave a loud cry and breathed his last. 38 And the curtain
of the temple was torn in two, from top to bottom. 39 Now when the
centurion, who stood facing him, saw that in this way he breathed his
last, he said, "Truly this man was God's Son!"
Jesus' burial
40 There were also women looking on from a distance; among them
were Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the younger
and of Joses, and Salome. 41 These used to follow him and provided for
him when he was in Galilee; and there were many other women who
had come up with him to Jerusalem.
42 When evening had come, and since it was the day of Preparation,
that is, the day before the sabbath, 43 Joseph of Arimathea, a
respected member of the council, who was also himself waiting
expectantly for the kingdom of God, went boldly to Pilate and asked
for the body of Jesus. 44 Then Pilate wondered if he were already
dead; and summoning the centurion, he asked him whether he had
been dead for some time. 45 When he learned from the centurion that
he was dead, he granted the body to Joseph. 46 Then Joseph bought a
linen cloth, and taking down the body, wrapped it in the linen cloth,
and laid it in a tomb that had been hewn out of the rock. He then

112

MARK 113

rolled a stone against the door of the tomb. 47 Mary Magdalene and
Mary the mother of Joses saw where the body was laid.
[Mark 16]
The empty tomb, the call back to Galilee, and 'they were afraid'
1 When the sabbath was over, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother
of James, and Salome bought spices, so that they might go and anoint
him. 2 And very early on the first day of the week, when the sun had
risen, they went to the tomb. 3 They had been saying to one another,
"Who will roll away the stone for us from the entrance to the tomb?"
4 When they looked up, they saw that the stone, which was very large,
had already been rolled back. 5 As they entered the tomb, they saw a
young man, dressed in a white robe, sitting on the right side; and they
were alarmed. 6 But he said to them, "Do not be alarmed; you are
looking for Jesus of Nazareth, who was crucified. He has been raised;
he is not here. Look, there is the place they laid him. 7 But go, tell his
disciples and Peter that he is going ahead of you to Galilee; there you
will see him, just as he told you." 8 So they went out and fled from the
tomb, for terror and amazement had seized them; and they said
nothing to anyone, for they were afraid.
Two attempts to provide a more satisfactory ending to the Gospel of
Mark
THE SHORTER ENDING OF MARK
[[And all that had been commanded them they told briefly to those
around Peter. And afterward Jesus himself sent out through them,
from east to west, the sacred and imperishable proclamation of eternal
salvation.]]
THE LONGER ENDING OF MARK
9 [[Now after he rose early on the first day of the week, he appeared
first to Mary Magdalene, from whom he had cast out seven demons. 10
She went out and told those who had been with him, while they were

113

MARK 114

mourning and weeping. 11 But when they heard that he was alive and
had been seen by her, they would not believe it.
12 After this he appeared in another form to two of them, as they were
walking into the country. 13 And they went back and told the rest, but
they did not believe them.
14 Later he appeared to the eleven themselves as they were sitting at
the table; and he upbraided them for their lack of faith and
stubbornness, because they had not believed those who saw him after
he had risen. 15 And he said to them, "Go into all the world and
proclaim the good news to the whole creation. 16 The one who
believes and is baptized will be saved; but the one who does not
believe will be condemned. 17 And these signs will accompany those
who believe: by using my name they will cast out demons; they will
speak in new tongues; 18 they will pick up snakes in their hands, and if
they drink any deadly thing, it will not hurt them; they will lay their
hands on the sick, and they will recover."
19 So then the Lord Jesus, after he had spoken to them, was taken up
into heaven and sat down at the right hand of God. 20 And they went
out and proclaimed the good news everywhere, while the Lord worked
with them and confirmed the message by the signs that accompanied
it.]]

114

LUKE 115

LUKE
Introduction
The third Gospel, traditionally called the Gospel according to Luke,
forms a unique literary and theological contribution to the New
Testament story of Jesus Christ. Jesus is presented in an elegantly and
deliberately crafted account so that readers perceive him to be "the
Lord," God's Son who is the universal savior of humanity. Jesus himself
is shown to inaugurate a mission to all humankind as the kingdom of
God draws near to the earthly lives of people in Jesus' very person and
work. Luke's telling of Jesus' story present Jesus' coming among
humanity — in birth, life, ministry, suffering, death, and resurrection —
as a fulfillment of God's promises of salvation, which brings peace and
wholeness of life in a decisive way. This saving event began the "final
days" of God's dealings with humanity in anticipation of the "Last
Day," "the Day of the Lord." Jesus himself and, in turn, his disciples call
people to true repentance, which means a new relationship to God and
to other beings in a manner of life that embodies God's will for human
"being."
In recounting this story, Luke reveals the ability to write in different
literary styles. The initial four verses of the book are a single Greek
sentence that forms a highly stylized introductory statement typically
found in ancient historiographical writings. The Greek is formal and
refined in a fashion that would have been familiar to well-educated
citizens of the Greco-Roman era. After this distinctive start, however,
the storytelling shifts into a style of Greek reminiscent of the
Septuagint (ancient Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible, with
additional writings from Hellenistic Judaism). This Semitic-influenced
form of Greek permeates the stories surrounding the birth and
childhood of Jesus. Yet, the Septuagint-like style lightens into a more
normal (and more typically secular) form of first-century Greek (called
"koine") in the narrative that comprises the remainder of the Gospel.
115

LUKE 116

When situations shift in the story, the language of the account varies
appropriately to suit the locale and characters in the narrative. Luke's
appreciation of stylistic variation in narrative communication is
apparent from his skilled employment in this technique. Indeed, it
seems that the Gospel itself captures and conveys the universal
significance of the story of God's salvation in and through Jesus Christ
in the variety of ways that Luke styles the story. Readers from different
religious, ethnic, and social backgrounds would find one level or
another of the overall account to which they could relate and, thereby,
find a point of identity and entry into the story of Jesus Christ.
The oldest traditions of the Christian church identify Luke, a physician
who was a traveling companion and coworker with Paul (Philem 1.24;
Col 4.14), as the author of the Gospel and its sequel, The Acts of the
Apostles. At times the tradition further identifies Luke as a Syrian from
Antioch, but practically nothing else is remembered of the writer of
the Third Gospel. The earliest of these traditions about the identity of
the author are from the late second century, and scholarly analysis of
the Gospel and Acts raises critical questions about the accuracy of the
attribution of the writings to the doctor, Luke, who was Paul's
associate. The strongest argument in favor of the validity of identifying
Luke the physician as the author of the Gospel and Acts is the relative
obscurity of this particular figure from early Christianity. Yet, even
defenders of the traditional identity of Luke recognize difficulties with
that understanding. In particular, Luke's familiarity with Judaism is
extensive, though he seems to have more book-knowledge than
practical experience with particular rituals and beliefs. Similarly, Luke
recalls detailed information about Palestinian locations and practices,
though readers encounter a tendency toward giving the story an urban
aura rather than presenting the predominantly rural reality that Jesus
would have known. Above all, Luke never mentions in Acts that Paul
wrote letters, and his account of the Gospel is quite clearly dependent
on other earlier writings, especially the Gospel of Mark. That Luke
knew and used still other materials, both oral and written, in
composing this Gospel is certain, if not demonstrable. In fact, Luke
shares a body of material (probably written in form) with the author of
the Gospel of Matthew that accounts for approximately one-fifth of
the overall Gospel story. Scholars designate this common material as

116

LUKE 117

"Q" (German "Quelle," meaning "source"). Whether Luke had further
written sources for his unique recital of Jesus' birth, childhood, certain
parables, and the materials peculiar to Luke's account of Jesus' passion
and resurrection is debated and at present beyond final determination.
Yet, Luke's concern with sources — with acknowledging and using
them profitably — is clear from his prologue to the Gospel (1.1-4).
The time and place of the writing of this Gospel are uncertain.
Tradition identifies Luke's account with both Antioch and Rome (where
Acts comes to its end), but no firm tradition or record locates the
precise time and place of composition. Almost any major urban center
in the Mediterranean would make a suitable location for such a
document to be written an read. As for the time of the writing, all one
can say with certainty is that Luke wrote this account after Mark
composed his Gospel. The typical suggestion of scholars that Luke
wrote around 85 CE is plausible, though the Gospel could have been
completed five to fifteen years earlier or even five to ten years later.
The available evidence from antiquity does not make precision possible
in either locating or dating the origin of Luke's narrative.
In broad strokes, Luke tells the same basic story that one reads in the
other canonical Gospels: Jesus appears, ministers in Galilee, and moves
to Judea and Jerusalem where he encounters deadly hostility that leads
to his suffering, death, and resurrection. Yet, Luke's story of Jesus has
logic and content that distinguish it among the four Gospels. The
advent of Jesus in Judaism has a continuity and coherence with the
history of Israel that presents it as the fulfillment of Israel's hopes. In
Luke's remembrance of Jesus one finds the manifestation of divine
compassion as Jesus reaches out to live and work among the marginal
members of his society. Women, the less-than-pious, tax collectors, the
poor, the sick, the oppressed, and even noble Pharisees are present and
interact with Jesus more prominently in this account than in any other.
As stated in Acts, "Jesus of Nazareth... went about doing good... for
God was with him" (Acts 10.38). Both the coming of Jesus and his
ministry of compassion are the direct results of God's anointing Jesus
with the power of the Holy Spirit. That divine outpouring of the Spirit
was neither unprecedented nor singular, however, for the same Spirit
of God was active in the history of Israel, clearly present and active in

117

LUKE 118

the Gospel account prior to the conception and birth of Jesus, and later
present and active in the account in Acts of the Church at work among
all the people of the known world.
The story told by Luke unfolds in a deliberate and seemingly logical
way. The prologue prepares the readers for the significance of the
story that follows, 1.1-4. The infancy and childhood of Jesus is told in a
series of scenes that alternate with an account of the origins of John
the Baptist; the result is that readers meet and understand the role of
both these figures in God's bringing salvation to all humanity, though
Jesus is clearly presented as the superior person in this arrangement
(1.5-2.52). The adult Jesus prepares for his ministry through an
encounter with the adult John (then, readers learn Jesus' genealogy)
and he undergoes temptations by the devil (3.1-4.13); Jesus ministers in
Galilee, provoking controversy, calling disciples, preaching, working
miracles, teaching, commissioning the initial ministry of his followers,
and dealing compassionately with the masses of people (4.14-9.50).
Jesus and his followers journey to Jerusalem and he ministers along the
way (9.51-19.27). Jesus enters Jerusalem, working in the Temple area
and teaching about the future (19.28-21.38). Jesus directs the Last
Supper, suffers, dies, and is buried (22.1-23.56), and Jesus' empty tomb
is found before he appears to the disciples and then ascends to heaven
(24.1-53).
Luke's narrative starts with a clear beginning, but one also containing
anticipations of the full story that follows and declarations that make
the significance of the whole story explicit. The narrative unfolds
naturally. Events occur as results of prior occurrences, and initial
incidents are told in such a way that they anticipate later developments
in the narrative. Readers who become actively involved in Luke's
account will find hints and signals that provoke questions and
expectations that are later answered and met in the reading of the
whole story. In general, wondering about the nature of salvation, the
character of the kingdom of God, the reality of repentance, and the
person and work of Jesus as the Lord — God's messiah, Son, and Savior
— will lead readers to ask about the depths of the story that Luke is
intent upon unveiling. Luke's primary concern is to inform the reader
who Jesus of Nazareth was — and now, who he is as the suffering,

118

LUKE 119

crucified Savior and the risen, exalted Lord. Furthermore, in the wake
of Luke's purposeful presentation of the person and work of Jesus
Christ, there is another dimension of the story that preserves and
communicates Jesus' teaching about what it means to be his follower.
Discipleship is a secondary theme that is closely related to the primary
theme of Jesus' identity and significance. Discipleship, however, is
sometimes a difficult dimension of the story for contemporary readers
to grasp, for discipleship is a way of life as a member of the repentant
and saved people of God. For Luke, one is not a disciple alone, but one
finds profound personal significance in becoming one of the people of
God who live as citizens of God's kingdom in a manner consistent with
God's intentions for the life of all humanity as brought and taught,
shown and known in Jesus Christ, God's Son, the universal Savior of
humankind.

[Luke 1]
The prologue
1 Since many have undertaken to set down an orderly account of the
events that have been fulfilled among us, 2 just as they were handed
on to us by those who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and
servants of the word, 3 I too decided, after investigating everything
carefully from the very first, to write an orderly account for you, most
excellent Theophilus, 4 so that you may know the truth concerning the
things about which you have been instructed.
The infancy and childhood of Jesus; the annunciation of the birth of
John the Baptist
5 In the days of King Herod of Judea, there was a priest named
Zechariah, who belonged to the priestly order of Abijah. His wife was a
descendant of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth. 6 Both of them
were righteous before God, living blamelessly according to all the
commandments and regulations of the Lord. 7 But they had no

119

LUKE 120

children, because Elizabeth was barren, and both were getting on in
years.
8 Once when he was serving as priest before God and his section was
on duty, 9 he was chosen by lot, according to the custom of the
priesthood, to enter the sanctuary of the Lord and offer incense. 10
Now at the time of the incense offering, the whole assembly of the
people was praying outside. 11 Then there appeared to him an angel of
the Lord, standing at the right side of the altar of incense. 12 When
Zechariah saw him, he was terrified; and fear overwhelmed him. 13 But
the angel said to him, "Do not be afraid, Zechariah, for your prayer has
been heard. Your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you will name
him John. 14 You will have joy and gladness, and many will rejoice at
his birth, 15 for he will be great in the sight of the Lord. He must never
drink wine or strong drink; even before his birth he will be filled with
the Holy Spirit. 16 He will turn many of the people of Israel to the Lord
their God. 17 With the spirit and power of Elijah he will go before him,
to turn the hearts of parents to their children, and the disobedient to
the wisdom of the righteous, to make ready a people prepared for the
Lord." 18 Zechariah said to the angel, "How will I know that this is so?
For I am an old man, and my wife is getting on in years." 19 The angel
replied, "I am Gabriel. I stand in the presence of God, and I have been
sent to speak to you and to bring you this good news. 20 But now,
because you did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their
time, you will become mute, unable to speak, until the day these
things occur."
21 Meanwhile the people were waiting for Zechariah, and wondered at
his delay in the sanctuary. 22 When he did come out, he could not
speak to them, and they realized that he had seen a vision in the
sanctuary. He kept motioning to them and remained unable to speak.
23 When his time of service was ended, he went to his home.
24 After those days his wife Elizabeth conceived, and for five months
she remained in seclusion. She said, 25 "This is what the Lord has done
for me when he looked favorably on me and took away the disgrace I
have endured among my people."

120

LUKE 121

The annunciation of Jesus' birth
26 In the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent by God to a town in
Galilee called Nazareth, 27 to a virgin engaged to a man whose name
was Joseph, of the house of David. The virgin's name was Mary. 28 And
he came to her and said, "Greetings, favored one! The Lord is with
you." 29 But she was much perplexed by his words and pondered what
sort of greeting this might be. 30 The angel said to her, "Do not be
afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God. 31 And now, you will
conceive in your womb and bear a son, and you will name him Jesus. 32
He will be great, and will be called the Son of the Most High, and the
Lord God will give to him the throne of his ancestor David. 33 He will
reign over the house of Jacob forever, and of his kingdom there will be
no end." 34 Mary said to the angel, "How can this be, since I am a
virgin?" 35 The angel said to her, "The Holy Spirit will come upon you,
and the power of the Most High will overshadow you; therefore the
child to be born will be holy; he will be called Son of God. 36 And now,
your relative Elizabeth in her old age has also conceived a son; and this
is the sixth month for her who was said to be barren. 37 For nothing
will be impossible with God." 38 Then Mary said, "Here am I, the
servant of the Lord; let it be with me according to your word." Then
the angel departed from her.
Mary and Elizabeth
39 In those days Mary set out and went with haste to a Judean town in
the hill country, 40 where she entered the house of Zechariah and
greeted Elizabeth. 41 When Elizabeth heard Mary's greeting, the child
leaped in her womb. And Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit 42
and exclaimed with a loud cry, "Blessed are you among women, and
blessed is the fruit of your womb. 43 And why has this happened to
me, that the mother of my Lord comes to me? 44 For as soon as I heard
the sound of your greeting, the child in my womb leaped for joy. 45
And blessed is she who believed that there would be a fulfillment of
what was spoken to her by the Lord."

121

LUKE 122

46 And Mary said,
"My soul magnifies the Lord,
47
and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior,
48 for he has looked with favor on the lowliness of his servant.
Surely, from now on all generations will call me blessed;
49 for the Mighty One has done great things for me,
and holy is his name.
50 His mercy is for those who fear him
from generation to generation.
51 He has shown strength with his arm;
he has scattered the proud in the thoughts of their hearts.
52 He has brought down the powerful from their thrones,
and lifted up the lowly;
53 he has filled the hungry with good things,
and sent the rich away empty.
54 He has helped his servant Israel,
in remembrance of his mercy,
55 according to the promise he made to our ancestors,
to Abraham and to his descendants forever."
56 And Mary remained with her about three months and then
returned to her home.
The birth and naming of John
57 Now the time came for Elizabeth to give birth, and she bore a son.
58 Her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord had shown his great
mercy to her, and they rejoiced with her.
59 On the eighth day they came to circumcise the child, and they were
going to name him Zechariah after his father. 60 But his mother said,
"No; he is to be called John." 61 They said to her, "None of your
relatives has this name." 62 Then they began motioning to his father to
find out what name he wanted to give him. 63 He asked for a writing
tablet and wrote, "His name is John." And all of them were amazed. 64
Immediately his mouth was opened and his tongue freed, and he
began to speak, praising God. 65 Fear came over all their neighbors,
and all these things were talked about throughout the entire hill

122

LUKE 123

country of Judea. 66 All who heard them pondered them and said,
"What then will this child become?" For, indeed, the hand of the Lord
was with him.
67 Then his father Zechariah was filled with the Holy Spirit and spoke
this prophecy:
68 "Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,
for he has looked favorably on his people and redeemed them.
69 He has raised up a mighty savior for us
in the house of his servant David,
70 as he spoke through the mouth of his holy prophets from of old,
71
that we would be saved from our enemies and from the hand of
all who hate us.
72 Thus he has shown the mercy promised to our ancestors,
and has remembered his holy covenant,
73 the oath that he swore to our ancestor Abraham,
to grant us 74 that we, being rescued from the hands of our
enemies, might serve him without fear, 75 in holiness
and righteousness before him all our days.
76 And you, child, will be called the prophet of the Most High;
for you will go before the Lord to prepare his ways,
77 to give knowledge of salvation to his people
by the forgiveness of their sins.
78 By the tender mercy of our God,
the dawn from on high will break upon us,
79 to give light to those who sit in darkness and in the shadow
of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace."
80 The child grew and became strong in spirit, and he was in the
wilderness until the day he appeared publicly to Israel.
[Luke 2]
The birth of Jesus
1 In those days a decree went out from Emperor Augustus that all the
world should be registered. 2 This was the first registration and was
taken while Quirinius was governor of Syria. 3 All went to their own
towns to be registered. 4 Joseph also went from the town of Nazareth

123

LUKE 124

in Galilee to Judea, to the city of David called Bethlehem, because he
was descended from the house and family of David. 5 He went to be
registered with Mary, to whom he was engaged and who was
expecting a child. 6 While they were there, the time came for her to
deliver her child. 7 And she gave birth to her firstborn son and
wrapped him in bands of cloth, and laid him in a manger, because
there was no place for them in the inn.
Annunciation to shepherds and their visit
8 In that region there were shepherds living in the fields, keeping
watch over their flock by night. 9 Then an angel of the Lord stood
before them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they
were terrified. 10 But the angel said to them, "Do not be afraid; for see
— I am bringing you good news of great joy for all the people: 11 to
you is born this day in the city of David a Savior, who is the Messiah,
the Lord. 12 This will be a sign for you: you will find a child wrapped in
bands of cloth and lying in a manger." 13 And suddenly there was with
the angel a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God and saying,
14 "Glory to God in the highest heaven,
and on earth peace among those whom he favors!"
15 When the angels had left them and gone into heaven, the
shepherds said to one another, "Let us go now to Bethlehem and see
this thing that has taken place, which the Lord has made known to us."
16 So they went with haste and found Mary and Joseph, and the child
lying in the manger. 17 When they saw this, they made known what
had been told them about this child; 18 and all who heard it were
amazed at what the shepherds told them. 19 But Mary treasured all
these words and pondered them in her heart. 20 The shepherds
returned, glorifying and praising God for all they had heard and seen,
as it had been told them.
Jesus' circumcision and presentation
21 After eight days had passed, it was time to circumcise the child; and
he was called Jesus, the name given by the angel before he was
conceived in the womb.

124

LUKE 125

22 When the time came for their purification according to the law of
Moses, they brought him up to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord 23
(as it is written in the law of the Lord, "Every firstborn male shall be
designated as holy to the Lord"), 24 and they offered a sacrifice
according to what is stated in the law of the Lord, "a pair of
turtledoves or two young pigeons."
25 Now there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon; this
man was righteous and devout, looking forward to the consolation of
Israel, and the Holy Spirit rested on him. 26 It had been revealed to him
by the Holy Spirit that he would not see death before he had seen the
LORD's Messiah. 27 Guided by the Spirit, Simeon came into the temple;
and when the parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him what
was customary under the law, 28 Simeon took him in his arms and
praised God, saying,
29 "Master, now you are dismissing your servant in peace,
according to your word;
30 for my eyes have seen your salvation,
31
which you have prepared in the presence of all peoples,
32 a light for revelation to the Gentiles
and for glory to your people Israel."
33 And the child's father and mother were amazed at what was being
said about him. 34 Then Simeon blessed them and said to his mother
Mary, "This child is destined for the falling and the rising of many in
Israel, and to be a sign that will be opposed 35 so that the inner
thoughts of many will be revealed — and a sword will pierce your own
soul too."
36 There was also a prophet, Anna the daughter of Phanuel, of the
tribe of Asher. She was of a great age, having lived with her husband
seven years after her marriage, 37 then as a widow to the age of
eighty-four. She never left the temple but worshiped there with fasting
and prayer night and day. 38 At that moment she came, and began to
praise God and to speak about the child to all who were looking for
the redemption of Jerusalem.

125

LUKE 126

Jesus' childhood in Nazareth
39 When they had finished everything required by the law of the Lord,
they returned to Galilee, to their own town of Nazareth. 40 The child
grew and became strong, filled with wisdom; and the favor of God was
upon him.
Young Jesus in the Temple
41 Now every year his parents went to Jerusalem for the festival of the
Passover. 42 And when he was twelve years old, they went up as usual
for the festival. 43 When the festival was ended and they started to
return, the boy Jesus stayed behind in Jerusalem, but his parents did
not know it. 44 Assuming that he was in the group of travelers, they
went a day's journey. Then they started to look for him among their
relatives and friends. 45 When they did not find him, they returned to
Jerusalem to search for him. 46 After three days they found him in the
temple, sitting among the teachers, listening to them and asking them
questions. 47 And all who heard him were amazed at his
understanding and his answers. 48 When his parents saw him they
were astonished; and his mother said to him, "Child, why have you
treated us like this? Look, your father and I have been searching for
you in great anxiety." 49 He said to them, "Why were you searching
for me? Did you not know that I must be in my Father's house?" 50 But
they did not understand what he said to them. 51 Then he went down
with them and came to Nazareth, and was obedient to them. His
mother treasured all these things in her heart.
52 And Jesus increased in wisdom and in years, and in divine and
human favor.
[Luke 3]
Jesus' preparation for the ministry; the appearance of John the Baptist
1 In the fifteenth year of the reign of Emperor Tiberius, when Pontius
Pilate was governor of Judea, and Herod was ruler of Galilee, and his
brother Philip ruler of the region of Ituraea and Trachonitis, and
Lysanias ruler of Abilene, 2 during the high priesthood of Annas and

126

LUKE 127

Caiaphas, the word of God came to John son of Zechariah in the
wilderness. 3 He went into all the region around the Jordan,
proclaiming a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins, 4 as it
is written in the book of the words of the prophet Isaiah,
"The voice of one crying out in the wilderness:
'Prepare the way of the Lord,
make his paths straight.
5 Every valley shall be filled,
and every mountain and hill shall be made low,
and the crooked shall be made straight,
and the rough ways made smooth;
6 and all flesh shall see the salvation of God.'"
John's call to repentance
7 John said to the crowds that came out to be baptized by him, "You
brood of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the wrath to come? 8
Bear fruits worthy of repentance. Do not begin to say to yourselves,
'We have Abraham as our ancestor'; for I tell you, God is able from
these stones to raise up children to Abraham. 9 Even now the ax is
lying at the root of the trees; every tree therefore that does not bear
good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire."
John's direction to the crowd
10 And the crowds asked him, "What then should we do?" 11 In reply
he said to them, "Whoever has two coats must share with anyone who
has none; and whoever has food must do likewise." 12 Even tax
collectors came to be baptized, and they asked him, "Teacher, what
should we do?" 13 He said to them, "Collect no more than the amount
prescribed for you." 14 Soldiers also asked him, "And we, what should
we do?" He said to them, "Do not extort money from anyone by
threats or false accusation, and be satisfied with your wages."
John's heralding of the messiah and his imprisonment by Herod
15 As the people were filled with expectation, and all were questioning
in their hearts concerning John, whether he might be the Messiah, 16

127

LUKE 128

John answered all of them by saying, "I baptize you with water; but
one who is more powerful than I is coming; I am not worthy to untie
the thong of his sandals. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and
fire. 17 His winnowing fork is in his hand, to clear his threshing floor
and to gather the wheat into his granary; but the chaff he will burn
with unquenchable fire."
18 So, with many other exhortations, he proclaimed the good news to
the people. 19 But Herod the ruler, who had been rebuked by him
because of Herodias, his brother's wife, and because of all the evil
things that Herod had done, 20 added to them all by shutting up John
in prison.
21 Now when all the people were baptized, and when Jesus also had
been baptized and was praying, the heaven was opened, 22 and the
Holy Spirit descended upon him in bodily form like a dove. And a voice
came from heaven, "You are my Son, the Beloved; with you I am well
pleased."
The genealogy of Jesus
23 Jesus was about thirty years old when he began his work. He was
the son (as was thought) of Joseph son of Heli, 24 son of Matthat, son
of Levi, son of Melchi, son of Jannai, son of Joseph, 25 son of
Mattathias, son of Amos, son of Nahum, son of Esli, son of Naggai, 26
son of Maath, son of Mattathias, son of Semein, son of Josech, son of
Joda, 27 son of Joanan, son of Rhesa, son of Zerubbabel, son of
Shealtiel, son of Neri, 28 son of Melchi, son of Addi, son of Cosam, son
of Elmadam, son of Er, 29 son of Joshua, son of Eliezer, son of Jorim,
son of Matthat, son of Levi, 30 son of Simeon, son of Judah, son of
Joseph, son of Jonam, son of Eliakim, 31 son of Melea, son of Menna,
son of Mattatha, son of Nathan, son of David, 32 son of Jesse, son of
Obed, son of Boaz, son of Sala, son of Nahshon, 33 son of Amminadab,
son of Admin, son of Arni, son of Hezron, son of Perez, son of Judah,
34 son of Jacob, son of Isaac, son of Abraham, son of Terah, son of
Nahor, 35 son of Serug, son of Reu, son of Peleg, son of Eber, son of
Shelah, 36 son of Cainan, son of Arphaxad, son of Shem, son of Noah,
son of Lamech, 37 son of Methuselah, son of Enoch, son of Jared, son

128

LUKE 129

of Mahalaleel, son of Cainan, 38 son of Enos, son of Seth, son of Adam,
son of God.
[Luke 4]
The temptation of Jesus
1 Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan and was led by
the Spirit in the wilderness, 2 where for forty days he was tempted by
the devil. He ate nothing at all during those days, and when they were
over, he was famished. 3 The devil said to him, "If you are the Son of
God, command this stone to become a loaf of bread." 4 Jesus answered
him, "It is written, 'One does not live by bread alone.'"
5 Then the devil led him up and showed him in an instant all the
kingdoms of the world. 6 And the devil said to him, "To you I will give
their glory and all this authority; for it has been given over to me, and I
give it to anyone I please. 7 If you, then, will worship me, it will all be
yours." 8 Jesus answered him, "It is written,
'Worship the Lord your God,
and serve only him.'"
9 Then the devil took him to Jerusalem, and placed him on the
pinnacle of the temple, saying to him, "If you are the Son of God,
throw yourself down from here, 10 for it is written,
'He will command his angels concerning you,
to protect you,'
11 and
'On their hands they will bear you up,
so that you will not dash your foot against a stone.'"
12 Jesus answered him, "It is said, 'Do not put the Lord your God to the
test.'" 13 When the devil had finished every test, he departed from him
until an opportune time.
The beginning of Jesus' ministry in Galilee
14 Then Jesus, filled with the power of the Spirit, returned to Galilee,
and a report about him spread through all the surrounding country. 15
He began to teach in their synagogues and was praised by everyone.

129

LUKE 130

Jesus in Nazareth
16 When he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, he
went to the synagogue on the sabbath day, as was his custom. He
stood up to read, 17 and the scroll of the prophet Isaiah was given to
him. He unrolled the scroll and found the place where it was written:
18 "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because he has anointed me
to bring good news to the poor.
He has sent me to proclaim release to the captives
and recovery of sight to the blind,
to let the oppressed go free,
19 to proclaim the year of the LORD's favor."
20 And he rolled up the scroll, gave it back to the attendant, and sat
down. The eyes of all in the synagogue were fixed on him. 21 Then he
began to say to them, "Today this scripture has been fulfilled in your
hearing." 22 All spoke well of him and were amazed at the gracious
words that came from his mouth. They said, "Is not this Joseph's son?"
23 He said to them, "Doubtless you will quote to me this proverb,
'Doctor, cure yourself!' And you will say, 'Do here also in your
hometown the things that we have heard you did at Capernaum.'" 24
And he said, "Truly I tell you, no prophet is accepted in the prophet's
hometown. 25 But the truth is, there were many widows in Israel in the
time of Elijah, when the heaven was shut up three years and six
months, and there was a severe famine over all the land; 26 yet Elijah
was sent to none of them except to a widow at Zarephath in Sidon. 27
There were also many lepers in Israel in the time of the prophet Elisha,
and none of them was cleansed except Naaman the Syrian." 28 When
they heard this, all in the synagogue were filled with rage. 29 They got
up, drove him out of the town, and led him to the brow of the hill on
which their town was built, so that they might hurl him off the cliff. 30
But he passed through the midst of them and went on his way.
Jesus in the synagogue at Capernaum
31 He went down to Capernaum, a city in Galilee, and was teaching
them on the sabbath. 32 They were astounded at his teaching, because
he spoke with authority. 33 In the synagogue there was a man who

130

LUKE 131

had the spirit of an unclean demon, and he cried out with a loud voice,
34 "Let us alone! What have you to do with us, Jesus of Nazareth?
Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are, the Holy One of
God." 35 But Jesus rebuked him, saying, "Be silent, and come out of
him!" When the demon had thrown him down before them, he came
out of him without having done him any harm. 36 They were all
amazed and kept saying to one another, "What kind of utterance is
this? For with authority and power he commands the unclean spirits,
and out they come!" 37 And a report about him began to reach every
place in the region.
The healing of Simon Peter's mother-in-law
38 After leaving the synagogue he entered Simon's house. Now
Simon's mother-in-law was suffering from a high fever, and they asked
him about her. 39 Then he stood over her and rebuked the fever, and it
left her. Immediately she got up and began to serve them.
Healings and exorcisms at sunset
40 As the sun was setting, all those who had any who were sick with
various kinds of diseases brought them to him; and he laid his hands on
each of them and cured them. 41 Demons also came out of many,
shouting, "You are the Son of God!" But he rebuked them and would
not allow them to speak, because they knew that he was the Messiah.
Departure and further preaching in Galilee
42 At daybreak he departed and went into a deserted place. And the
crowds were looking for him; and when they reached him, they
wanted to prevent him from leaving them. 43 But he said to them, "I
must proclaim the good news of the kingdom of God to the other
cities also; for I was sent for this purpose." 44 So he continued
proclaiming the message in the synagogues of Judea.

131

LUKE 132

[Luke 5]
The great catch of fish
1 Once while Jesus was standing beside the lake of Gennesaret, and the
crowd was pressing in on him to hear the word of God, 2 he saw two
boats there at the shore of the lake; the fishermen had gone out of
them and were washing their nets. 3 He got into one of the boats, the
one belonging to Simon, and asked him to put out a little way from
the shore. Then he sat down and taught the crowds from the boat. 4
When he had finished speaking, he said to Simon, "Put out into the
deep water and let down your nets for a catch." 5 Simon answered,
"Master, we have worked all night long but have caught nothing. Yet
if you say so, I will let down the nets." 6 When they had done this, they
caught so many fish that their nets were beginning to break. 7 So they
signaled their partners in the other boat to come and help them. And
they came and filled both boats, so that they began to sink. 8 But
when Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus' knees, saying, "Go
away from me, Lord, for I am a sinful man!" 9 For he and all who were
with him were amazed at the catch of fish that they had taken; 10 and
so also were James and John, sons of Zebedee, who were partners with
Simon. Then Jesus said to Simon, "Do not be afraid; from now on you
will be catching people." 11 When they had brought their boats to
shore, they left everything and followed him.
The healing of a leper
12 Once, when he was in one of the cities, there was a man covered
with leprosy. When he saw Jesus, he bowed with his face to the ground
and begged him, "Lord, if you choose, you can make me clean." 13
Then Jesus stretched out his hand, touched him, and said, "I do choose.
Be made clean." Immediately the leprosy left him. 14 And he ordered
him to tell no one. "Go," he said, "and show yourself to the priest,
and, as Moses commanded, make an offering for your cleansing, for a
testimony to them." 15 But now more than ever the word about Jesus
spread abroad; many crowds would gather to hear him and to be cured
of their diseases. 16 But he would withdraw to deserted places and
pray.

132

LUKE 133

Healing and forgiveness of sins
17 One day, while he was teaching, Pharisees and teachers of the law
were sitting near by (they had come from every village of Galilee and
Judea and from Jerusalem); and the power of the Lord was with him to
heal. 18 Just then some men came, carrying a paralyzed man on a bed.
They were trying to bring him in and lay him before Jesus; 19 but
finding no way to bring him in because of the crowd, they went up on
the roof and let him down with his bed through the tiles into the
middle of the crowd in front of Jesus. 20 When he saw their faith, he
said, "Friend, your sins are forgiven you." 21 Then the scribes and the
Pharisees began to question, "Who is this who is speaking
blasphemies? Who can forgive sins but God alone?" 22 When Jesus
perceived their questionings, he answered them, "Why do you raise
such questions in your hearts? 23 Which is easier, to say, 'Your sins are
forgiven you,' or to say, 'Stand up and walk'? 24 But so that you may
know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins" — he
said to the one who was paralyzed — "I say to you, stand up and take
your bed and go to your home." 25 Immediately he stood up before
them, took what he had been lying on, and went to his home,
glorifying God. 26 Amazement seized all of them, and they glorified
God and were filled with awe, saying, "We have seen strange things
today."
The call of Levi
27 After this he went out and saw a tax collector named Levi, sitting at
the tax booth; and he said to him, "Follow me." 28 And he got up, left
everything, and followed him.
29 Then Levi gave a great banquet for him in his house; and there was
a large crowd of tax collectors and others sitting at the table with
them. 30 The Pharisees and their scribes were complaining to his
disciples, saying, "Why do you eat and drink with tax collectors and
sinners?" 31 Jesus answered, "Those who are well have no need of a
physician, but those who are sick; 32 I have come to call not the
righteous but sinners to repentance."

133

LUKE 134

Debate about fasting
33 Then they said to him, "John's disciples, like the disciples of the
Pharisees, frequently fast and pray, but your disciples eat and drink."
34 Jesus said to them, "You cannot make wedding guests fast while the
bridegroom is with them, can you? 35 The days will come when the
bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then they will fast in
those days." 36 He also told them a parable: "No one tears a piece
from a new garment and sews it on an old garment; otherwise the new
will be torn, and the piece from the new will not match the old. 37 And
no one puts new wine into old wineskins; otherwise the new wine will
burst the skins and will be spilled, and the skins will be destroyed. 38
But new wine must be put into fresh wineskins. 39 And no one after
drinking old wine desires new wine, but says, 'The old is good.'"
[Luke 6]
Eating and healing on the sabbath
1 One sabbath while Jesus was going through the grainfields, his
disciples plucked some heads of grain, rubbed them in their hands, and
ate them. 2 But some of the Pharisees said, "Why are you doing what is
not lawful on the sabbath?" 3 Jesus answered, "Have you not read
what David did when he and his companions were hungry? 4 He
entered the house of God and took and ate the bread of the Presence,
which it is not lawful for any but the priests to eat, and gave some to
his companions?" 5 Then he said to them, "The Son of Man is lord of
the sabbath."
6 On another sabbath he entered the synagogue and taught, and there
was a man there whose right hand was withered. 7 The scribes and the
Pharisees watched him to see whether he would cure on the sabbath,
so that they might find an accusation against him. 8 Even though he
knew what they were thinking, he said to the man who had the
withered hand, "Come and stand here." He got up and stood there. 9
Then Jesus said to them, "I ask you, is it lawful to do good or to do
harm on the sabbath, to save life or to destroy it?" 10 After looking
around at all of them, he said to him, "Stretch out your hand." He did

134

LUKE 135

so, and his hand was restored. 11 But they were filled with fury and
discussed with one another what they might do to Jesus.
Jesus' selection of the twelve
12 Now during those days he went out to the mountain to pray; and he
spent the night in prayer to God. 13 And when day came, he called his
disciples and chose twelve of them, whom he also named apostles: 14
Simon, whom he named Peter, and his brother Andrew, and James,
and John, and Philip, and Bartholomew, 15 and Matthew, and Thomas,
and James son of Alphaeus, and Simon, who was called the Zealot, 16
and Judas son of James, and Judas Iscariot, who became a traitor.
The Sermon on the Mount
17 He came down with them and stood on a level place, with a great
crowd of his disciples and a great multitude of people from all Judea,
Jerusalem, and the coast of Tyre and Sidon. 18 They had come to hear
him and to be healed of their diseases; and those who were troubled
with unclean spirits were cured. 19 And all in the crowd were trying to
touch him, for power came out from him and healed all of them.
The beatitudes
20 Then he looked up at his disciples and said:
"Blessed are you who are poor,
for yours is the kingdom of God.
21 "Blessed are you who are hungry now,
for you will be filled.
"Blessed are you who weep now,
for you will laugh.
22 "Blessed are you when people hate you, and when they exclude
you, revile you, and defame you on account of the Son of Man. 23
Rejoice in that day and leap for joy, for surely your reward is great in
heaven; for that is what their ancestors did to the prophets.

135

LUKE 136

The woes
24 "But woe to you who are rich,
for you have received your consolation.
25 "Woe to you who are full now,
for you will be hungry.
"Woe to you who are laughing now,
for you will mourn and weep.
26 "Woe to you when all speak well of you, for that is what their
ancestors did to the false prophets.
The love of enemies
27 "But I say to you that listen, Love your enemies, do good to those
who hate you, 28 bless those who curse you, pray for those who abuse
you. 29 If anyone strikes you on the cheek, offer the other also; and
from anyone who takes away your coat do not withhold even your
shirt. 30 Give to everyone who begs from you; and if anyone takes
away your goods, do not ask for them again. 31 Do to others as you
would have them do to you.
32 "If you love those who love you, what credit is that to you? For even
sinners love those who love them. 33 If you do good to those who do
good to you, what credit is that to you? For even sinners do the same.
34 If you lend to those from whom you hope to receive, what credit is
that to you? Even sinners lend to sinners, to receive as much again. 35
But love your enemies, do good, and lend, expecting nothing in return.
Your reward will be great, and you will be children of the Most High;
for he is kind to the ungrateful and the wicked. 36 Be merciful, just as
your Father is merciful.
On judging others
37 "Do not judge, and you will not be judged; do not condemn, and
you will not be condemned. Forgive, and you will be forgiven; 38 give,
and it will be given to you. A good measure, pressed down, shaken

136

LUKE 137

together, running over, will be put into your lap; for the measure you
give will be the measure you get back."
39 He also told them a parable: "Can a blind person guide a blind
person? Will not both fall into a pit? 40 A disciple is not above the
teacher, but everyone who is fully qualified will be like the teacher. 41
Why do you see the speck in your neighbor's eye, but do not notice the
log in your own eye? 42 Or how can you say to your neighbor, 'Friend,
let me take out the speck in your eye,' when you yourself do not see
the log in your own eye? You hypocrite, first take the log out of your
own eye, and then you will see clearly to take the speck out of your
neighbor's eye.
The sources of good and evil
43 "No good tree bears bad fruit, nor again does a bad tree bear good
fruit; 44 for each tree is known by its own fruit. Figs are not gathered
from thorns, nor are grapes picked from a bramble bush. 45 The good
person out of the good treasure of the heart produces good, and the
evil person out of evil treasure produces evil; for it is out of the
abundance of the heart that the mouth speaks.
The wise and the foolish builders
46 "Why do you call me 'Lord, Lord,' and do not do what I tell you? 47 I
will show you what someone is like who comes to me, hears my words,
and acts on them. 48 That one is like a man building a house, who dug
deeply and laid the foundation on rock; when a flood arose, the river
burst against that house but could not shake it, because it had been
well built. 49 But the one who hears and does not act is like a man who
built a house on the ground without a foundation. When the river
burst against it, immediately it fell, and great was the ruin of that
house."

137

LUKE 138

[Luke 7]
The centurion's slave
1 After Jesus had finished all his sayings in the hearing of the people,
he entered Capernaum. 2 A centurion there had a slave whom he
valued highly, and who was ill and close to death. 3 When he heard
about Jesus, he sent some Jewish elders to him, asking him to come
and heal his slave. 4 When they came to Jesus, they appealed to him
earnestly, saying, "He is worthy of having you do this for him, 5 for he
loves our people, and it is he who built our synagogue for us." 6 And
Jesus went with them, but when he was not far from the house, the
centurion sent friends to say to him, "Lord, do not trouble yourself, for
I am not worthy to have you come under my roof; 7 therefore I did not
presume to come to you. But only speak the word, and let my servant
be healed. 8 For I also am a man set under authority, with soldiers
under me; and I say to one, 'Go,' and he goes, and to another, 'Come,'
and he comes, and to my slave, 'Do this,' and the slave does it." 9
When Jesus heard this he was amazed at him, and turning to the
crowd that followed him, he said, "I tell you, not even in Israel have I
found such faith." 10 When those who had been sent returned to the
house, they found the slave in good health.
The widow's son at Nain
11 Soon afterwards he went to a town called Nain, and his disciples and
a large crowd went with him. 12 As he approached the gate of the
town, a man who had died was being carried out. He was his mother's
only son, and she was a widow; and with her was a large crowd from
the town. 13 When the Lord saw her, he had compassion for her and
said to her, "Do not weep." 14 Then he came forward and touched the
bier, and the bearers stood still. And he said, "Young man, I say to you,
rise!" 15 The dead man sat up and began to speak, and Jesus gave him
to his mother. 16 Fear seized all of them; and they glorified God,
saying, "A great prophet has risen among us!" and "God has looked
favorably on his people!" 17 This word about him spread throughout
Judea and all the surrounding country.

138

LUKE 139

Jesus and John the Baptist
18 The disciples of John reported all these things to him. So John
summoned two of his disciples 19 and sent them to the Lord to ask,
"Are you the one who is to come, or are we to wait for another?" 20
When the men had come to him, they said, "John the Baptist has sent
us to you to ask, 'Are you the one who is to come, or are we to wait for
another?'" 21 Jesus had just then cured many people of diseases,
plagues, and evil spirits, and had given sight to many who were blind.
22 And he answered them, "Go and tell John what you have seen and
heard: the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are
cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, the poor have good news
brought to them. 23 And blessed is anyone who takes no offense at
me."
24 When John's messengers had gone, Jesus began to speak to the
crowds about John: "What did you go out into the wilderness to look
at? A reed shaken by the wind? 25 What then did you go out to see?
Someone dressed in soft robes? Look, those who put on fine clothing
and live in luxury are in royal palaces. 26 What then did you go out to
see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet. 27 This is the
one about whom it is written,
'See, I am sending my messenger ahead of you,
who will prepare your way before you.'
28 I tell you, among those born of women no one is greater than John;
yet the least in the kingdom of God is greater than he." 29 (And all the
people who heard this, including the tax collectors, acknowledged the
justice of God, because they had been baptized with John's baptism. 30
But by refusing to be baptized by him, the Pharisees and the lawyers
rejected God's purpose for themselves.)
31 "To what then will I compare the people of this generation, and
what are they like? 32 They are like children sitting in the marketplace
and calling to one another,
'We played the flute for you, and you did not dance;
we wailed, and you did not weep.'

139

LUKE 140

33 For John the Baptist has come eating no bread and drinking no
wine, and you say, 'He has a demon'; 34 the Son of Man has come
eating and drinking, and you say, 'Look, a glutton and a drunkard, a
friend of tax collectors and sinners!' 35 Nevertheless, wisdom is
vindicated by all her children."
Simon the Pharisee, Jesus, and the woman with the ointment
36 One of the Pharisees asked Jesus to eat with him, and he went into
the Pharisee's house and took his place at the table. 37 And a woman
in the city, who was a sinner, having learned that he was eating in the
Pharisee's house, brought an alabaster jar of ointment. 38 She stood
behind him at his feet, weeping, and began to bathe his feet with her
tears and to dry them with her hair. Then she continued kissing his feet
and anointing them with the ointment. 39 Now when the Pharisee
who had invited him saw it, he said to himself, "If this man were a
prophet, he would have known who and what kind of woman this is
who is touching him — that she is a sinner." 40 Jesus spoke up and said
to him, "Simon, I have something to say to you." "Teacher," he replied,
"speak." 41 "A certain creditor had two debtors; one owed five
hundred denarii, and the other fifty. 42 When they could not pay, he
canceled the debts for both of them. Now which of them will love him
more?" 43 Simon answered, "I suppose the one for whom he canceled
the greater debt." And Jesus said to him, "You have judged rightly."
44 Then turning toward the woman, he said to Simon, "Do you see this
woman? I entered your house; you gave me no water for my feet, but
she has bathed my feet with her tears and dried them with her hair. 45
You gave me no kiss, but from the time I came in she has not stopped
kissing my feet. 46 You did not anoint my head with oil, but she has
anointed my feet with ointment. 47 Therefore, I tell you, her sins,
which were many, have been forgiven; hence she has shown great
love. But the one to whom little is forgiven, loves little." 48 Then he
said to her, "Your sins are forgiven." 49 But those who were at the
table with him began to say among themselves, "Who is this who even
forgives sins?" 50 And he said to the woman, "Your faith has saved
you; go in peace."

140

LUKE 141

[Luke 8]
Jesus' tour and the ministering women
1 Soon afterwards he went on through cities and villages, proclaiming
and bringing the good news of the kingdom of God. The twelve were
with him, 2 as well as some women who had been cured of evil spirits
and infirmities: Mary, called Magdalene, from whom seven demons
had gone out, 3 and Joanna, the wife of Herod's steward Chuza, and
Susanna, and many others, who provided for them out of their
resources.
Parable of the sower
4 When a great crowd gathered and people from town after town
came to him, he said in a parable: 5 "A sower went out to sow his seed;
and as he sowed, some fell on the path and was trampled on, and the
birds of the air ate it up. 6 Some fell on the rock; and as it grew up, it
withered for lack of moisture. 7 Some fell among thorns, and the
thorns grew with it and choked it. 8 Some fell into good soil, and when
it grew, it produced a hundredfold." As he said this, he called out, "Let
anyone with ears to hear listen!"
Jesus' explanation of parables
9 Then his disciples asked him what this parable meant. 10 He said, "To
you it has been given to know the secrets of the kingdom of God; but
to others I speak in parables, so that
'looking they may not perceive,
and listening they may not understand.'
Interpretation of the parable of the sower
11 "Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God. 12 The ones on
the path are those who have heard; then the devil comes and takes
away the word from their hearts, so that they may not believe and be
saved. 13 The ones on the rock are those who, when they hear the
word, receive it with joy. But these have no root; they believe only for
a while and in a time of testing fall away. 14 As for what fell among

141

LUKE 142

the thorns, these are the ones who hear; but as they go on their way,
they are choked by the cares and riches and pleasures of life, and their
fruit does not mature. 15 But as for that in the good soil, these are the
ones who, when they hear the word, hold it fast in an honest and good
heart, and bear fruit with patient endurance.
On obedient listening
16 "No one after lighting a lamp hides it under a jar, or puts it under a
bed, but puts it on a lampstand, so that those who enter may see the
light. 17 For nothing is hidden that will not be disclosed, nor is anything
secret that will not become known and come to light. 18 Then pay
attention to how you listen; for to those who have, more will be given;
and from those who do not have, even what they seem to have will be
taken away."
Jesus' true relatives
19 Then his mother and his brothers came to him, but they could not
reach him because of the crowd. 20 And he was told, "Your mother
and your brothers are standing outside, wanting to see you." 21 But he
said to them, "My mother and my brothers are those who hear the
word of God and do it."
Winds and water obey
22 One day he got into a boat with his disciples, and he said to them,
"Let us go across to the other side of the lake." So they put out, 23 and
while they were sailing he fell asleep. A windstorm swept down on the
lake, and the boat was filling with water, and they were in danger. 24
They went to him and woke him up, shouting, "Master, Master, we are
perishing!" And he woke up and rebuked the wind and the raging
waves; they ceased, and there was a calm. 25 He said to them, "Where
is your faith?" They were afraid and amazed, and said to one another,
"Who then is this, that he commands even the winds and the water,
and they obey him?"

142

LUKE 143

The Gerasene demoniac
26 Then they arrived at the country of the Gerasenes, which is opposite
Galilee. 27 As he stepped out on land, a man of the city who had
demons met him. For a long time he had worn no clothes, and he did
not live in a house but in the tombs. 28 When he saw Jesus, he fell
down before him and shouted at the top of his voice, "What have you
to do with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I beg you, do not
torment me" — 29 for Jesus had commanded the unclean spirit to
come out of the man. (For many times it had seized him; he was kept
under guard and bound with chains and shackles, but he would break
the bonds and be driven by the demon into the wilds.) 30 Jesus then
asked him, "What is your name?" He said, "Legion"; for many demons
had entered him. 31 They begged him not to order them to go back
into the abyss.
32 Now there on the hillside a large herd of swine was feeding; and the
demons begged Jesus to let them enter these. So he gave them
permission. 33 Then the demons came out of the man and entered the
swine, and the herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake and was
drowned.
34 When the swineherds saw what had happened, they ran off and
told it in the city and in the country. 35 Then people came out to see
what had happened, and when they came to Jesus, they found the
man from whom the demons had gone sitting at the feet of Jesus,
clothed and in his right mind. And they were afraid. 36 Those who had
seen it told them how the one who had been possessed by demons had
been healed. 37 Then all the people of the surrounding country of the
Gerasenes asked Jesus to leave them; for they were seized with great
fear. So he got into the boat and returned. 38 The man from whom the
demons had gone begged that he might be with him; but Jesus sent
him away, saying, 39 "Return to your home, and declare how much
God has done for you." So he went away, proclaiming throughout the
city how much Jesus had done for him.

143

LUKE 144

Jairus's daughter and the hemorrhaging woman
40 Now when Jesus returned, the crowd welcomed him, for they were
all waiting for him. 41 Just then there came a man named Jairus, a
leader of the synagogue. He fell at Jesus' feet and begged him to come
to his house, 42 for he had an only daughter, about twelve years old,
who was dying.
As he went, the crowds pressed in on him. 43 Now there was a woman
who had been suffering from hemorrhages for twelve years; and
though she had spent all she had on physicians, no one could cure her.
44 She came up behind him and touched the fringe of his clothes, and
immediately her hemorrhage stopped. 45 Then Jesus asked, "Who
touched me?" When all denied it, Peter said, "Master, the crowds
surround you and press in on you." 46 But Jesus said, "Someone
touched me; for I noticed that power had gone out from me." 47
When the woman saw that she could not remain hidden, she came
trembling; and falling down before him, she declared in the presence
of all the people why she had touched him, and how she had been
immediately healed. 48 He said to her, "Daughter, your faith has made
you well; go in peace."
49 While he was still speaking, someone came from the leader's house
to say, "Your daughter is dead; do not trouble the teacher any longer."
50 When Jesus heard this, he replied, "Do not fear. Only believe, and
she will be saved." 51 When he came to the house, he did not allow
anyone to enter with him, except Peter, John, and James, and the
child's father and mother. 52 They were all weeping and wailing for
her; but he said, "Do not weep; for she is not dead but sleeping." 53
And they laughed at him, knowing that she was dead. 54 But he took
her by the hand and called out, "Child, get up!" 55 Her spirit returned,
and she got up at once. Then he directed them to give her something
to eat. 56 Her parents were astounded; but he ordered them to tell no
one what had happened.

144

LUKE 145

[Luke 9]
Commissioning the twelve
1 Then Jesus called the twelve together and gave them power and
authority over all demons and to cure diseases, 2 and he sent them out
to proclaim the kingdom of God and to heal. 3 He said to them, "Take
nothing for your journey, no staff, nor bag, nor bread, nor money —
not even an extra tunic. 4 Whatever house you enter, stay there, and
leave from there. 5 Wherever they do not welcome you, as you are
leaving that town shake the dust off your feet as a testimony against
them." 6 They departed and went through the villages, bringing the
good news and curing diseases everywhere.
Herod's curiosity of Jesus
7 Now Herod the ruler heard about all that had taken place, and he
was perplexed, because it was said by some that John had been raised
from the dead, 8 by some that Elijah had appeared, and by others that
one of the ancient prophets had arisen. 9 Herod said, "John I
beheaded; but who is this about whom I hear such things?" And he
tried to see him.
The apostles' return and the crowds' following Jesus
10 On their return the apostles told Jesus all they had done. He took
them with him and withdrew privately to a city called Bethsaida. 11
When the crowds found out about it, they followed him; and he
welcomed them, and spoke to them about the kingdom of God, and
healed those who needed to be cured.
Feeding the five thousand
12 The day was drawing to a close, and the twelve came to him and
said, "Send the crowd away, so that they may go into the surrounding
villages and countryside, to lodge and get provisions; for we are here
in a deserted place." 13 But he said to them, "You give them something
to eat." They said, "We have no more than five loaves and two fish —
unless we are to go and buy food for all these people." 14 For there

145

LUKE 146

were about five thousand men. And he said to his disciples, "Make
them sit down in groups of about fifty each." 15 They did so and made
them all sit down. 16 And taking the five loaves and the two fish, he
looked up to heaven, and blessed and broke them, and gave them to
the disciples to set before the crowd. 17 And all ate and were filled.
What was left over was gathered up, twelve baskets of broken pieces.
Peter's confession
18 Once when Jesus was praying alone, with only the disciples near
him, he asked them, "Who do the crowds say that I am?" 19 They
answered, "John the Baptist; but others, Elijah; and still others, that
one of the ancient prophets has arisen." 20 He said to them, "But who
do you say that I am?" Peter answered, "The Messiah of God."
Jesus' command to silence and first prediction of his death
21 He sternly ordered and commanded them not to tell anyone, 22
saying, "The Son of Man must undergo great suffering, and be rejected
by the elders, chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and on the third
day be raised."
The requirements of discipleship
23 Then he said to them all, "If any want to become my followers, let
them deny themselves and take up their cross daily and follow me. 24
For those who want to save their life will lose it, and those who lose
their life for my sake will save it. 25 What does it profit them if they
gain the whole world, but lose or forfeit themselves? 26 Those who are
ashamed of me and of my words, of them the Son of Man will be
ashamed when he comes in his glory and the glory of the Father and of
the holy angels. 27 But truly I tell you, there are some standing here
who will not taste death before they see the kingdom of God."

146

LUKE 147

The Transfiguration
28 Now about eight days after these sayings Jesus took with him Peter
and John and James, and went up on the mountain to pray. 29 And
while he was praying, the appearance of his face changed, and his
clothes became dazzling white. 30 Suddenly they saw two men, Moses
and Elijah, talking to him. 31 They appeared in glory and were speaking
of his departure, which he was about to accomplish at Jerusalem. 32
Now Peter and his companions were weighed down with sleep; but
since they had stayed awake, they saw his glory and the two men who
stood with him. 33 Just as they were leaving him, Peter said to Jesus,
"Master, it is good for us to be here; let us make three dwellings, one
for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah" — not knowing what he
said. 34 While he was saying this, a cloud came and overshadowed
them; and they were terrified as they entered the cloud. 35 Then from
the cloud came a voice that said, "This is my Son, my Chosen; listen to
him!" 36 When the voice had spoken, Jesus was found alone. And they
kept silent and in those days told no one any of the things they had
seen.
Jesus heals an afflicted boy
37 On the next day, when they had come down from the mountain, a
great crowd met him. 38 Just then a man from the crowd shouted,
"Teacher, I beg you to look at my son; he is my only child. 39 Suddenly
a spirit seizes him, and all at once he shrieks. It convulses him until he
foams at the mouth; it mauls him and will scarcely leave him. 40 I
begged your disciples to cast it out, but they could not." 41 Jesus
answered, "You faithless and perverse generation, how much longer
must I be with you and bear with you? Bring your son here." 42 While
he was coming, the demon dashed him to the ground in convulsions.
But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, healed the boy, and gave him
back to his father. 43 And all were astounded at the greatness of God.
A second prediction
While everyone was amazed at all that he was doing, he said to his
disciples, 44 "Let these words sink into your ears: The Son of Man is

147

LUKE 148

going to be betrayed into human hands." 45 But they did not
understand this saying; its meaning was concealed from them, so that
they could not perceive it. And they were afraid to ask him about this
saying.
True greatness
46 An argument arose among them as to which one of them was the
greatest. 47 But Jesus, aware of their inner thoughts, took a little child
and put it by his side, 48 and said to them, "Whoever welcomes this
child in my name welcomes me, and whoever welcomes me welcomes
the one who sent me; for the least among all of you is the greatest."
The unknown exorcist
49 John answered, "Master, we saw someone casting out demons in
your name, and we tried to stop him, because he does not follow with
us." 50 But Jesus said to him, "Do not stop him; for whoever is not
against you is for you."
Jesus' journey to Jerusalem with his followers; Samaritans' rejection of
Jesus
51 When the days drew near for him to be taken up, he set his face to
go to Jerusalem. 52 And he sent messengers ahead of him. On their
way they entered a village of the Samaritans to make ready for him; 53
but they did not receive him, because his face was set toward
Jerusalem. 54 When his disciples James and John saw it, they said,
"Lord, do you want us to command fire to come down from heaven
and consume them?" 55 But he turned and rebuked them. 56 Then
they went on to another village.
The demands of following Jesus
57 As they were going along the road, someone said to him, "I will
follow you wherever you go." 58 And Jesus said to him, "Foxes have
holes, and birds of the air have nests; but the Son of Man has nowhere
to lay his head." 59 To another he said, "Follow me." But he said,

148

LUKE 149

"Lord, first let me go and bury my father." 60 But Jesus said to him,
"Let the dead bury their own dead; but as for you, go and proclaim the
kingdom of God." 61 Another said, "I will follow you, Lord; but let me
first say farewell to those at my home." 62 Jesus said to him, "No one
who puts a hand to the plow and looks back is fit for the kingdom of
God."
[Luke 10]
The mission of the seventy
1 After this the Lord appointed seventy others and sent them on ahead
of him in pairs to every town and place where he himself intended to
go. 2 He said to them, "The harvest is plentiful, but the laborers are
few; therefore ask the Lord of the harvest to send out laborers into his
harvest. 3 Go on your way. See, I am sending you out like lambs into
the midst of wolves. 4 Carry no purse, no bag, no sandals; and greet no
one on the road. 5 Whatever house you enter, first say, 'Peace to this
house!' 6 And if anyone is there who shares in peace, your peace will
rest on that person; but if not, it will return to you. 7 Remain in the
same house, eating and drinking whatever they provide, for the
laborer deserves to be paid. Do not move about from house to house.
8 Whenever you enter a town and its people welcome you, eat what is
set before you; 9 cure the sick who are there, and say to them, 'The
kingdom of God has come near to you.' 10 But whenever you enter a
town and they do not welcome you, go out into its streets and say, 11
'Even the dust of your town that clings to our feet, we wipe off in
protest against you. Yet know this: the kingdom of God has come
near.' 12 I tell you, on that day it will be more tolerable for Sodom than
for that town.
Woes to unrepentant cities
13 "Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the deeds of
power done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have
repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes. 14 But at the
judgment it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon than for you. 15
And you, Capernaum,

149

LUKE 150

will you be exalted to heaven?
No, you will be brought down to Hades.
Jesus's interpretation of the mission
16 "Whoever listens to you listens to me, and whoever rejects you
rejects me, and whoever rejects me rejects the one who sent me."
Return of the seventy
17 The seventy returned with joy, saying, "Lord, in your name even the
demons submit to us!" 18 He said to them, "I watched Satan fall from
heaven like a flash of lightning. 19 See, I have given you authority to
tread on snakes and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy;
and nothing will hurt you. 20 Nevertheless, do not rejoice at this, that
the spirits submit to you, but rejoice that your names are written in
heaven."
Jesus' thanksgiving to God
21 At that same hour Jesus rejoiced in the Holy Spirit and said, "I thank
you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these
things from the wise and the intelligent and have revealed them to
infants; yes, Father, for such was your gracious will. 22 All things have
been handed over to me by my Father; and no one knows who the Son
is except the Father, or who the Father is except the Son and anyone to
whom the Son chooses to reveal him."
Jesus' blessing of the disciples
23 Then turning to the disciples, Jesus said to them privately, "Blessed
are the eyes that see what you see! 24 For I tell you that many prophets
and kings desired to see what you see, but did not see it, and to hear
what you hear, but did not hear it."

150

LUKE 151

A lawyer's question
25 Just then a lawyer stood up to test Jesus. "Teacher," he said, "what
must I do to inherit eternal life?" 26 He said to him, "What is written in
the law? What do you read there?" 27 He answered, "You shall love
the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with
all your strength, and with all your mind; and your neighbor as
yourself." 28 And he said to him, "You have given the right answer; do
this, and you will live."
Parable of the Good Samaritan
29 But wanting to justify himself, he asked Jesus, "And who is my
neighbor?" 30 Jesus replied, "A man was going down from Jerusalem
to Jericho, and fell into the hands of robbers, who stripped him, beat
him, and went away, leaving him half dead. 31 Now by chance a priest
was going down that road; and when he saw him, he passed by on the
other side. 32 So likewise a Levite, when he came to the place and saw
him, passed by on the other side. 33 But a Samaritan while traveling
came near him; and when he saw him, he was moved with pity. 34 He
went to him and bandaged his wounds, having poured oil and wine on
them. Then he put him on his own animal, brought him to an inn, and
took care of him. 35 The next day he took out two denarii, gave them
to the innkeeper, and said, 'Take care of him; and when I come back, I
will repay you whatever more you spend.' 36 Which of these three, do
you think, was a neighbor to the man who fell into the hands of the
robbers?" 37 He said, "The one who showed him mercy." Jesus said to
him, "Go and do likewise."
Martha and Mary
38 Now as they went on their way, he entered a certain village, where
a woman named Martha welcomed him into her home. 39 She had a
sister named Mary, who sat at the LORD's feet and listened to what he
was saying. 40 But Martha was distracted by her many tasks; so she
came to him and asked, "Lord, do you not care that my sister has left
me to do all the work by myself? Tell her then to help me." 41 But the
Lord answered her, "Martha, Martha, you are worried and distracted

151

LUKE 152

by many things; 42 there is need of only one thing. Mary has chosen
the better part, which will not be taken away from her."
[Luke 11]
The LORD's Prayer
1 He was praying in a certain place, and after he had finished, one of
his disciples said to him, "Lord, teach us to pray, as John taught his
disciples." 2 He said to them, "When you pray, say:
Father, hallowed be your name.
Your kingdom come.
3
Give us each day our daily bread.
4
And forgive us our sins,
for we ourselves forgive everyone indebted to us.
And do not bring us to the time of trial."
Teaching about persistence
5 And he said to them, "Suppose one of you has a friend, and you go
to him at midnight and say to him, 'Friend, lend me three loaves of
bread; 6 for a friend of mine has arrived, and I have nothing to set
before him.' 7 And he answers from within, 'Do not bother me; the
door has already been locked, and my children are with me in bed; I
cannot get up and give you anything.' 8 I tell you, even though he will
not get up and give him anything because he is his friend, at least
because of his persistence he will get up and give him whatever he
needs.
A parabolic admonition and assurance concerning prayer
9 "So I say to you, Ask, and it will be given you; search, and you will
find; knock, and the door will be opened for you. 10 For everyone who
asks receives, and everyone who searches finds, and for everyone who
knocks, the door will be opened. 11 Is there anyone among you who, if
your child asks for a fish, will give a snake instead of a fish? 12 Or if the
child asks for an egg, will give a scorpion? 13 If you then, who are evil,
know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will the
heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him!"

152

LUKE 153

The Beelzebul controversy
14 Now he was casting out a demon that was mute; when the demon
had gone out, the one who had been mute spoke, and the crowds
were amazed. 15 But some of them said, "He casts out demons by
Beelzebul, the ruler of the demons." 16 Others, to test him, kept
demanding from him a sign from heaven. 17 But he knew what they
were thinking and said to them, "Every kingdom divided against itself
becomes a desert, and house falls on house. 18 If Satan also is divided
against himself, how will his kingdom stand? — for you say that I cast
out the demons by Beelzebul. 19 Now if I cast out the demons by
Beelzebul, by whom do your exorcists cast them out? Therefore they
will be your judges. 20 But if it is by the finger of God that I cast out
the demons, then the kingdom of God has come to you. 21 When a
strong man, fully armed, guards his castle, his property is safe. 22 But
when one stronger than he attacks him and overpowers him, he takes
away his armor in which he trusted and divides his plunder. 23
Whoever is not with me is against me, and whoever does not gather
with me scatters.
The return of the unclean spirits
24 "When the unclean spirit has gone out of a person, it wanders
through waterless regions looking for a resting place, but not finding
any, it says, 'I will return to my house from which I came.' 25 When it
comes, it finds it swept and put in order. 26 Then it goes and brings
seven other spirits more evil than itself, and they enter and live there;
and the last state of that person is worse than the first."
True blessedness
27 While he was saying this, a woman in the crowd raised her voice and
said to him, "Blessed is the womb that bore you and the breasts that
nursed you!" 28 But he said, "Blessed rather are those who hear the
word of God and obey it!"

153

LUKE 154

The sign of Jonah
29 When the crowds were increasing, he began to say, "This
generation is an evil generation; it asks for a sign, but no sign will be
given to it except the sign of Jonah. 30 For just as Jonah became a sign
to the people of Nineveh, so the Son of Man will be to this generation.
31 The queen of the South will rise at the judgment with the people of
this generation and condemn them, because she came from the ends
of the earth to listen to the wisdom of Solomon, and see, something
greater than Solomon is here! 32 The people of Nineveh will rise up at
the judgment with this generation and condemn it, because they
repented at the proclamation of Jonah, and see, something greater
than Jonah is here!
Light and sight; the healthy eye
33 "No one after lighting a lamp puts it in a cellar, but on the
lampstand so that those who enter may see the light. 34 Your eye is
the lamp of your body. If your eye is healthy, your whole body is full of
light; but if it is not healthy, your body is full of darkness. 35 Therefore
consider whether the light in you is not darkness. 36 If then your whole
body is full of light, with no part of it in darkness, it will be as full of
light as when a lamp gives you light with its rays."
Sayings against Pharisees and lawyers
37 While he was speaking, a Pharisee invited him to dine with him; so
he went in and took his place at the table. 38 The Pharisee was amazed
to see that he did not first wash before dinner. 39 Then the Lord said
to him, "Now you Pharisees clean the outside of the cup and of the
dish, but inside you are full of greed and wickedness. 40 You fools! Did
not the one who made the outside make the inside also? 41 So give for
alms those things that are within; and see, everything will be clean for
you.
42 "But woe to you Pharisees! For you tithe mint and rue and herbs of
all kinds, and neglect justice and the love of God; it is these you ought
to have practiced, without neglecting the others. 43 Woe to you

154

LUKE 155

Pharisees! For you love to have the seat of honor in the synagogues
and to be greeted with respect in the marketplaces. 44 Woe to you!
For you are like unmarked graves, and people walk over them without
realizing it."
45 One of the lawyers answered him, "Teacher, when you say these
things, you insult us too." 46 And he said, "Woe also to you lawyers!
For you load people with burdens hard to bear, and you yourselves do
not lift a finger to ease them. 47 Woe to you! For you build the tombs
of the prophets whom your ancestors killed. 48 So you are witnesses
and approve of the deeds of your ancestors; for they killed them, and
you build their tombs. 49 Therefore also the Wisdom of God said, 'I will
send them prophets and apostles, some of whom they will kill and
persecute,' 50 so that this generation may be charged with the blood
of all the prophets shed since the foundation of the world, 51 from the
blood of Abel to the blood of Zechariah, who perished between the
altar and the sanctuary. Yes, I tell you, it will be charged against this
generation. 52 Woe to you lawyers! For you have taken away the key
of knowledge; you did not enter yourselves, and you hindered those
who were entering."
53 When he went outside, the scribes and the Pharisees began to be
very hostile toward him and to cross-examine him about many things,
54 lying in wait for him, to catch him in something he might say.
[Luke 12]
The yeast of the Pharisees; calls to fearless confession
1 Meanwhile, when the crowd gathered by the thousands, so that they
trampled on one another, he began to speak first to his disciples,
"Beware of the yeast of the Pharisees, that is, their hypocrisy. 2
Nothing is covered up that will not be uncovered, and nothing secret
that will not become known. 3 Therefore whatever you have said in
the dark will be heard in the light, and what you have whispered
behind closed doors will be proclaimed from the housetops.

155

LUKE 156

4 "I tell you, my friends, do not fear those who kill the body, and after
that can do nothing more. 5 But I will warn you whom to fear: fear him
who, after he has killed, has authority to cast into hell. Yes, I tell you,
fear him! 6 Are not five sparrows sold for two pennies? Yet not one of
them is forgotten in God's sight. 7 But even the hairs of your head are
all counted. Do not be afraid; you are of more value than many
sparrows.
Blaspheming the Holy Spirit; aid therefrom
8 "And I tell you, everyone who acknowledges me before others, the
Son of Man also will acknowledge before the angels of God; 9 but
whoever denies me before others will be denied before the angels of
God. 10 And everyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man will
be forgiven; but whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit will not
be forgiven. 11 When they bring you before the synagogues, the rulers,
and the authorities, do not worry about how you are to defend
yourselves or what you are to say; 12 for the Holy Spirit will teach you
at that very hour what you ought to say."
Warning against greed; parable of the rich fool
13 Someone in the crowd said to him, "Teacher, tell my brother to
divide the family inheritance with me." 14 But he said to him, "Friend,
who set me to be a judge or arbitrator over you?" 15 And he said to
them, "Take care! Be on your guard against all kinds of greed; for
one's life does not consist in the abundance of possessions." 16 Then he
told them a parable: "The land of a rich man produced abundantly. 17
And he thought to himself, 'What should I do, for I have no place to
store my crops?' 18 Then he said, 'I will do this: I will pull down my
barns and build larger ones, and there I will store all my grain and my
goods. 19 And I will say to my soul, Soul, you have ample goods laid up
for many years; relax, eat, drink, be merry.' 20 But God said to him,
'You fool! This very night your life is being demanded of you. And the
things you have prepared, whose will they be?' 21 So it is with those
who store up treasures for themselves but are not rich toward God."

156

LUKE 157

Anxiety concerning life
22 He said to his disciples, "Therefore I tell you, do not worry about
your life, what you will eat, or about your body, what you will wear. 23
For life is more than food, and the body more than clothing. 24
Consider the ravens: they neither sow nor reap, they have neither
storehouse nor barn, and yet God feeds them. Of how much more
value are you than the birds! 25 And can any of you by worrying add a
single hour to your span of life? 26 If then you are not able to do so
small a thing as that, why do you worry about the rest? 27 Consider the
lilies, how they grow: they neither toil nor spin; yet I tell you, even
Solomon in all his glory was not clothed like one of these. 28 But if God
so clothes the grass of the field, which is alive today and tomorrow is
thrown into the oven, how much more will he clothe you — you of
little faith! 29 And do not keep striving for what you are to eat and
what you are to drink, and do not keep worrying. 30 For it is the
nations of the world that strive after all these things, and your Father
knows that you need them. 31 Instead, strive for his kingdom, and
these things will be given to you as well.
Treasure in heaven
32 "Do not be afraid, little flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to
give you the kingdom. 33 Sell your possessions, and give alms. Make
purses for yourselves that do not wear out, an unfailing treasure in
heaven, where no thief comes near and no moth destroys. 34 For
where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
Sayings on watchfulness and faithfulness
35 "Be dressed for action and have your lamps lit; 36 be like those who
are waiting for their master to return from the wedding banquet, so
that they may open the door for him as soon as he comes and knocks.
37 Blessed are those slaves whom the master finds alert when he
comes; truly I tell you, he will fasten his belt and have them sit down to
eat, and he will come and serve them. 38 If he comes during the middle
of the night, or near dawn, and finds them so, blessed are those slaves.

157

LUKE 158

39 "But know this: if the owner of the house had known at what hour
the thief was coming, he would not have let his house be broken into.
40 You also must be ready, for the Son of Man is coming at an
unexpected hour."
41 Peter said, "Lord, are you telling this parable for us or for
everyone?" 42 And the Lord said, "Who then is the faithful and
prudent manager whom his master will put in charge of his slaves, to
give them their allowance of food at the proper time? 43 Blessed is
that slave whom his master will find at work when he arrives. 44 Truly I
tell you, he will put that one in charge of all his possessions. 45 But if
that slave says to himself, 'My master is delayed in coming,' and if he
begins to beat the other slaves, men and women, and to eat and drink
and get drunk, 46 the master of that slave will come on a day when he
does not expect him and at an hour that he does not know, and will
cut him in pieces, and put him with the unfaithful. 47 That slave who
knew what his master wanted, but did not prepare himself or do what
was wanted, will receive a severe beating. 48 But the one who did not
know and did what deserved a beating will receive a light beating.
From everyone to whom much has been given, much will be required;
and from the one to whom much has been entrusted, even more will
be demanded.
The controversial character of Jesus' mission
49 "I came to bring fire to the earth, and how I wish it were already
kindled! 50 I have a baptism with which to be baptized, and what
stress I am under until it is completed! 51 Do you think that I have come
to bring peace to the earth? No, I tell you, but rather division! 52 From
now on five in one household will be divided, three against two and
two against three; 53 they will be divided:
father against son
and son against father,
mother against daughter
and daughter against mother,
mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law
and daughter-in-law against mother-in-law."

158

LUKE 159

Interpreting the times
54 He also said to the crowds, "When you see a cloud rising in the
west, you immediately say, 'It is going to rain'; and so it happens. 55
And when you see the south wind blowing, you say, 'There will be
scorching heat'; and it happens. 56 You hypocrites! You know how to
interpret the appearance of earth and sky, but why do you not know
how to interpret the present time?
Settling with an accuser
57 "And why do you not judge for yourselves what is right? 58 Thus,
when you go with your accuser before a magistrate, on the way make
an effort to settle the case, or you may be dragged before the judge,
and the judge hand you over to the officer, and the officer throw you
in prison. 59 I tell you, you will never get out until you have paid the
very last penny."
[Luke 13]
Parable of the unfruitful fig tree
1 At that very time there were some present who told him about the
Galileans whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. 2 He
asked them, "Do you think that because these Galileans suffered in this
way they were worse sinners than all other Galileans? 3 No, I tell you;
but unless you repent, you will all perish as they did. 4 Or those
eighteen who were killed when the tower of Siloam fell on them — do
you think that they were worse offenders than all the others living in
Jerusalem? 5 No, I tell you; but unless you repent, you will all perish
just as they did."
6 Then he told this parable: "A man had a fig tree planted in his
vineyard; and he came looking for fruit on it and found none. 7 So he
said to the gardener, 'See here! For three years I have come looking for
fruit on this fig tree, and still I find none. Cut it down! Why should it
be wasting the soil?' 8 He replied, 'Sir, let it alone for one more year,
until I dig around it and put manure on it. 9 If it bears fruit next year,
well and good; but if not, you can cut it down.'"

159

LUKE 160

Healing of a crippled woman on the sabbath
10 Now he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath. 11
And just then there appeared a woman with a spirit that had crippled
her for eighteen years. She was bent over and was quite unable to
stand up straight. 12 When Jesus saw her, he called her over and said,
"Woman, you are set free from your ailment." 13 When he laid his
hands on her, immediately she stood up straight and began praising
God. 14 But the leader of the synagogue, indignant because Jesus had
cured on the sabbath, kept saying to the crowd, "There are six days on
which work ought to be done; come on those days and be cured, and
not on the sabbath day." 15 But the Lord answered him and said, "You
hypocrites! Does not each of you on the sabbath untie his ox or his
donkey from the manger, and lead it away to give it water? 16 And
ought not this woman, a daughter of Abraham whom Satan bound for
eighteen long years, be set free from this bondage on the sabbath
day?" 17 When he said this, all his opponents were put to shame; and
the entire crowd was rejoicing at all the wonderful things that he was
doing.
Parable of the mustard seed
18 He said therefore, "What is the kingdom of God like? And to what
should I compare it? 19 It is like a mustard seed that someone took and
sowed in the garden; it grew and became a tree, and the birds of the
air made nests in its branches."
Parable of the yeast
20 And again he said, "To what should I compare the kingdom of God?
21 It is like yeast that a woman took and mixed in with three measures
of flour until all of it was leavened."
The necessity of discipline for salvation
22 Jesus went through one town and village after another, teaching as
he made his way to Jerusalem. 23 Someone asked him, "Lord, will only
a few be saved?" He said to them, 24 "Strive to enter through the

160

LUKE 161

narrow door; for many, I tell you, will try to enter and will not be able.
25 When once the owner of the house has got up and shut the door,
and you begin to stand outside and to knock at the door, saying, 'Lord,
open to us,' then in reply he will say to you, 'I do not know where you
come from.' 26 Then you will begin to say, 'We ate and drank with you,
and you taught in our streets.' 27 But he will say, 'I do not know where
you come from; go away from me, all you evildoers!' 28 There will be
weeping and gnashing of teeth when you see Abraham and Isaac and
Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, and you yourselves
thrown out. 29 Then people will come from east and west, from north
and south, and will eat in the kingdom of God. 30 Indeed, some are
last who will be first, and some are first who will be last."
Report and reply concerning Herod; Jesus' lament over Jerusalem
31 At that very hour some Pharisees came and said to him, "Get away
from here, for Herod wants to kill you." 32 He said to them, "Go and
tell that fox for me, 'Listen, I am casting out demons and performing
cures today and tomorrow, and on the third day I finish my work. 33
Yet today, tomorrow, and the next day I must be on my way, because it
is impossible for a prophet to be killed outside of Jerusalem.' 34
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the city that kills the prophets and stones those
who are sent to it! How often have I desired to gather your children
together as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, and you were
not willing! 35 See, your house is left to you. And I tell you, you will
not see me until the time comes when you say, 'Blessed is the one who
comes in the name of the Lord.'"
[Luke 14]
Healing of a man with edema on the sabbath
1 On one occasion when Jesus was going to the house of a leader of
the Pharisees to eat a meal on the sabbath, they were watching him
closely. 2 Just then, in front of him, there was a man who had edema
(dropsy). 3 And Jesus asked the lawyers and Pharisees, "Is it lawful to
cure people on the sabbath, or not?" 4 But they were silent. So Jesus
took him and healed him, and sent him away. 5 Then he said to them,
"If one of you has a child or an ox that has fallen into a well, will you

161

LUKE 162

not immediately pull it out on a sabbath day?" 6 And they could not
reply to this.
Parable on humility
7 When he noticed how the guests chose the places of honor, he told
them a parable. 8 "When you are invited by someone to a wedding
banquet, do not sit down at the place of honor, in case someone more
distinguished than you has been invited by your host; 9 and the host
who invited both of you may come and say to you, 'Give this person
your place,' and then in disgrace you would start to take the lowest
place. 10 But when you are invited, go and sit down at the lowest
place, so that when your host comes, he may say to you, 'Friend, move
up higher'; then you will be honored in the presence of all who sit at
the table with you. 11 For all who exalt themselves will be humbled,
and those who humble themselves will be exalted."
12 He said also to the one who had invited him, "When you give a
luncheon or a dinner, do not invite your friends or your brothers or
your relatives or rich neighbors, in case they may invite you in return,
and you would be repaid. 13 But when you give a banquet, invite the
poor, the crippled, the lame, and the blind. 14 And you will be blessed,
because they cannot repay you, for you will be repaid at the
resurrection of the righteous."
Parable of the great dinner
15 One of the dinner guests, on hearing this, said to him, "Blessed is
anyone who will eat bread in the kingdom of God!" 16 Then Jesus said
to him, "Someone gave a great dinner and invited many. 17 At the time
for the dinner he sent his slave to say to those who had been invited,
'Come; for everything is ready now.' 18 But they all alike began to
make excuses. The first said to him, 'I have bought a piece of land, and
I must go out and see it; please accept my regrets.' 19 Another said, 'I
have bought five yoke of oxen, and I am going to try them out; please
accept my regrets.' 20 Another said, 'I have just been married, and
therefore I cannot come.' 21 So the slave returned and reported this to
his master. Then the owner of the house became angry and said to his

162

LUKE 163

slave, 'Go out at once into the streets and lanes of the town and bring
in the poor, the crippled, the blind, and the lame.' 22 And the slave
said, 'Sir, what you ordered has been done, and there is still room.' 23
Then the master said to the slave, 'Go out into the roads and lanes, and
compel people to come in, so that my house may be filled. 24 For I tell
you, none of those who were invited will taste my dinner.'"
The costs of discipleship
25 Now large crowds were traveling with him; and he turned and said
to them, 26 "Whoever comes to me and does not hate father and
mother, wife and children, brothers and sisters, yes, and even life itself,
cannot be my disciple. 27 Whoever does not carry the cross and follow
me cannot be my disciple. 28 For which of you, intending to build a
tower, does not first sit down and estimate the cost, to see whether he
has enough to complete it? 29 Otherwise, when he has laid a
foundation and is not able to finish, all who see it will begin to ridicule
him, 30 saying, 'This fellow began to build and was not able to finish.'
31 Or what king, going out to wage war against another king, will not
sit down first and consider whether he is able with ten thousand to
oppose the one who comes against him with twenty thousand? 32 If he
cannot, then, while the other is still far away, he sends a delegation
and asks for the terms of peace. 33 So therefore, none of you can
become my disciple if you do not give up all your possessions.
Saying about salt
34 "Salt is good; but if salt has lost its taste, how can its saltiness be
restored? 35 It is fit neither for the soil nor for the manure pile; they
throw it away. Let anyone with ears to hear listen!"
[Luke 15]
Parable of the lost sheep
1 Now all the tax collectors and sinners were coming near to listen to
him. 2 And the Pharisees and the scribes were grumbling and saying,
"This fellow welcomes sinners and eats with them."

163

LUKE 164

3 So he told them this parable: 4 "Which one of you, having a hundred
sheep and losing one of them, does not leave the ninety-nine in the
wilderness and go after the one that is lost until he finds it? 5 When he
has found it, he lays it on his shoulders and rejoices. 6 And when he
comes home, he calls together his friends and neighbors, saying to
them, 'Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep that was lost.' 7 Just
so, I tell you, there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who
repents than over ninety-nine righteous persons who need no
repentance.
Parable of the lost coin
8 "Or what woman having ten silver coins, if she loses one of them,
does not light a lamp, sweep the house, and search carefully until she
finds it? 9 When she has found it, she calls together her friends and
neighbors, saying, 'Rejoice with me, for I have found the coin that I
had lost.' 10 Just so, I tell you, there is joy in the presence of the angels
of God over one sinner who repents."
Parable of the lost prodigal son
11 Then Jesus said, "There was a man who had two sons. 12 The
younger of them said to his father, 'Father, give me the share of the
property that will belong to me.' So he divided his property between
them. 13 A few days later the younger son gathered all he had and
traveled to a distant country, and there he squandered his property in
dissolute living. 14 When he had spent everything, a severe famine
took place throughout that country, and he began to be in need. 15 So
he went and hired himself out to one of the citizens of that country,
who sent him to his fields to feed the pigs. 16 He would gladly have
filled himself with the pods that the pigs were eating; and no one gave
him anything. 17 But when he came to himself he said, 'How many of
my father's hired hands have bread enough and to spare, but here I am
dying of hunger! 18 I will get up and go to my father, and I will say to
him, "Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you; 19 I am no
longer worthy to be called your son; treat me like one of your hired
hands."' 20 So he set off and went to his father. But while he was still
far off, his father saw him and was filled with compassion; he ran and

164

LUKE 165

put his arms around him and kissed him. 21 Then the son said to him,
'Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you; I am no longer
worthy to be called your son.' 22 But the father said to his slaves,
'Quickly, bring out a robe — the best one — and put it on him; put a
ring on his finger and sandals on his feet. 23 And get the fatted calf
and kill it, and let us eat and celebrate; 24 for this son of mine was
dead and is alive again; he was lost and is found!' And they began to
celebrate.
25 "Now his elder son was in the field; and when he came and
approached the house, he heard music and dancing. 26 He called one
of the slaves and asked what was going on. 27 He replied, 'Your
brother has come, and your father has killed the fatted calf, because he
has got him back safe and sound.' 28 Then he became angry and
refused to go in. His father came out and began to plead with him. 29
But he answered his father, 'Listen! For all these years I have been
working like a slave for you, and I have never disobeyed your
command; yet you have never given me even a young goat so that I
might celebrate with my friends. 30 But when this son of yours came
back, who has devoured your property with prostitutes, you killed the
fatted calf for him!' 31 Then the father said to him, 'Son, you are
always with me, and all that is mine is yours. 32 But we had to
celebrate and rejoice, because this brother of yours was dead and has
come to life; he was lost and has been found.'"
[Luke 16]
Parable of the dishonest manager
1 Then Jesus said to the disciples, "There was a rich man who had a
manager, and charges were brought to him that this man was
squandering his property. 2 So he summoned him and said to him,
'What is this that I hear about you? Give me an accounting of your
management, because you cannot be my manager any longer.' 3 Then
the manager said to himself, 'What will I do, now that my master is
taking the position away from me? I am not strong enough to dig, and
I am ashamed to beg. 4 I have decided what to do so that, when I am
dismissed as manager, people may welcome me into their homes.' 5 So,
summoning his master's debtors one by one, he asked the first, 'How

165

LUKE 166

much do you owe my master?' 6 He answered, 'A hundred jugs of olive
oil.' He said to him, 'Take your bill, sit down quickly, and make it fifty.'
7 Then he asked another, 'And how much do you owe?' He replied, 'A
hundred containers of wheat.' He said to him, 'Take your bill and make
it eighty.' 8 And his master commended the dishonest manager
because he had acted shrewdly; for the children of this age are more
shrewd in dealing with their own generation than are the children of
light. 9 And I tell you, make friends for yourselves by means of
dishonest wealth so that when it is gone, they may welcome you into
the eternal homes.
A series of sayings
10 "Whoever is faithful in a very little is faithful also in much; and
whoever is dishonest in a very little is dishonest also in much. 11 If then
you have not been faithful with the dishonest wealth, who will entrust
to you the true riches? 12 And if you have not been faithful with what
belongs to another, who will give you what is your own? 13 No slave
can serve two masters; for a slave will either hate the one and love the
other, or be devoted to the one and despise the other. You cannot
serve God and wealth."
14 The Pharisees, who were lovers of money, heard all this, and they
ridiculed him. 15 So he said to them, "You are those who justify
yourselves in the sight of others; but God knows your hearts; for what
is prized by human beings is an abomination in the sight of God.
16 "The law and the prophets were in effect until John came; since
then the good news of the kingdom of God is proclaimed, and
everyone tries to enter it by force. 17 But it is easier for heaven and
earth to pass away, than for one stroke of a letter in the law to be
dropped.
18 "Anyone who divorces his wife and marries another commits
adultery, and whoever marries a woman divorced from her husband
commits adultery.

166

LUKE 167

Parable of the rich man and Lazarus
19 "There was a rich man who was dressed in purple and fine linen and
who feasted sumptuously every day. 20 And at his gate lay a poor man
named Lazarus, covered with sores, 21 who longed to satisfy his hunger
with what fell from the rich man's table; even the dogs would come
and lick his sores. 22 The poor man died and was carried away by the
angels to be with Abraham. The rich man also died and was buried. 23
In Hades, where he was being tormented, he looked up and saw
Abraham far away with Lazarus by his side. 24 He called out, 'Father
Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his
finger in water and cool my tongue; for I am in agony in these flames.'
25 But Abraham said, 'Child, remember that during your lifetime you
received your good things, and Lazarus in like manner evil things; but
now he is comforted here, and you are in agony. 26 Besides all this,
between you and us a great chasm has been fixed, so that those who
might want to pass from here to you cannot do so, and no one can
cross from there to us.' 27 He said, 'Then, father, I beg you to send him
to my father's house — 28 for I have five brothers — that he may warn
them, so that they will not also come into this place of torment.' 29
Abraham replied, 'They have Moses and the prophets; they should
listen to them.' 30 He said, 'No, father Abraham; but if someone goes
to them from the dead, they will repent.' 31 He said to him, 'If they do
not listen to Moses and the prophets, neither will they be convinced
even if someone rises from the dead.'"
[Luke 17]
The peril of causing temptation; sayings concerning forgiveness
1 Jesus said to his disciples, "Occasions for stumbling are bound to
come, but woe to anyone by whom they come! 2 It would be better for
you if a millstone were hung around your neck and you were thrown
into the sea than for you to cause one of these little ones to stumble. 3
Be on your guard! If another disciple sins, you must rebuke the
offender, and if there is repentance, you must forgive. 4 And if the
same person sins against you seven times a day, and turns back to you
seven times and says, 'I repent,' you must forgive."

167

LUKE 168

Saying concerning faith
5 The apostles said to the Lord, "Increase our faith!" 6 The Lord
replied, "If you had faith the size of a mustard seed, you could say to
this mulberry tree, 'Be uprooted and planted in the sea,' and it would
obey you.
The obligation to obedience
7 "Who among you would say to your slave who has just come in from
plowing or tending sheep in the field, 'Come here at once and take
your place at the table'? 8 Would you not rather say to him, 'Prepare
supper for me, put on your apron and serve me while I eat and drink;
later you may eat and drink'? 9 Do you thank the slave for doing what
was commanded? 10 So you also, when you have done all that you
were ordered to do, say, 'We are worthless slaves; we have done only
what we ought to have done!'"
The cleansing of ten lepers
11 On the way to Jerusalem Jesus was going through the region
between Samaria and Galilee. 12 As he entered a village, ten lepers
approached him. Keeping their distance, 13 they called out, saying,
"Jesus, Master, have mercy on us!" 14 When he saw them, he said to
them, "Go and show yourselves to the priests." And as they went, they
were made clean. 15 Then one of them, when he saw that he was
healed, turned back, praising God with a loud voice. 16 He prostrated
himself at Jesus' feet and thanked him. And he was a Samaritan. 17
Then Jesus asked, "Were not ten made clean? But the other nine,
where are they? 18 Was none of them found to return and give praise
to God except this foreigner?" 19 Then he said to him, "Get up and go
on your way; your faith has made you well."
The coming of the kingdom of God
20 Once Jesus was asked by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God
was coming, and he answered, "The kingdom of God is not coming

168

LUKE 169

with things that can be observed; 21 nor will they say, 'Look, here it is!'
or 'There it is!' For, in fact, the kingdom of God is among you."
The day of the Son of Man
22 Then he said to the disciples, "The days are coming when you will
long to see one of the days of the Son of Man, and you will not see it.
23 They will say to you, 'Look there!' or 'Look here!' Do not go, do not
set off in pursuit. 24 For as the lightning flashes and lights up the sky
from one side to the other, so will the Son of Man be in his day. 25 But
first he must endure much suffering and be rejected by this generation.
26 Just as it was in the days of Noah, so too it will be in the days of the
Son of Man. 27 They were eating and drinking, and marrying and
being given in marriage, until the day Noah entered the ark, and the
flood came and destroyed all of them. 28 Likewise, just as it was in the
days of Lot: they were eating and drinking, buying and selling,
planting and building, 29 but on the day that Lot left Sodom, it rained
fire and sulfur from heaven and destroyed all of them 30 — it will be
like that on the day that the Son of Man is revealed. 31 On that day,
anyone on the housetop who has belongings in the house must not
come down to take them away; and likewise anyone in the field must
not turn back. 32 Remember Lot's wife. 33 Those who try to make their
life secure will lose it, but those who lose their life will keep it. 34 I tell
you, on that night there will be two in one bed; one will be taken and
the other left. 35 There will be two women grinding meal together;
one will be taken and the other left." 37 Then they asked him, "Where,
Lord?" He said to them, "Where the corpse is, there the vultures will
gather."
[Luke 18]
Parable of the unjust judge and the persistent widow
1 Then Jesus told them a parable about their need to pray always and
not to lose heart. 2 He said, "In a certain city there was a judge who
neither feared God nor had respect for people. 3 In that city there was
a widow who kept coming to him and saying, 'Grant me justice against
my opponent.' 4 For a while he refused; but later he said to himself,
'Though I have no fear of God and no respect for anyone, 5 yet

169

LUKE 170

because this widow keeps bothering me, I will grant her justice, so that
she may not wear me out by continually coming.'" 6 And the Lord said,
"Listen to what the unjust judge says. 7 And will not God grant justice
to his chosen ones who cry to him day and night? Will he delay long in
helping them? 8 I tell you, he will quickly grant justice to them. And
yet, when the Son of Man comes, will he find faith on earth?"
Parable of the Pharisee and the tax collector
9 He also told this parable to some who trusted in themselves that they
were righteous and regarded others with contempt: 10 "Two men went
up to the temple to pray, one a Pharisee and the other a tax collector.
11 The Pharisee, standing by himself, was praying thus, 'God, I thank
you that I am not like other people: thieves, rogues, adulterers, or even
like this tax collector. 12 I fast twice a week; I give a tenth of all my
income.' 13 But the tax collector, standing far off, would not even look
up to heaven, but was beating his breast and saying, 'God, be merciful
to me, a sinner!' 14 I tell you, this man went down to his home justified
rather than the other; for all who exalt themselves will be humbled,
but all who humble themselves will be exalted."
Jesus and the little children
15 People were bringing even infants to him that he might touch them;
and when the disciples saw it, they sternly ordered them not to do it.
16 But Jesus called for them and said, "Let the little children come to
me, and do not stop them; for it is to such as these that the kingdom of
God belongs. 17 Truly I tell you, whoever does not receive the kingdom
of God as a little child will never enter it."
The rich ruler, wealth, and salvation
18 A certain ruler asked him, "Good Teacher, what must I do to inherit
eternal life?" 19 Jesus said to him, "Why do you call me good? No one
is good but God alone. 20 You know the commandments: 'You shall
not commit adultery; You shall not murder; You shall not steal; You
shall not bear false witness; Honor your father and mother.'" 21 He
replied, "I have kept all these since my youth." 22 When Jesus heard

170

LUKE 171

this, he said to him, "There is still one thing lacking. Sell all that you
own and distribute the money to the poor, and you will have treasure
in heaven; then come, follow me." 23 But when he heard this, he
became sad; for he was very rich. 24 Jesus looked at him and said,
"How hard it is for those who have wealth to enter the kingdom of
God! 25 Indeed, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a
needle than for someone who is rich to enter the kingdom of God."
26 Those who heard it said, "Then who can be saved?" 27 He replied,
"What is impossible for mortals is possible for God."
28 Then Peter said, "Look, we have left our homes and followed you."
29 And he said to them, "Truly I tell you, there is no one who has left
house or wife or brothers or parents or children, for the sake of the
kingdom of God, 30 who will not get back very much more in this age,
and in the age to come eternal life."
Jesus' third prediction of his death
31 Then he took the twelve aside and said to them, "See, we are going
up to Jerusalem, and everything that is written about the Son of Man
by the prophets will be accomplished. 32 For he will be handed over to
the Gentiles; and he will be mocked and insulted and spat upon. 33
After they have flogged him, they will kill him, and on the third day he
will rise again." 34 But they understood nothing about all these things;
in fact, what he said was hidden from them, and they did not grasp
what was said.
Healing of a blind man
35 As he approached Jericho, a blind man was sitting by the roadside
begging. 36 When he heard a crowd going by, he asked what was
happening. 37 They told him, "Jesus of Nazareth is passing by." 38
Then he shouted, "Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!" 39 Those
who were in front sternly ordered him to be quiet; but he shouted
even more loudly, "Son of David, have mercy on me!" 40 Jesus stood
still and ordered the man to be brought to him; and when he came
near, he asked him, 41 "What do you want me to do for you?" He said,

171

LUKE 172

"Lord, let me see again." 42 Jesus said to him, "Receive your sight; your
faith has saved you." 43 Immediately he regained his sight and
followed him, glorifying God; and all the people, when they saw it,
praised God.
[Luke 19]
Zacchaeus's salvation
1 He entered Jericho and was passing through it. 2 A man was there
named Zacchaeus; he was a chief tax collector and was rich. 3 He was
trying to see who Jesus was, but on account of the crowd he could not,
because he was short in stature. 4 So he ran ahead and climbed a
sycamore tree to see him, because he was going to pass that way. 5
When Jesus came to the place, he looked up and said to him,
"Zacchaeus, hurry and come down; for I must stay at your house
today." 6 So he hurried down and was happy to welcome him. 7 All
who saw it began to grumble and said, "He has gone to be the guest
of one who is a sinner." 8 Zacchaeus stood there and said to the Lord,
"Look, half of my possessions, Lord, I will give to the poor; and if I have
defrauded anyone of anything, I will pay back four times as much." 9
Then Jesus said to him, "Today salvation has come to this house,
because he too is a son of Abraham. 10 For the Son of Man came to
seek out and to save the lost."
Parable of the ten pounds
11 As they were listening to this, he went on to tell a parable, because
he was near Jerusalem, and because they supposed that the kingdom
of God was to appear immediately. 12 So he said, "A nobleman went to
a distant country to get royal power for himself and then return. 13 He
summoned ten of his slaves, and gave them ten pounds, and said to
them, 'Do business with these until I come back.' 14 But the citizens of
his country hated him and sent a delegation after him, saying, 'We do
not want this man to rule over us.' 15 When he returned, having
received royal power, he ordered these slaves, to whom he had given
the money, to be summoned so that he might find out what they had
gained by trading. 16 The first came forward and said, 'Lord, your
pound has made ten more pounds.' 17 He said to him, 'Well done, good

172

LUKE 173

slave! Because you have been trustworthy in a very small thing, take
charge of ten cities.' 18 Then the second came, saying, 'Lord, your
pound has made five pounds.' 19 He said to him, 'And you, rule over
five cities.' 20 Then the other came, saying, 'Lord, here is your pound. I
wrapped it up in a piece of cloth, 21 for I was afraid of you, because
you are a harsh man; you take what you did not deposit, and reap
what you did not sow.' 22 He said to him, 'I will judge you by your own
words, you wicked slave! You knew, did you, that I was a harsh man,
taking what I did not deposit and reaping what I did not sow? 23 Why
then did you not put my money into the bank? Then when I returned, I
could have collected it with interest.' 24 He said to the bystanders,
'Take the pound from him and give it to the one who has ten pounds.'
25 (And they said to him, 'Lord, he has ten pounds!') 26 'I tell you, to all
those who have, more will be given; but from those who have nothing,
even what they have will be taken away. 27 But as for these enemies of
mine who did not want me to be king over them — bring them here
and slaughter them in my presence.'"
Jesus' ministry in Jerusalem
28 After he had said this, he went on ahead, going up to Jerusalem.
The entry into Jerusalem
29 When he had come near Bethphage and Bethany, at the place called
the Mount of Olives, he sent two of the disciples, 30 saying, "Go into
the village ahead of you, and as you enter it you will find tied there a
colt that has never been ridden. Untie it and bring it here. 31 If anyone
asks you, 'Why are you untying it?' just say this, 'The Lord needs it.'" 32
So those who were sent departed and found it as he had told them. 33
As they were untying the colt, its owners asked them, "Why are you
untying the colt?" 34 They said, "The Lord needs it." 35 Then they
brought it to Jesus; and after throwing their cloaks on the colt, they set
Jesus on it. 36 As he rode along, people kept spreading their cloaks on
the road. 37 As he was now approaching the path down from the
Mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to praise
God joyfully with a loud voice for all the deeds of power that they had
seen, 38 saying,

173

LUKE 174

"Blessed is the king
who comes in the name of the Lord!
Peace in heaven,
and glory in the highest heaven!"
39 Some of the Pharisees in the crowd said to him, "Teacher, order
your disciples to stop." 40 He answered, "I tell you, if these were silent,
the stones would shout out."
Weeping over Jerusalem
41 As he came near and saw the city, he wept over it, 42 saying, "If you,
even you, had only recognized on this day the things that make for
peace! But now they are hidden from your eyes. 43 Indeed, the days
will come upon you, when your enemies will set up ramparts around
you and surround you, and hem you in on every side. 44 They will crush
you to the ground, you and your children within you, and they will not
leave within you one stone upon another; because you did not
recognize the time of your visitation from God."
Cleansing of the Temple
45 Then he entered the temple and began to drive out those who were
selling things there; 46 and he said, "It is written,
'My house shall be a house of prayer';
but you have made it a den of robbers."
The religious leaders' hostility toward Jesus
47 Every day he was teaching in the temple. The chief priests, the
scribes, and the leaders of the people kept looking for a way to kill
him; 48 but they did not find anything they could do, for all the people
were spellbound by what they heard.
[Luke 20]
Questioning Jesus' authority
1 One day, as he was teaching the people in the temple and telling the
good news, the chief priests and the scribes came with the elders 2 and

174

LUKE 175

said to him, "Tell us, by what authority are you doing these things?
Who is it who gave you this authority?" 3 He answered them, "I will
also ask you a question, and you tell me: 4 Did the baptism of John
come from heaven, or was it of human origin?" 5 They discussed it
with one another, saying, "If we say, 'From heaven,' he will say, 'Why
did you not believe him?' 6 But if we say, 'Of human origin,' all the
people will stone us; for they are convinced that John was a prophet."
7 So they answered that they did not know where it came from. 8 Then
Jesus said to them, "Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing
these things."
Parable of the vineyard and tenants
9 He began to tell the people this parable: "A man planted a vineyard,
and leased it to tenants, and went to another country for a long time.
10 When the season came, he sent a slave to the tenants in order that
they might give him his share of the produce of the vineyard; but the
tenants beat him and sent him away empty-handed. 11 Next he sent
another slave; that one also they beat and insulted and sent away
empty-handed. 12 And he sent still a third; this one also they wounded
and threw out. 13 Then the owner of the vineyard said, 'What shall I
do? I will send my beloved son; perhaps they will respect him.' 14 But
when the tenants saw him, they discussed it among themselves and
said, 'This is the heir; let us kill him so that the inheritance may be
ours.' 15 So they threw him out of the vineyard and killed him. What
then will the owner of the vineyard do to them? 16 He will come and
destroy those tenants and give the vineyard to others." When they
heard this, they said, "Heaven forbid!" 17 But he looked at them and
said, "What then does this text mean:
'The stone that the builders rejected
has become the cornerstone'?
18 Everyone who falls on that stone will be broken to pieces; and it will
crush anyone on whom it falls." 19 When the scribes and chief priests
realized that he had told this parable against them, they wanted to lay
hands on him at that very hour, but they feared the people.

175

LUKE 176

Paying taxes to the emperor
20 So they watched him and sent spies who pretended to be honest, in
order to trap him by what he said, so as to hand him over to the
jurisdiction and authority of the governor. 21 So they asked him,
"Teacher, we know that you are right in what you say and teach, and
you show deference to no one, but teach the way of God in accordance
with truth. 22 Is it lawful for us to pay taxes to the emperor, or not?"
23 But he perceived their craftiness and said to them, 24 "Show me a
denarius. Whose head and whose title does it bear?" They said, "The
emperor's." 25 He said to them, "Then give to the emperor the things
that are the emperor's, and to God the things that are God's." 26 And
they were not able in the presence of the people to trap him by what
he said; and being amazed by his answer, they became silent.
Question concerning resurrection
27 Some Sadducees, those who say there is no resurrection, came to
him 28 and asked him a question, "Teacher, Moses wrote for us that if
a man's brother dies, leaving a wife but no children, the man shall
marry the widow and raise up children for his brother. 29 Now there
were seven brothers; the first married, and died childless; 30 then the
second 31 and the third married her, and so in the same way all seven
died childless. 32 Finally the woman also died. 33 In the resurrection,
therefore, whose wife will the woman be? For the seven had married
her."
34 Jesus said to them, "Those who belong to this age marry and are
given in marriage; 35 but those who are considered worthy of a place
in that age and in the resurrection from the dead neither marry nor are
given in marriage. 36 Indeed they cannot die anymore, because they
are like angels and are children of God, being children of the
resurrection. 37 And the fact that the dead are raised Moses himself
showed, in the story about the bush, where he speaks of the Lord as
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. 38 Now
he is God not of the dead, but of the living; for to him all of them are
alive." 39 Then some of the scribes answered, "Teacher, you have

176

LUKE 177

spoken well." 40 For they no longer dared to ask him another
question.
A question about David's son
41 Then he said to them, "How can they say that the Messiah is David's
son? 42 For David himself says in the book of Psalms,
'The Lord said to my Lord,
"Sit at my right hand,
43
until I make your enemies your footstool."'
44 David thus calls him Lord; so how can he be his son?"
Warning concerning the scribes
45 In the hearing of all the people he said to the disciples, 46 "Beware
of the scribes, who like to walk around in long robes, and love to be
greeted with respect in the marketplaces, and to have the best seats in
the synagogues and places of honor at banquets. 47 They devour
widows' houses and for the sake of appearance say long prayers. They
will receive the greater condemnation."
[Luke 21]
The widow's offering
1 He looked up and saw rich people putting their gifts into the
treasury; 2 he also saw a poor widow put in two small copper coins. 3
He said, "Truly I tell you, this poor widow has put in more than all of
them; 4 for all of them have contributed out of their abundance, but
she out of her poverty has put in all she had to live on."
Foretelling the destruction of the Temple
5 When some were speaking about the temple, how it was adorned
with beautiful stones and gifts dedicated to God, he said, 6 "As for
these things that you see, the days will come when not one stone will
be left upon another; all will be thrown down."

177

LUKE 178

Sayings about end-time signs
7 They asked him, "Teacher, when will this be, and what will be the
sign that this is about to take place?" 8 And he said, "Beware that you
are not led astray; for many will come in my name and say, 'I am he!'
and, 'The time is near!' Do not go after them.
9 "When you hear of wars and insurrections, do not be terrified; for
these things must take place first, but the end will not follow
immediately." 10 Then he said to them, "Nation will rise against
nation, and kingdom against kingdom; 11 there will be great
earthquakes, and in various places famines and plagues; and there will
be dreadful portents and great signs from heaven.
Foretelling the persecution of the disciples
12 "But before all this occurs, they will arrest you and persecute you;
they will hand you over to synagogues and prisons, and you will be
brought before kings and governors because of my name. 13 This will
give you an opportunity to testify. 14 So make up your minds not to
prepare your defense in advance; 15 for I will give you words and a
wisdom that none of your opponents will be able to withstand or
contradict. 16 You will be betrayed even by parents and brothers, by
relatives and friends; and they will put some of you to death. 17 You
will be hated by all because of my name. 18 But not a hair of your head
will perish. 19 By your endurance you will gain your souls.
The desolation of Jerusalem
20 "When you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, then know that its
desolation has come near. 21 Then those in Judea must flee to the
mountains, and those inside the city must leave it, and those out in the
country must not enter it; 22 for these are days of vengeance, as a
fulfillment of all that is written. 23 Woe to those who are pregnant and
to those who are nursing infants in those days! For there will be great
distress on the earth and wrath against this people; 24 they will fall by
the edge of the sword and be taken away as captives among all

178

LUKE 179

nations; and Jerusalem will be trampled on by the Gentiles, until the
times of the Gentiles are fulfilled.
The coming of the Son of Man
25 "There will be signs in the sun, the moon, and the stars, and on the
earth distress among nations confused by the roaring of the sea and
the waves. 26 People will faint from fear and foreboding of what is
coming upon the world, for the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
27 Then they will see 'the Son of Man coming in a cloud' with power
and great glory. 28 Now when these things begin to take place, stand
up and raise your heads, because your redemption is drawing near."
The lesson of the fig tree
29 Then he told them a parable: "Look at the fig tree and all the trees;
30 as soon as they sprout leaves you can see for yourselves and know
that summer is already near. 31 So also, when you see these things
taking place, you know that the kingdom of God is near. 32 Truly I tell
you, this generation will not pass away until all things have taken
place. 33 Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass
away.
Admonition to alertness
34 "Be on guard so that your hearts are not weighed down with
dissipation and drunkenness and the worries of this life, and that day
does not catch you unexpectedly, 35 like a trap. For it will come upon
all who live on the face of the whole earth. 36 Be alert at all times,
praying that you may have the strength to escape all these things that
will take place, and to stand before the Son of Man."
Summary concerning Jesus' ministry in Jerusalem
37 Every day he was teaching in the temple, and at night he would go
out and spend the night on the Mount of Olives, as it was called. 38
And all the people would get up early in the morning to listen to him
in the temple.

179

LUKE 180

[Luke 22]
The Last Supper and Jesus' ministry in Jerusalem; the deadly
conspiracy against Jesus
1 Now the festival of Unleavened Bread, which is called the Passover,
was near. 2 The chief priests and the scribes were looking for a way to
put Jesus to death, for they were afraid of the people.
3 Then Satan entered into Judas called Iscariot, who was one of the
twelve; 4 he went away and conferred with the chief priests and
officers of the temple police about how he might betray him to them.
5 They were greatly pleased and agreed to give him money. 6 So he
consented and began to look for an opportunity to betray him to them
when no crowd was present.
Preparations for the Passover
7 Then came the day of Unleavened Bread, on which the Passover lamb
had to be sacrificed. 8 So Jesus sent Peter and John, saying, "Go and
prepare the Passover meal for us that we may eat it." 9 They asked
him, "Where do you want us to make preparations for it?" 10 "Listen,"
he said to them, "when you have entered the city, a man carrying a jar
of water will meet you; follow him into the house he enters 11 and say
to the owner of the house, 'The teacher asks you, "Where is the guest
room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?"' 12 He will
show you a large room upstairs, already furnished. Make preparations
for us there." 13 So they went and found everything as he had told
them; and they prepared the Passover meal.
The Last Supper; the foretelling of the betrayal
14 When the hour came, he took his place at the table, and the
apostles with him. 15 He said to them, "I have eagerly desired to eat
this Passover with you before I suffer; 16 for I tell you, I will not eat it
until it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God." 17 Then he took a cup, and
after giving thanks he said, "Take this and divide it among yourselves;
18 for I tell you that from now on I will not drink of the fruit of the
vine until the kingdom of God comes." 19 Then he took a loaf of bread,

180

LUKE 181

and when he had given thanks, he broke it and gave it to them, saying,
"This is my body, which is given for you. Do this in remembrance of
me." 20 And he did the same with the cup after supper, saying, "This
cup that is poured out for you is the new covenant in my blood. 21 But
see, the one who betrays me is with me, and his hand is on the table.
22 For the Son of Man is going as it has been determined, but woe to
that one by whom he is betrayed!" 23 Then they began to ask one
another which one of them it could be who would do this.
True discipleship
24 A dispute also arose among them as to which one of them was to be
regarded as the greatest. 25 But he said to them, "The kings of the
Gentiles lord it over them; and those in authority over them are called
benefactors. 26 But not so with you; rather the greatest among you
must become like the youngest, and the leader like one who serves. 27
For who is greater, the one who is at the table or the one who serves?
Is it not the one at the table? But I am among you as one who serves.
28 "You are those who have stood by me in my trials; 29 and I confer
on you, just as my Father has conferred on me, a kingdom, 30 so that
you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and you will sit on
thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
The foretelling of Peter's denial
31 "Simon, Simon, listen! Satan has demanded to sift all of you like
wheat, 32 but I have prayed for you that your own faith may not fail;
and you, when once you have turned back, strengthen your brothers."
33 And he said to him, "Lord, I am ready to go with you to prison and
to death!" 34 Jesus said, "I tell you, Peter, the cock will not crow this
day, until you have denied three times that you know me."
Sayings about the coming crisis
35 He said to them, "When I sent you out without a purse, bag, or
sandals, did you lack anything?" They said, "No, not a thing." 36 He
said to them, "But now, the one who has a purse must take it, and

181

LUKE 182

likewise a bag. And the one who has no sword must sell his cloak and
buy one. 37 For I tell you, this scripture must be fulfilled in me, 'And he
was counted among the lawless'; and indeed what is written about me
is being fulfilled." 38 They said, "Lord, look, here are two swords." He
replied, "It is enough."
Jesus' prayer on the Mount of Olives
39 He came out and went, as was his custom, to the Mount of Olives;
and the disciples followed him. 40 When he reached the place, he said
to them, "Pray that you may not come into the time of trial." 41 Then
he withdrew from them about a stone's throw, knelt down, and
prayed, 42 "Father, if you are willing, remove this cup from me; yet,
not my will but yours be done." [[43 Then an angel from heaven
appeared to him and gave him strength. 44 In his anguish he prayed
more earnestly, and his sweat became like great drops of blood falling
down on the ground.]] 45 When he got up from prayer, he came to the
disciples and found them sleeping because of grief, 46 and he said to
them, "Why are you sleeping? Get up and pray that you may not come
into the time of trial."
The betrayal and arrest of Jesus
47 While he was still speaking, suddenly a crowd came, and the one
called Judas, one of the twelve, was leading them. He approached
Jesus to kiss him; 48 but Jesus said to him, "Judas, is it with a kiss that
you are betraying the Son of Man?" 49 When those who were around
him saw what was coming, they asked, "Lord, should we strike with
the sword?" 50 Then one of them struck the slave of the high priest
and cut off his right ear. 51 But Jesus said, "No more of this!" And he
touched his ear and healed him. 52 Then Jesus said to the chief priests,
the officers of the temple police, and the elders who had come for him,
"Have you come out with swords and clubs as if I were a bandit? 53
When I was with you day after day in the temple, you did not lay hands
on me. But this is your hour, and the power of darkness!"

182

LUKE 183

Peter's denials
54 Then they seized him and led him away, bringing him into the high
priest's house. But Peter was following at a distance. 55 When they had
kindled a fire in the middle of the courtyard and sat down together,
Peter sat among them. 56 Then a servant-girl, seeing him in the
firelight, stared at him and said, "This man also was with him." 57 But
he denied it, saying, "Woman, I do not know him." 58 A little later
someone else, on seeing him, said, "You also are one of them." But
Peter said, "Man, I am not!" 59 Then about an hour later still another
kept insisting, "Surely this man also was with him; for he is a Galilean."
60 But Peter said, "Man, I do not know what you are talking about!"
At that moment, while he was still speaking, the cock crowed. 61 The
Lord turned and looked at Peter. Then Peter remembered the word of
the Lord, how he had said to him, "Before the cock crows today, you
will deny me three times." 62 And he went out and wept bitterly.
The mockery of Jesus
63 Now the men who were holding Jesus began to mock him and beat
him; 64 they also blindfolded him and kept asking him, "Prophesy!
Who is it that struck you?" 65 They kept heaping many other insults on
him.
Jesus before the council
66 When day came, the assembly of the elders of the people, both
chief priests and scribes, gathered together, and they brought him to
their council. 67 They said, "If you are the Messiah, tell us." He replied,
"If I tell you, you will not believe; 68 and if I question you, you will not
answer. 69 But from now on the Son of Man will be seated at the right
hand of the power of God." 70 All of them asked, "Are you, then, the
Son of God?" He said to them, "You say that I am." 71 Then they said,
"What further testimony do we need? We have heard it ourselves from
his own lips!"

183

LUKE 184

[Luke 23]
Jesus before Pilate
1 Then the assembly rose as a body and brought Jesus before Pilate. 2
They began to accuse him, saying, "We found this man perverting our
nation, forbidding us to pay taxes to the emperor, and saying that he
himself is the Messiah, a king." 3 Then Pilate asked him, "Are you the
king of the Jews?" He answered, "You say so." 4 Then Pilate said to the
chief priests and the crowds, "I find no basis for an accusation against
this man." 5 But they were insistent and said, "He stirs up the people
by teaching throughout all Judea, from Galilee where he began even
to this place."
Jesus before Herod
6 When Pilate heard this, he asked whether the man was a Galilean. 7
And when he learned that he was under Herod's jurisdiction, he sent
him off to Herod, who was himself in Jerusalem at that time. 8 When
Herod saw Jesus, he was very glad, for he had been wanting to see him
for a long time, because he had heard about him and was hoping to
see him perform some sign. 9 He questioned him at some length, but
Jesus gave him no answer. 10 The chief priests and the scribes stood by,
vehemently accusing him. 11 Even Herod with his soldiers treated him
with contempt and mocked him; then he put an elegant robe on him,
and sent him back to Pilate. 12 That same day Herod and Pilate became
friends with each other; before this they had been enemies.
Pilate's declaration of Jesus' innocence
13 Pilate then called together the chief priests, the leaders, and the
people, 14 and said to them, "You brought me this man as one who
was perverting the people; and here I have examined him in your
presence and have not found this man guilty of any of your charges
against him. 15 Neither has Herod, for he sent him back to us. Indeed,
he has done nothing to deserve death. 16 I will therefore have him
flogged and release him."

184

LUKE 185

The sentencing of Jesus to death
18 Then they all shouted out together, "Away with this fellow! Release
Barabbas for us!" 19 (This was a man who had been put in prison for an
insurrection that had taken place in the city, and for murder.) 20 Pilate,
wanting to release Jesus, addressed them again; 21 but they kept
shouting, "Crucify, crucify him!" 22 A third time he said to them, "Why,
what evil has he done? I have found in him no ground for the sentence
of death; I will therefore have him flogged and then release him." 23
But they kept urgently demanding with loud shouts that he should be
crucified; and their voices prevailed. 24 So Pilate gave his verdict that
their demand should be granted. 25 He released the man they asked
for, the one who had been put in prison for insurrection and murder,
and he handed Jesus over as they wished.
On the way to the cross
26 As they led him away, they seized a man, Simon of Cyrene, who was
coming from the country, and they laid the cross on him, and made
him carry it behind Jesus. 27 A great number of the people followed
him, and among them were women who were beating their breasts
and wailing for him. 28 But Jesus turned to them and said, "Daughters
of Jerusalem, do not weep for me, but weep for yourselves and for
your children. 29 For the days are surely coming when they will say,
'Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bore, and the
breasts that never nursed.' 30 Then they will begin to say to the
mountains, 'Fall on us'; and to the hills, 'Cover us.' 31 For if they do this
when the wood is green, what will happen when it is dry?"
Jesus' exchange with the two criminals; the scene of the crucifixion
32 Two others also, who were criminals, were led away to be put to
death with him. 33 When they came to the place that is called The
Skull, they crucified Jesus there with the criminals, one on his right and
one on his left. [[34 Then Jesus said, "Father, forgive them; for they do
not know what they are doing."]] And they cast lots to divide his
clothing. 35 And the people stood by, watching; but the leaders
scoffed at him, saying, "He saved others; let him save himself if he is

185

LUKE 186

the Messiah of God, his chosen one!" 36 The soldiers also mocked him,
coming up and offering him sour wine, 37 and saying, "If you are the
King of the Jews, save yourself!" 38 There was also an inscription over
him, "This is the King of the Jews."
39 One of the criminals who were hanged there kept deriding him and
saying, "Are you not the Messiah? Save yourself and us!" 40 But the
other rebuked him, saying, "Do you not fear God, since you are under
the same sentence of condemnation? 41 And we indeed have been
condemned justly, for we are getting what we deserve for our deeds,
but this man has done nothing wrong." 42 Then he said, "Jesus,
remember me when you come into your kingdom." 43 He replied,
"Truly I tell you, today you will be with me in Paradise."
The death and burial of Jesus
44 It was now about noon, and darkness came over the whole land
until three in the afternoon, 45 while the sun's light failed; and the
curtain of the temple was torn in two. 46 Then Jesus, crying with a
loud voice, said, "Father, into your hands I commend my spirit." Having
said this, he breathed his last. 47 When the centurion saw what had
taken place, he praised God and said, "Certainly this man was
innocent." 48 And when all the crowds who had gathered there for
this spectacle saw what had taken place, they returned home, beating
their breasts. 49 But all his acquaintances, including the women who
had followed him from Galilee, stood at a distance, watching these
things.
50 Now there was a good and righteous man named Joseph, who,
though a member of the council, 51 had not agreed to their plan and
action. He came from the Jewish town of Arimathea, and he was
waiting expectantly for the kingdom of God. 52 This man went to
Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus. 53 Then he took it down,
wrapped it in a linen cloth, and laid it in a rock-hewn tomb where no
one had ever been laid. 54 It was the day of Preparation, and the
sabbath was beginning. 55 The women who had come with him from
Galilee followed, and they saw the tomb and how his body was laid. 56
Then they returned, and prepared spices and ointments.

186

LUKE 187

On the sabbath they rested according to the commandment.
[Luke 24]
The empty tomb and the resurrection; the women at the tomb
1 But on the first day of the week, at early dawn, they came to the
tomb, taking the spices that they had prepared. 2 They found the stone
rolled away from the tomb, 3 but when they went in, they did not find
the body. 4 While they were perplexed about this, suddenly two men
in dazzling clothes stood beside them. 5 The women were terrified and
bowed their faces to the ground, but the men said to them, "Why do
you look for the living among the dead? He is not here, but has risen. 6
Remember how he told you, while he was still in Galilee, 7 that the Son
of Man must be handed over to sinners, and be crucified, and on the
third day rise again." 8 Then they remembered his words, 9 and
returning from the tomb, they told all this to the eleven and to all the
rest. 10 Now it was Mary Magdalene, Joanna, Mary the mother of
James, and the other women with them who told this to the apostles.
11 But these words seemed to them an idle tale, and they did not
believe them. 12 But Peter got up and ran to the tomb; stooping and
looking in, he saw the linen cloths by themselves; then he went home,
amazed at what had happened.
The Emmaus incident
13 Now on that same day two of them were going to a village called
Emmaus, about seven miles from Jerusalem, 14 and talking with each
other about all these things that had happened. 15 While they were
talking and discussing, Jesus himself came near and went with them, 16
but their eyes were kept from recognizing him. 17 And he said to them,
"What are you discussing with each other while you walk along?" They
stood still, looking sad. 18 Then one of them, whose name was Cleopas,
answered him, "Are you the only stranger in Jerusalem who does not
know the things that have taken place there in these days?" 19 He
asked them, "What things?" They replied, "The things about Jesus of
Nazareth, who was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God
and all the people, 20 and how our chief priests and leaders handed
him over to be condemned to death and crucified him. 21 But we had

187

LUKE 188

hoped that he was the one to redeem Israel. Yes, and besides all this, it
is now the third day since these things took place. 22 Moreover, some
women of our group astounded us. They were at the tomb early this
morning, 23 and when they did not find his body there, they came back
and told us that they had indeed seen a vision of angels who said that
he was alive. 24 Some of those who were with us went to the tomb
and found it just as the women had said; but they did not see him." 25
Then he said to them, "Oh, how foolish you are, and how slow of heart
to believe all that the prophets have declared! 26 Was it not necessary
that the Messiah should suffer these things and then enter into his
glory?" 27 Then beginning with Moses and all the prophets, he
interpreted to them the things about himself in all the scriptures.
28 As they came near the village to which they were going, he walked
ahead as if he were going on. 29 But they urged him strongly, saying,
"Stay with us, because it is almost evening and the day is now nearly
over." So he went in to stay with them. 30 When he was at the table
with them, he took bread, blessed and broke it, and gave it to them. 31
Then their eyes were opened, and they recognized him; and he
vanished from their sight. 32 They said to each other, "Were not our
hearts burning within us while he was talking to us on the road, while
he was opening the scriptures to us?" 33 That same hour they got up
and returned to Jerusalem; and they found the eleven and their
companions gathered together. 34 They were saying, "The Lord has
risen indeed, and he has appeared to Simon!" 35 Then they told what
had happened on the road, and how he had been made known to
them in the breaking of the bread.
Jesus' appearance to his disciples
36 While they were talking about this, Jesus himself stood among them
and said to them, "Peace be with you." 37 They were startled and
terrified, and thought that they were seeing a ghost. 38 He said to
them, "Why are you frightened, and why do doubts arise in your
hearts? 39 Look at my hands and my feet; see that it is I myself. Touch
me and see; for a ghost does not have flesh and bones as you see that I
have." 40 And when he had said this, he showed them his hands and
his feet. 41 While in their joy they were disbelieving and still

188

LUKE 189

wondering, he said to them, "Have you anything here to eat?" 42 They
gave him a piece of broiled fish, 43 and he took it and ate in their
presence.
Jesus' final words and withdrawal into heaven
44 Then he said to them, "These are my words that I spoke to you
while I was still with you — that everything written about me in the
law of Moses, the prophets, and the psalms must be fulfilled." 45 Then
he opened their minds to understand the scriptures, 46 and he said to
them, "Thus it is written, that the Messiah is to suffer and to rise from
the dead on the third day, 47 and that repentance and forgiveness of
sins is to be proclaimed in his name to all nations, beginning from
Jerusalem. 48 You are witnesses of these things. 49 And see, I am
sending upon you what my Father promised; so stay here in the city
until you have been clothed with power from on high."
50 Then he led them out as far as Bethany, and, lifting up his hands, he
blessed them. 51 While he was blessing them, he withdrew from them
and was carried up into heaven. 52 And they worshiped him, and
returned to Jerusalem with great joy; 53 and they were continually in
the temple blessing God.

189

JOHN 190

JOHN
Introduction
The prologue of the Fourth Gospel (1.1-18), long recognized as the
introduction to and summary of the Gospel's main concerns and
emphases, takes pains not only to acknowledge Jesus as a human
being, but as a social being as well when it proclaims, "The Word
became flesh and lived among us" (1.14). Any effort to understand the
Fourth Gospel must take this central pronouncement as a major point
of interpretive entry. For although it speaks in a mystical tone that is
meant to convey the unique relationship to God and solitary grandeur
of the person of Jesus, the Fourth Gospel treats with equal gravity the
"fleshly" nature of Jesus as it critiques the social relations and
structures of the world that Jesus confronts. Thus even as it presents
Jesus as the incarnate Word of God, the Fourth Gospel is also the story
of Jesus as flesh and blood. Indeed, a careful reading reveals its focus
to be precisely the doings of "flesh" in the "world" (1.10), that is, the
activities of Jesus and the individual and collective responses to them.
In telling the story of Jesus the author symbolically uses a number of
terms drawn from common experience — bread, water, light, life,
word, shepherd, door, way — to make the significance of Jesus both
clear and gripping. After the prologue (1.1-1.18), the Gospel presents
the public ministry of Jesus as both the object of faith (1.19-4.54) and
the object of persecution and unbelief (chs 5-12), depicts his ministry to
the disciples in the upper room (chs 13-17), narrates his death and
resurrection (chs 18-20), and concludes with an epilogue (ch 21). The
following division is suggested by the Gospel itself: the prologue (1.11.18); the book of Jesus' signs that his is the revelation of the Father
(1.19-12.50); the book of Jesus' glory as it is revealed through his
crucifixion, resurrection, and ascension to those that accept him (13.120.31); the epilogue, which contains accounts of Jesus' post-resurrection
appearances (21.1-25).
190

JOHN 191

The major concerns of the Gospel are engendering faith in the person
of Jesus (20.21) and discrediting the Temple-centered, hereditary
religious authorities who present a collective obstacle to the
acceptance of faith in Jesus (1.14; 9.22-23). Its attempts to engender
faith in Jesus are seen in its presentation of him as the incarnate Word
(1.1), the only begotten Son (3.16, 18), the messiah (1.41), the Holy One
of God (6.69), the King of Israel 1.49), its portrayal of him as totally in
control of his life as well as in his death (18.12; 19.30), and its use as a
term of self-description the Greek phrase "ego eimi" ("I am") without
a predicate, which is reminiscent of God's self-reference in Ex 3.14; Isa
41.4; 43.10; 46.4. Its concern to discredit the religious authorities, whom
it calls "the Jews," is effectuated by portraying them as mercenary and
uncaring shepherds (10.12-13), as haughty and condescending to the
people *7.15, 49; 9.34), as being more concerned with worldly acclaim
than divine favor (12.43), and as betrayers of Jesus (11.53). In addition to
its usage as cited above, in many instances its repeated use of "ego
eimi" with a predicate contrasts Jesus with the religious authorities ("I
am") or portrays him as replacing some aspect of established firstcentury Judaism. Even further, it presents him as embodying basic
elements of the natural world, such as light (8.12) and life itself (11.25).
This replacement or embodying motif is employed in other instances,
such as the depiction of Jesus as replacing the Temple and the Passover
(6.1-4), and serves to strengthen the Gospel's emphasis on the
incarnation.
Although its scathing portrayal of "the Jews" has opened it to charges
of anti-Semitism, a careful reading of the Gospel reveals "the Jews" to
be a class designation, not a religious or ethnic grouping; rather than
denoting adherents to Judaism in general, the term primarily refers to
the hereditary Temple religious authorities. The Gospel further
acknowledges their influential status by including among "the Jews"
those who have accepted the worldview and class interests of the
hereditary religious authorities as their own. This larger group includes
the Pharisees (1.19, 24) and even the "crowd" of laypersons whose
worth the religious authorities dismissed (7.49; cf. 6.22, 41). Thus the
rejection and persecution of Jesus by "the Jews" is seen to be not only
the result of what he says and does, but because his healings, his

191

JOHN 192

pronouncements, and his earthly person lack the pedigree and
imprimatur of the religious elite (7.15, 48-49; cf. 9.34).
Several factors in the Fourth Gospel's attention to detail in the story of
the fleshly Jesus suggest that it incorporates a much earlier tradition.
Current scholarly consensus dates the final editing o the Gospel in 8090 CE. The bitter and combative tone with which the Gospel discredits
"the Jews" and its angry demonizing of them, as in 8.44, for instance,
indicates opposition to a dominant group with the power to determine
who is to be accepted in the Jewish community by anathematizing and
expelling from Judaism those who challenge the dominant group's
authority (9.22; 12.42). The powerful Temple hierarchy, in effect, ceased
to exist in 70 CE with the destruction of the Jerusalem Temple.
Moreover, the portrayal of Jesus as replacing the Temple may suggest
that the Temple still stands as the center of Judaism (5.2), even as it
repeats longstanding critiques of the Temple that prophesy its
destruction (2.19; 4.21). Once the Temple and its hierarchy were no
longer in existence, this polemic was transferred to local opponents of
Christian believers. The "Jews" are equated with "the world" (16.1-4).
Finally, recent archaeological finds indicate that the Fourth Gospel
contains accurate details about the Jerusalem Temple and its environs
prior to 70 CE (e.g., 9.7; 10.22-23; 19.13). Together these factors suggest
a possible alternate date for the earliest version of the Gospel material
before 70 CE. Although the theological complexity and high
christology, especially in chs 14-17, could indicate a longer period of
theological gestation and symbolic development (and this is the view
of most scholars), similarly developed views are found in such early
New Testament writings as Paul's letter to the Romans. Although some
scholars deny any dependence of the Fourth Gospel upon the Synoptic
Gospels, most scholars accept the Fourth Gospel's dependence upon
the Synoptics; at the least, they hold that its author was aware of
them.
Who wrote this Gospel? Tradition says it was the apostle John.
Scholarly opinion has long held that it was composed by a disciple of
John who recorded his preaching. The epilogue speaks of an
anonymous, loyal Jerusalem disciple of Jesus, called "the disciple whom

192

JOHN 193

Jesus loved" (20.2; see 13.23; 19.26; 21.7,20), as the source of this unique
understanding of Jesus.

[John 1]
The prologue
1 In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God. 2 He was in the beginning with God. 3 All things came
into being through him, and without him not one thing came into
being. What has come into being 4 in him was life, and the life was the
light of all people. 5 The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness
did not overcome it.
6 There was a man sent from God, whose name was John. 7 He came as
a witness to testify to the light, so that all might believe through him.
8 He himself was not the light, but he came to testify to the light. 9
The true light, which enlightens everyone, was coming into the world.
10 He was in the world, and the world came into being through him;
yet the world did not know him. 11 He came to what was his own, and
his own people did not accept him. 12 But to all who received him, who
believed in his name, he gave power to become children of God, 13
who were born, not of blood or of the will of the flesh or of the will of
man, but of God.
14 And the Word became flesh and lived among us, and we have seen
his glory, the glory as of a father's only son, full of grace and truth. 15
(John testified to him and cried out, "This was he of whom I said, 'He
who comes after me ranks ahead of me because he was before me.'")
16 From his fullness we have all received, grace upon grace. 17 The law
indeed was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus
Christ. 18 No one has ever seen God. It is God the only Son, who is close
to the Father's heart, who has made him known.

193

JOHN 194

The testimony of John the Baptist
19 This is the testimony given by John when the Jews sent priests and
Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, "Who are you?" 20 He confessed
and did not deny it, but confessed, "I am not the Messiah." 21 And they
asked him, "What then? Are you Elijah?" He said, "I am not." "Are you
the prophet?" He answered, "No." 22 Then they said to him, "Who are
you? Let us have an answer for those who sent us. What do you say
about yourself?" 23 He said,
"I am the voice of one crying out in the wilderness,
'Make straight the way of the Lord,'"
as the prophet Isaiah said.
24 Now they had been sent from the Pharisees. 25 They asked him,
"Why then are you baptizing if you are neither the Messiah, nor Elijah,
nor the prophet?" 26 John answered them, "I baptize with water.
Among you stands one whom you do not know, 27 the one who is
coming after me; I am not worthy to untie the thong of his sandal." 28
This took place in Bethany across the Jordan where John was baptizing.
29 The next day he saw Jesus coming toward him and declared, "Here
is the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world! 30 This is he
of whom I said, 'After me comes a man who ranks ahead of me
because he was before me.' 31 I myself did not know him; but I came
baptizing with water for this reason, that he might be revealed to
Israel." 32 And John testified, "I saw the Spirit descending from heaven
like a dove, and it remained on him. 33 I myself did not know him, but
the one who sent me to baptize with water said to me, 'He on whom
you see the Spirit descend and remain is the one who baptizes with the
Holy Spirit.' 34 And I myself have seen and have testified that this is the
Son of God."
35 The next day John again was standing with two of his disciples, 36
and as he watched Jesus walk by, he exclaimed, "Look, here is the
Lamb of God!" 37 The two disciples heard him say this, and they
followed Jesus. 38 When Jesus turned and saw them following, he said
to them, "What are you looking for?" They said to him, "Rabbi" (which
translated means Teacher), "where are you staying?" 39 He said to

194

JOHN 195

them, "Come and see." They came and saw where he was staying, and
they remained with him that day. It was about four o'clock in the
afternoon. 40 One of the two who heard John speak and followed him
was Andrew, Simon Peter's brother. 41 He first found his brother Simon
and said to him, "We have found the Messiah" (which is translated
Anointed). 42 He brought Simon to Jesus, who looked at him and said,
"You are Simon son of John. You are to be called Cephas" (which is
translated Peter).
43 The next day Jesus decided to go to Galilee. He found Philip and
said to him, "Follow me." 44 Now Philip was from Bethsaida, the city of
Andrew and Peter. 45 Philip found Nathanael and said to him, "We
have found him about whom Moses in the law and also the prophets
wrote, Jesus son of Joseph from Nazareth." 46 Nathanael said to him,
"Can anything good come out of Nazareth?" Philip said to him, "Come
and see." 47 When Jesus saw Nathanael coming toward him, he said of
him, "Here is truly an Israelite in whom there is no deceit!" 48
Nathanael asked him, "Where did you get to know me?" Jesus
answered, "I saw you under the fig tree before Philip called you." 49
Nathanael replied, "Rabbi, you are the Son of God! You are the King
of Israel!" 50 Jesus answered, "Do you believe because I told you that I
saw you under the fig tree? You will see greater things than these." 51
And he said to him, "Very truly, I tell you, you will see heaven opened
and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of
Man."
[John 2]
The wedding at Cana
1 On the third day there was a wedding in Cana of Galilee, and the
mother of Jesus was there. 2 Jesus and his disciples had also been
invited to the wedding. 3 When the wine gave out, the mother of Jesus
said to him, "They have no wine." 4 And Jesus said to her, "Woman,
what concern is that to you and to me? My hour has not yet come." 5
His mother said to the servants, "Do whatever he tells you." 6 Now
standing there were six stone water jars for the Jewish rites of
purification, each holding twenty or thirty gallons. 7 Jesus said to them,
"Fill the jars with water." And they filled them up to the brim. 8 He

195

JOHN 196

said to them, "Now draw some out, and take it to the chief steward."
So they took it. 9 When the steward tasted the water that had become
wine, and did not know where it came from (though the servants who
had drawn the water knew), the steward called the bridegroom 10 and
said to him, "Everyone serves the good wine first, and then the inferior
wine after the guests have become drunk. But you have kept the good
wine until now." 11 Jesus did this, the first of his signs, in Cana of
Galilee, and revealed his glory; and his disciples believed in him.
12 After this he went down to Capernaum with his mother, his
brothers, and his disciples; and they remained there a few days.
The demonstration against corruption in the Temple
13 The Passover of the Jews was near, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
14 In the temple he found people selling cattle, sheep, and doves, and
the money changers seated at their tables. 15 Making a whip of cords,
he drove all of them out of the temple, both the sheep and the cattle.
He also poured out the coins of the money changers and overturned
their tables. 16 He told those who were selling the doves, "Take these
things out of here! Stop making my Father's house a marketplace!" 17
His disciples remembered that it was written, "Zeal for your house will
consume me." 18 The Jews then said to him, "What sign can you show
us for doing this?" 19 Jesus answered them, "Destroy this temple, and
in three days I will raise it up." 20 The Jews then said, "This temple has
been under construction for forty-six years, and will you raise it up in
three days?" 21 But he was speaking of the temple of his body. 22 After
he was raised from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said
this; and they believed the scripture and the word that Jesus had
spoken.
23 When he was in Jerusalem during the Passover festival, many
believed in his name because they saw the signs that he was doing. 24
But Jesus on his part would not entrust himself to them, because he
knew all people 25 and needed no one to testify about anyone; for he
himself knew what was in everyone.

196

JOHN 197

[John 3]
Jesus and the religious authorities
1 Now there was a Pharisee named Nicodemus, a leader of the Jews. 2
He came to Jesus by night and said to him, "Rabbi, we know that you
are a teacher who has come from God; for no one can do these signs
that you do apart from the presence of God." 3 Jesus answered him,
"Very truly, I tell you, no one can see the kingdom of God without
being born from above." 4 Nicodemus said to him, "How can anyone
be born after having grown old? Can one enter a second time into the
mother's womb and be born?" 5 Jesus answered, "Very truly, I tell you,
no one can enter the kingdom of God without being born of water
and Spirit. 6 What is born of the flesh is flesh, and what is born of the
Spirit is spirit. 7 Do not be astonished that I said to you, 'You must be
born from above.' 8 The wind blows where it chooses, and you hear
the sound of it, but you do not know where it comes from or where it
goes. So it is with everyone who is born of the Spirit." 9 Nicodemus
said to him, "How can these things be?" 10 Jesus answered him, "Are
you a teacher of Israel, and yet you do not understand these things?
11 "Very truly, I tell you, we speak of what we know and testify to what
we have seen; yet you do not receive our testimony. 12 If I have told
you about earthly things and you do not believe, how can you believe
if I tell you about heavenly things? 13 No one has ascended into heaven
except the one who descended from heaven, the Son of Man. 14 And
just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of
Man be lifted up, 15 that whoever believes in him may have eternal
life.
16 "For God so loved the world that he gave his only Son, so that
everyone who believes in him may not perish but may have eternal life.
17 "Indeed, God did not send the Son into the world to condemn the
world, but in order that the world might be saved through him. 18
Those who believe in him are not condemned; but those who do not
believe are condemned already, because they have not believed in the
name of the only Son of God. 19 And this is the judgment, that the
light has come into the world, and people loved darkness rather than

197

JOHN 198

light because their deeds were evil. 20 For all who do evil hate the light
and do not come to the light, so that their deeds may not be exposed.
21 But those who do what is true come to the light, so that it may be
clearly seen that their deeds have been done in God."
Further testimony of John the Baptist
22 After this Jesus and his disciples went into the Judean countryside,
and he spent some time there with them and baptized. 23 John also
was baptizing at Aenon near Salim because water was abundant there;
and people kept coming and were being baptized 24 — John, of
course, had not yet been thrown into prison.
25 Now a discussion about purification arose between John's disciples
and a Jew. 26 They came to John and said to him, "Rabbi, the one who
was with you across the Jordan, to whom you testified, here he is
baptizing, and all are going to him." 27 John answered, "No one can
receive anything except what has been given from heaven. 28 You
yourselves are my witnesses that I said, 'I am not the Messiah, but I
have been sent ahead of him.' 29 He who has the bride is the
bridegroom. The friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him,
rejoices greatly at the bridegroom's voice. For this reason my joy has
been fulfilled. 30 He must increase, but I must decrease."
31 The one who comes from above is above all; the one who is of the
earth belongs to the earth and speaks about earthly things. The one
who comes from heaven is above all. 32 He testifies to what he has
seen and heard, yet no one accepts his testimony. 33 Whoever has
accepted his testimony has certified this, that God is true. 34 He whom
God has sent speaks the words of God, for he gives the Spirit without
measure. 35 The Father loves the Son and has placed all things in his
hands. 36 Whoever believes in the Son has eternal life; whoever
disobeys the Son will not see life, but must endure God's wrath.

198

JOHN 199

[John 4]
Jesus and the Samaritans
1 Now when Jesus learned that the Pharisees had heard, "Jesus is
making and baptizing more disciples than John" 2 — although it was
not Jesus himself but his disciples who baptized — 3 he left Judea and
started back to Galilee. 4 But he had to go through Samaria. 5 So he
came to a Samaritan city called Sychar, near the plot of ground that
Jacob had given to his son Joseph. 6 Jacob's well was there, and Jesus,
tired out by his journey, was sitting by the well. It was about noon.
7 A Samaritan woman came to draw water, and Jesus said to her, "Give
me a drink." 8 (His disciples had gone to the city to buy food.) 9 The
Samaritan woman said to him, "How is it that you, a Jew, ask a drink of
me, a woman of Samaria?" (Jews do not share things in common with
Samaritans.) 10 Jesus answered her, "If you knew the gift of God, and
who it is that is saying to you, 'Give me a drink,' you would have asked
him, and he would have given you living water." 11 The woman said to
him, "Sir, you have no bucket, and the well is deep. Where do you get
that living water? 12 Are you greater than our ancestor Jacob, who
gave us the well, and with his sons and his flocks drank from it?" 13
Jesus said to her, "Everyone who drinks of this water will be thirsty
again, 14 but those who drink of the water that I will give them will
never be thirsty. The water that I will give will become in them a spring
of water gushing up to eternal life." 15 The woman said to him, "Sir,
give me this water, so that I may never be thirsty or have to keep
coming here to draw water."
16 Jesus said to her, "Go, call your husband, and come back." 17 The
woman answered him, "I have no husband." Jesus said to her, "You
are right in saying, 'I have no husband'; 18 for you have had five
husbands, and the one you have now is not your husband. What you
have said is true!" 19 The woman said to him, "Sir, I see that you are a
prophet. 20 Our ancestors worshiped on this mountain, but you say
that the place where people must worship is in Jerusalem." 21 Jesus
said to her, "Woman, believe me, the hour is coming when you will
worship the Father neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem. 22 You
worship what you do not know; we worship what we know, for

199

JOHN 200

salvation is from the Jews. 23 But the hour is coming, and is now here,
when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and truth,
for the Father seeks such as these to worship him. 24 God is spirit, and
those who worship him must worship in spirit and truth." 25 The
woman said to him, "I know that Messiah is coming" (who is called
Christ). "When he comes, he will proclaim all things to us." 26 Jesus
said to her, "I am he, the one who is speaking to you."
27 Just then his disciples came. They were astonished that he was
speaking with a woman, but no one said, "What do you want?" or,
"Why are you speaking with her?" 28 Then the woman left her water
jar and went back to the city. She said to the people, 29 "Come and see
a man who told me everything I have ever done! He cannot be the
Messiah, can he?" 30 They left the city and were on their way to him.
31 Meanwhile the disciples were urging him, "Rabbi, eat something."
32 But he said to them, "I have food to eat that you do not know
about." 33 So the disciples said to one another, "Surely no one has
brought him something to eat?" 34 Jesus said to them, "My food is to
do the will of him who sent me and to complete his work. 35 Do you
not say, 'Four months more, then comes the harvest'? But I tell you,
look around you, and see how the fields are ripe for harvesting. 36 The
reaper is already receiving wages and is gathering fruit for eternal life,
so that sower and reaper may rejoice together. 37 For here the saying
holds true, 'One sows and another reaps.' 38 I sent you to reap that for
which you did not labor. Others have labored, and you have entered
into their labor."
39 Many Samaritans from that city believed in him because of the
woman's testimony, "He told me everything I have ever done." 40 So
when the Samaritans came to him, they asked him to stay with them;
and he stayed there two days. 41 And many more believed because of
his word. 42 They said to the woman, "It is no longer because of what
you said that we believe, for we have heard for ourselves, and we
know that this is truly the Savior of the world."

200

JOHN 201

Healing of the official's son
43 When the two days were over, he went from that place to Galilee 44
(for Jesus himself had testified that a prophet has no honor in the
prophet's own country). 45 When he came to Galilee, the Galileans
welcomed him, since they had seen all that he had done in Jerusalem
at the festival; for they too had gone to the festival.
46 Then he came again to Cana in Galilee where he had changed the
water into wine. Now there was a royal official whose son lay ill in
Capernaum. 47 When he heard that Jesus had come from Judea to
Galilee, he went and begged him to come down and heal his son, for
he was at the point of death. 48 Then Jesus said to him, "Unless you
see signs and wonders you will not believe." 49 The official said to him,
"Sir, come down before my little boy dies." 50 Jesus said to him, "Go;
your son will live." The man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him
and started on his way. 51 As he was going down, his slaves met him
and told him that his child was alive. 52 So he asked them the hour
when he began to recover, and they said to him, "Yesterday at one in
the afternoon the fever left him." 53 The father realized that this was
the hour when Jesus had said to him, "Your son will live." So he
himself believed, along with his whole household. 54 Now this was the
second sign that Jesus did after coming from Judea to Galilee.
[John 5]
Healing the lame man on the sabbath
1 After this there was a festival of the Jews, and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem.
2 Now in Jerusalem by the Sheep Gate there is a pool, called in Hebrew
Beth-zatha, which has five porticoes. 3 In these lay many invalids —
blind, lame, and paralyzed. 5 One man was there who had been ill for
thirty-eight years. 6 When Jesus saw him lying there and knew that he
had been there a long time, he said to him, "Do you want to be made
well?" 7 The sick man answered him, "Sir, I have no one to put me into
the pool when the water is stirred up; and while I am making my way,
someone else steps down ahead of me." 8 Jesus said to him, "Stand up,

201

JOHN 202

take your mat and walk." 9 At once the man was made well, and he
took up his mat and began to walk.
Now that day was a sabbath. 10 So the Jews said to the man who had
been cured, "It is the sabbath; it is not lawful for you to carry your
mat." 11 But he answered them, "The man who made me well said to
me, 'Take up your mat and walk.'" 12 They asked him, "Who is the man
who said to you, 'Take it up and walk'?" 13 Now the man who had
been healed did not know who it was, for Jesus had disappeared in the
crowd that was there. 14 Later Jesus found him in the temple and said
to him, "See, you have been made well! Do not sin any more, so that
nothing worse happens to you." 15 The man went away and told the
Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well. 16 Therefore the Jews
started persecuting Jesus, because he was doing such things on the
sabbath. 17 But Jesus answered them, "My Father is still working, and I
also am working." 18 For this reason the Jews were seeking all the
more to kill him, because he was not only breaking the sabbath, but
was also calling God his own Father, thereby making himself equal to
God.
Jesus' relation to God
19 Jesus said to them, "Very truly, I tell you, the Son can do nothing on
his own, but only what he sees the Father doing; for whatever the
Father does, the Son does likewise. 20 The Father loves the Son and
shows him all that he himself is doing; and he will show him greater
works than these, so that you will be astonished. 21 Indeed, just as the
Father raises the dead and gives them life, so also the Son gives life to
whomever he wishes. 22 The Father judges no one but has given all
judgment to the Son, 23 so that all may honor the Son just as they
honor the Father. Anyone who does not honor the Son does not honor
the Father who sent him. 24 Very truly, I tell you, anyone who hears my
word and believes him who sent me has eternal life, and does not
come under judgment, but has passed from death to life.
25 "Very truly, I tell you, the hour is coming, and is now here, when the
dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who hear will
live. 26 For just as the Father has life in himself, so he has granted the

202

JOHN 203

Son also to have life in himself; 27 and he has given him authority to
execute judgment, because he is the Son of Man. 28 Do not be
astonished at this; for the hour is coming when all who are in their
graves will hear his voice 29 and will come out — those who have done
good, to the resurrection of life, and those who have done evil, to the
resurrection of condemnation.
30 "I can do nothing on my own. As I hear, I judge; and my judgment is
just, because I seek to do not my own will but the will of him who sent
me.
Evidence of Jesus' relationship to God
31 "If I testify about myself, my testimony is not true. 32 There is
another who testifies on my behalf, and I know that his testimony to
me is true. 33 You sent messengers to John, and he testified to the
truth. 34 Not that I accept such human testimony, but I say these things
so that you may be saved. 35 He was a burning and shining lamp, and
you were willing to rejoice for a while in his light. 36 But I have a
testimony greater than John's. The works that the Father has given me
to complete, the very works that I am doing, testify on my behalf that
the Father has sent me. 37 And the Father who sent me has himself
testified on my behalf. You have never heard his voice or seen his form,
38 and you do not have his word abiding in you, because you do not
believe him whom he has sent.
Jesus rebukes those who refuse his offer
39 "You search the scriptures because you think that in them you have
eternal life; and it is they that testify on my behalf. 40 Yet you refuse
to come to me to have life. 41 I do not accept glory from human
beings. 42 But I know that you do not have the love of God in you. 43 I
have come in my Father's name, and you do not accept me; if another
comes in his own name, you will accept him. 44 How can you believe
when you accept glory from one another and do not seek the glory
that comes from the one who alone is God? 45 Do not think that I will
accuse you before the Father; your accuser is Moses, on whom you
have set your hope. 46 If you believed Moses, you would believe me,

203

JOHN 204

for he wrote about me. 47 But if you do not believe what he wrote,
how will you believe what I say?"
[John 6]
Feeding the five thousand; Jesus replaces the Passover
1 After this Jesus went to the other side of the Sea of Galilee, also
called the Sea of Tiberias. 2 A large crowd kept following him, because
they saw the signs that he was doing for the sick. 3 Jesus went up the
mountain and sat down there with his disciples. 4 Now the Passover,
the festival of the Jews, was near. 5 When he looked up and saw a
large crowd coming toward him, Jesus said to Philip, "Where are we to
buy bread for these people to eat?" 6 He said this to test him, for he
himself knew what he was going to do. 7 Philip answered him, "Six
months' wages would not buy enough bread for each of them to get a
little." 8 One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, said to
him, 9 "There is a boy here who has five barley loaves and two fish. But
what are they among so many people?" 10 Jesus said, "Make the
people sit down." Now there was a great deal of grass in the place; so
they sat down, about five thousand in all. 11 Then Jesus took the
loaves, and when he had given thanks, he distributed them to those
who were seated; so also the fish, as much as they wanted. 12 When
they were satisfied, he told his disciples, "Gather up the fragments left
over, so that nothing may be lost." 13 So they gathered them up, and
from the fragments of the five barley loaves, left by those who had
eaten, they filled twelve baskets. 14 When the people saw the sign that
he had done, they began to say, "This is indeed the prophet who is to
come into the world."
15 When Jesus realized that they were about to come and take him by
force to make him king, he withdrew again to the mountain by
himself.
Jesus walks on the sea
16 When evening came, his disciples went down to the sea, 17 got into
a boat, and started across the sea to Capernaum. It was now dark, and
Jesus had not yet come to them. 18 The sea became rough because a

204

JOHN 205

strong wind was blowing. 19 When they had rowed about three or four
miles, they saw Jesus walking on the sea and coming near the boat,
and they were terrified. 20 But he said to them, "It is I; do not be
afraid." 21 Then they wanted to take him into the boat, and
immediately the boat reached the land toward which they were going.
Jesus, the bread of life
22 The next day the crowd that had stayed on the other side of the sea
saw that there had been only one boat there. They also saw that Jesus
had not got into the boat with his disciples, but that his disciples had
gone away alone. 23 Then some boats from Tiberias came near the
place where they had eaten the bread after the Lord had given thanks.
24 So when the crowd saw that neither Jesus nor his disciples were
there, they themselves got into the boats and went to Capernaum
looking for Jesus.
25 When they found him on the other side of the sea, they said to him,
"Rabbi, when did you come here?" 26 Jesus answered them, "Very
truly, I tell you, you are looking for me, not because you saw signs, but
because you ate your fill of the loaves. 27 Do not work for the food
that perishes, but for the food that endures for eternal life, which the
Son of Man will give you. For it is on him that God the Father has set
his seal." 28 Then they said to him, "What must we do to perform the
works of God?" 29 Jesus answered them, "This is the work of God, that
you believe in him whom he has sent." 30 So they said to him, "What
sign are you going to give us then, so that we may see it and believe
you? What work are you performing? 31 Our ancestors ate the manna
in the wilderness; as it is written, 'He gave them bread from heaven to
eat.'" 32 Then Jesus said to them, "Very truly, I tell you, it was not
Moses who gave you the bread from heaven, but it is my Father who
gives you the true bread from heaven. 33 For the bread of God is that
which comes down from heaven and gives life to the world." 34 They
said to him, "Sir, give us this bread always."
35 Jesus said to them, "I am the bread of life. Whoever comes to me
will never be hungry, and whoever believes in me will never be thirsty.
36 But I said to you that you have seen me and yet do not believe. 37

205

JOHN 206

Everything that the Father gives me will come to me, and anyone who
comes to me I will never drive away; 38 for I have come down from
heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him who sent me. 39
And this is the will of him who sent me, that I should lose nothing of
all that he has given me, but raise it up on the last day. 40 This is
indeed the will of my Father, that all who see the Son and believe in
him may have eternal life; and I will raise them up on the last day."
41 Then the Jews began to complain about him because he said, "I am
the bread that came down from heaven." 42 They were saying, "Is not
this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How
can he now say, 'I have come down from heaven'?" 43 Jesus answered
them, "Do not complain among yourselves. 44 No one can come to me
unless drawn by the Father who sent me; and I will raise that person up
on the last day. 45 It is written in the prophets, 'And they shall all be
taught by God.' Everyone who has heard and learned from the Father
comes to me. 46 Not that anyone has seen the Father except the one
who is from God; he has seen the Father. 47 Very truly, I tell you,
whoever believes has eternal life. 48 I am the bread of life. 49 Your
ancestors ate the manna in the wilderness, and they died. 50 This is the
bread that comes down from heaven, so that one may eat of it and not
die. 51 I am the living bread that came down from heaven. Whoever
eats of this bread will live forever; and the bread that I will give for the
life of the world is my flesh."
52 The Jews then disputed among themselves, saying, "How can this
man give us his flesh to eat?" 53 So Jesus said to them, "Very truly, I
tell you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood,
you have no life in you. 54 Those who eat my flesh and drink my blood
have eternal life, and I will raise them up on the last day; 55 for my
flesh is true food and my blood is true drink. 56 Those who eat my
flesh and drink my blood abide in me, and I in them. 57 Just as the
living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father, so whoever eats
me will live because of me. 58 This is the bread that came down from
heaven, not like that which your ancestors ate, and they died. But the
one who eats this bread will live forever." 59 He said these things while
he was teaching in the synagogue at Capernaum.

206

JOHN 207

60 When many of his disciples heard it, they said, "This teaching is
difficult; who can accept it?" 61 But Jesus, being aware that his
disciples were complaining about it, said to them, "Does this offend
you? 62 Then what if you were to see the Son of Man ascending to
where he was before? 63 It is the spirit that gives life; the flesh is
useless. The words that I have spoken to you are spirit and life. 64 But
among you there are some who do not believe." For Jesus knew from
the first who were the ones that did not believe, and who was the one
that would betray him. 65 And he said, "For this reason I have told you
that no one can come to me unless it is granted by the Father."
66 Because of this many of his disciples turned back and no longer
went about with him. 67 So Jesus asked the twelve, "Do you also wish
to go away?" 68 Simon Peter answered him, "Lord, to whom can we
go? You have the words of eternal life. 69 We have come to believe
and know that you are the Holy One of God." 70 Jesus answered them,
"Did I not choose you, the twelve? Yet one of you is a devil." 71 He was
speaking of Judas son of Simon Iscariot, for he, though one of the
twelve, was going to betray him.
[John 7]
The conflict between Jesus and the religious authorities escalates
1 After this Jesus went about in Galilee. He did not wish to go about in
Judea because the Jews were looking for an opportunity to kill him. 2
Now the Jewish festival of Booths was near. 3 So his brothers said to
him, "Leave here and go to Judea so that your disciples also may see
the works you are doing; 4 for no one who wants to be widely known
acts in secret. If you do these things, show yourself to the world." 5
(For not even his brothers believed in him.) 6 Jesus said to them, "My
time has not yet come, but your time is always here. 7 The world
cannot hate you, but it hates me because I testify against it that its
works are evil. 8 Go to the festival yourselves. I am not going to this
festival, for my time has not yet fully come." 9 After saying this, he
remained in Galilee.
10 But after his brothers had gone to the festival, then he also went,
not publicly but as it were in secret. 11 The Jews were looking for him

207

JOHN 208

at the festival and saying, "Where is he?" 12 And there was
considerable complaining about him among the crowds. While some
were saying, "He is a good man," others were saying, "No, he is
deceiving the crowd." 13 Yet no one would speak openly about him for
fear of the Jews.
14 About the middle of the festival Jesus went up into the temple and
began to teach. 15 The Jews were astonished at it, saying, "How does
this man have such learning, when he has never been taught?" 16 Then
Jesus answered them, "My teaching is not mine but his who sent me. 17
Anyone who resolves to do the will of God will know whether the
teaching is from God or whether I am speaking on my own. 18 Those
who speak on their own seek their own glory; but the one who seeks
the glory of him who sent him is true, and there is nothing false in him.
19 "Did not Moses give you the law? Yet none of you keeps the law.
Why are you looking for an opportunity to kill me?" 20 The crowd
answered, "You have a demon! Who is trying to kill you?" 21 Jesus
answered them, "I performed one work, and all of you are astonished.
22 Moses gave you circumcision (it is, of course, not from Moses, but
from the patriarchs), and you circumcise a man on the sabbath. 23 If a
man receives circumcision on the sabbath in order that the law of
Moses may not be broken, are you angry with me because I healed a
man's whole body on the sabbath? 24 Do not judge by appearances,
but judge with right judgment."
25 Now some of the people of Jerusalem were saying, "Is not this the
man whom they are trying to kill? 26 And here he is, speaking openly,
but they say nothing to him! Can it be that the authorities really know
that this is the Messiah? 27 Yet we know where this man is from; but
when the Messiah comes, no one will know where he is from." 28 Then
Jesus cried out as he was teaching in the temple, "You know me, and
you know where I am from. I have not come on my own. But the one
who sent me is true, and you do not know him. 29 I know him, because
I am from him, and he sent me." 30 Then they tried to arrest him, but
no one laid hands on him, because his hour had not yet come. 31 Yet
many in the crowd believed in him and were saying, "When the
Messiah comes, will he do more signs than this man has done?"

208

JOHN 209

32 The Pharisees heard the crowd muttering such things about him,
and the chief priests and Pharisees sent temple police to arrest him. 33
Jesus then said, "I will be with you a little while longer, and then I am
going to him who sent me. 34 You will search for me, but you will not
find me; and where I am, you cannot come." 35 The Jews said to one
another, "Where does this man intend to go that we will not find him?
Does he intend to go to the Dispersion among the Greeks and teach
the Greeks? 36 What does he mean by saying, 'You will search for me
and you will not find me' and 'Where I am, you cannot come'?"
37 On the last day of the festival, the great day, while Jesus was
standing there, he cried out, "Let anyone who is thirsty come to me, 38
and let the one who believes in me drink. As the scripture has said,
'Out of the believer's heart shall flow rivers of living water.'" 39 Now
he said this about the Spirit, which believers in him were to receive; for
as yet there was no Spirit, because Jesus was not yet glorified.
40 When they heard these words, some in the crowd said, "This is
really the prophet." 41 Others said, "This is the Messiah." But some
asked, "Surely the Messiah does not come from Galilee, does he? 42
Has not the scripture said that the Messiah is descended from David
and comes from Bethlehem, the village where David lived?" 43 So
there was a division in the crowd because of him. 44 Some of them
wanted to arrest him, but no one laid hands on him.
45 Then the temple police went back to the chief priests and Pharisees,
who asked them, "Why did you not arrest him?" 46 The police
answered, "Never has anyone spoken like this!" 47 Then the Pharisees
replied, "Surely you have not been deceived too, have you? 48 Has any
one of the authorities or of the Pharisees believed in him? 49 But this
crowd, which does not know the law — they are accursed." 50
Nicodemus, who had gone to Jesus before, and who was one of them,
asked, 51 "Our law does not judge people without first giving them a
hearing to find out what they are doing, does it?" 52 They replied,
"Surely you are not also from Galilee, are you? Search and you will see
that no prophet is to arise from Galilee."

209

JOHN 210

The woman caught in adultery
[[7:53 Then each of them went home, [John 8] 1 while Jesus went to the
Mount of Olives. 2 Early in the morning he came again to the temple.
All the people came to him and he sat down and began to teach them.
3 The scribes and the Pharisees brought a woman who had been
caught in adultery; and making her stand before all of them, 4 they
said to him, "Teacher, this woman was caught in the very act of
committing adultery. 5 Now in the law Moses commanded us to stone
such women. Now what do you say?" 6 They said this to test him, so
that they might have some charge to bring against him. Jesus bent
down and wrote with his finger on the ground. 7 When they kept on
questioning him, he straightened up and said to them, "Let anyone
among you who is without sin be the first to throw a stone at her." 8
And once again he bent down and wrote on the ground. 9 When they
heard it, they went away, one by one, beginning with the elders; and
Jesus was left alone with the woman standing before him. 10 Jesus
straightened up and said to her, "Woman, where are they? Has no one
condemned you?" 11 She said, "No one, sir." And Jesus said, "Neither
do I condemn you. Go your way, and from now on do not sin again."]]
Jesus the light of life
12 Again Jesus spoke to them, saying, "I am the light of the world.
Whoever follows me will never walk in darkness but will have the light
of life." 13 Then the Pharisees said to him, "You are testifying on your
own behalf; your testimony is not valid." 14 Jesus answered, "Even if I
testify on my own behalf, my testimony is valid because I know where I
have come from and where I am going, but you do not know where I
come from or where I am going. 15 You judge by human standards; I
judge no one. 16 Yet even if I do judge, my judgment is valid; for it is
not I alone who judge, but I and the Father who sent me. 17 In your
law it is written that the testimony of two witnesses is valid. 18 I testify
on my own behalf, and the Father who sent me testifies on my behalf."
19 Then they said to him, "Where is your Father?" Jesus answered,
"You know neither me nor my Father. If you knew me, you would
know my Father also." 20 He spoke these words while he was teaching

210

JOHN 211

in the treasury of the temple, but no one arrested him, because his
hour had not yet come.
21 Again he said to them, "I am going away, and you will search for
me, but you will die in your sin. Where I am going, you cannot come."
22 Then the Jews said, "Is he going to kill himself? Is that what he
means by saying, 'Where I am going, you cannot come'?" 23 He said to
them, "You are from below, I am from above; you are of this world, I
am not of this world. 24 I told you that you would die in your sins, for
you will die in your sins unless you believe that I am he." 25 They said
to him, "Who are you?" Jesus said to them, "Why do I speak to you at
all? 26 I have much to say about you and much to condemn; but the
one who sent me is true, and I declare to the world what I have heard
from him." 27 They did not understand that he was speaking to them
about the Father. 28 So Jesus said, "When you have lifted up the Son
of Man, then you will realize that I am he, and that I do nothing on my
own, but I speak these things as the Father instructed me. 29 And the
one who sent me is with me; he has not left me alone, for I always do
what is pleasing to him." 30 As he was saying these things, many
believed in him.
31 Then Jesus said to the Jews who had believed in him, "If you
continue in my word, you are truly my disciples; 32 and you will know
the truth, and the truth will make you free." 33 They answered him,
"We are descendants of Abraham and have never been slaves to
anyone. What do you mean by saying, 'You will be made free'?"
34 Jesus answered them, "Very truly, I tell you, everyone who commits
sin is a slave to sin. 35 The slave does not have a permanent place in
the household; the son has a place there forever. 36 So if the Son
makes you free, you will be free indeed. 37 I know that you are
descendants of Abraham; yet you look for an opportunity to kill me,
because there is no place in you for my word. 38 I declare what I have
seen in the Father's presence; as for you, you should do what you have
heard from the Father."

211

JOHN 212

39 They answered him, "Abraham is our father." Jesus said to them, "If
you were Abraham's children, you would be doing what Abraham did,
40 but now you are trying to kill me, a man who has told you the truth
that I heard from God. This is not what Abraham did. 41 You are
indeed doing what your father does." They said to him, "We are not
illegitimate children; we have one father, God himself." 42 Jesus said to
them, "If God were your Father, you would love me, for I came from
God and now I am here. I did not come on my own, but he sent me. 43
Why do you not understand what I say? It is because you cannot accept
my word. 44 You are from your father the devil, and you choose to do
your father's desires. He was a murderer from the beginning and does
not stand in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he lies,
he speaks according to his own nature, for he is a liar and the father of
lies. 45 But because I tell the truth, you do not believe me. 46 Which of
you convicts me of sin? If I tell the truth, why do you not believe me?
47 Whoever is from God hears the words of God. The reason you do
not hear them is that you are not from God."
48 The Jews answered him, "Are we not right in saying that you are a
Samaritan and have a demon?" 49 Jesus answered, "I do not have a
demon; but I honor my Father, and you dishonor me. 50 Yet I do not
seek my own glory; there is one who seeks it and he is the judge. 51
Very truly, I tell you, whoever keeps my word will never see death." 52
The Jews said to him, "Now we know that you have a demon.
Abraham died, and so did the prophets; yet you say, 'Whoever keeps
my word will never taste death.' 53 Are you greater than our father
Abraham, who died? The prophets also died. Who do you claim to
be?" 54 Jesus answered, "If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. It is my
Father who glorifies me, he of whom you say, 'He is our God,' 55
though you do not know him. But I know him; if I would say that I do
not know him, I would be a liar like you. But I do know him and I keep
his word. 56 Your ancestor Abraham rejoiced that he would see my
day; he saw it and was glad." 57 Then the Jews said to him, "You are
not yet fifty years old, and have you seen Abraham?" 58 Jesus said to
them, "Very truly, I tell you, before Abraham was, I am." 59 So they
picked up stones to throw at him, but Jesus hid himself and went out
of the temple.

212

JOHN 213

[John 9]
The healing of a man born blind
1 As he walked along, he saw a man blind from birth. 2 His disciples
asked him, "Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was
born blind?" 3 Jesus answered, "Neither this man nor his parents
sinned; he was born blind so that God's works might be revealed in
him. 4 We must work the works of him who sent me while it is day;
night is coming when no one can work. 5 As long as I am in the world, I
am the light of the world." 6 When he had said this, he spat on the
ground and made mud with the saliva and spread the mud on the
man's eyes, 7 saying to him, "Go, wash in the pool of Siloam" (which
means Sent). Then he went and washed and came back able to see. 8
The neighbors and those who had seen him before as a beggar began
to ask, "Is this not the man who used to sit and beg?" 9 Some were
saying, "It is he." Others were saying, "No, but it is someone like him."
He kept saying, "I am the man." 10 But they kept asking him, "Then
how were your eyes opened?" 11 He answered, "The man called Jesus
made mud, spread it on my eyes, and said to me, 'Go to Siloam and
wash.' Then I went and washed and received my sight." 12 They said to
him, "Where is he?" He said, "I do not know."
13 They brought to the Pharisees the man who had formerly been
blind. 14 Now it was a sabbath day when Jesus made the mud and
opened his eyes. 15 Then the Pharisees also began to ask him how he
had received his sight. He said to them, "He put mud on my eyes. Then
I washed, and now I see." 16 Some of the Pharisees said, "This man is
not from God, for he does not observe the sabbath." But others said,
"How can a man who is a sinner perform such signs?" And they were
divided. 17 So they said again to the blind man, "What do you say
about him? It was your eyes he opened." He said, "He is a prophet."
18 The Jews did not believe that he had been blind and had received
his sight until they called the parents of the man who had received his
sight 19 and asked them, "Is this your son, who you say was born blind?
How then does he now see?" 20 His parents answered, "We know that
this is our son, and that he was born blind; 21 but we do not know how
it is that now he sees, nor do we know who opened his eyes. Ask him;

213

JOHN 214

he is of age. He will speak for himself." 22 His parents said this because
they were afraid of the Jews; for the Jews had already agreed that
anyone who confessed Jesus to be the Messiah would be put out of the
synagogue. 23 Therefore his parents said, "He is of age; ask him."
24 So for the second time they called the man who had been blind, and
they said to him, "Give glory to God! We know that this man is a
sinner." 25 He answered, "I do not know whether he is a sinner. One
thing I do know, that though I was blind, now I see." 26 They said to
him, "What did he do to you? How did he open your eyes?" 27 He
answered them, "I have told you already, and you would not listen.
Why do you want to hear it again? Do you also want to become his
disciples?" 28 Then they reviled him, saying, "You are his disciple, but
we are disciples of Moses. 29 We know that God has spoken to Moses,
but as for this man, we do not know where he comes from." 30 The
man answered, "Here is an astonishing thing! You do not know where
he comes from, and yet he opened my eyes. 31 We know that God does
not listen to sinners, but he does listen to one who worships him and
obeys his will. 32 Never since the world began has it been heard that
anyone opened the eyes of a person born blind. 33 If this man were not
from God, he could do nothing." 34 They answered him, "You were
born entirely in sins, and are you trying to teach us?" And they drove
him out.
35 Jesus heard that they had driven him out, and when he found him,
he said, "Do you believe in the Son of Man?" 36 He answered, "And
who is he, sir? Tell me, so that I may believe in him." 37 Jesus said to
him, "You have seen him, and the one speaking with you is he." 38 He
said, "Lord, I believe." And he worshiped him. 39 Jesus said, "I came
into this world for judgment so that those who do not see may see,
and those who do see may become blind." 40 Some of the Pharisees
near him heard this and said to him, "Surely we are not blind, are we?"
41 Jesus said to them, "If you were blind, you would not have sin. But
now that you say, 'We see,' your sin remains.

214

JOHN 215

[John 10]
Jesus, the shepherd who gives his life
1 "Very truly, I tell you, anyone who does not enter the sheepfold by
the gate but climbs in by another way is a thief and a bandit. 2 The one
who enters by the gate is the shepherd of the sheep. 3 The gatekeeper
opens the gate for him, and the sheep hear his voice. He calls his own
sheep by name and leads them out. 4 When he has brought out all his
own, he goes ahead of them, and the sheep follow him because they
know his voice. 5 They will not follow a stranger, but they will run
from him because they do not know the voice of strangers." 6 Jesus
used this figure of speech with them, but they did not understand
what he was saying to them.
7 So again Jesus said to them, "Very truly, I tell you, I am the gate for
the sheep. 8 All who came before me are thieves and bandits; but the
sheep did not listen to them. 9 I am the gate. Whoever enters by me
will be saved, and will come in and go out and find pasture. 10 The
thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy. I came that they may
have life, and have it abundantly.
11 "I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for
the sheep. 12 The hired hand, who is not the shepherd and does not
own the sheep, sees the wolf coming and leaves the sheep and runs
away — and the wolf snatches them and scatters them. 13 The hired
hand runs away because a hired hand does not care for the sheep. 14 I
am the good shepherd. I know my own and my own know me, 15 just
as the Father knows me and I know the Father. And I lay down my life
for the sheep. 16 I have other sheep that do not belong to this fold. I
must bring them also, and they will listen to my voice. So there will be
one flock, one shepherd. 17 For this reason the Father loves me,
because I lay down my life in order to take it up again. 18 No one takes
it from me, but I lay it down of my own accord. I have power to lay it
down, and I have power to take it up again. I have received this
command from my Father."
19 Again the Jews were divided because of these words. 20 Many of
them were saying, "He has a demon and is out of his mind. Why listen

215

JOHN 216

to him?" 21 Others were saying, "These are not the words of one who
has a demon. Can a demon open the eyes of the blind?"
22 At that time the festival of the Dedication took place in Jerusalem. It
was winter, 23 and Jesus was walking in the temple, in the portico of
Solomon. 24 So the Jews gathered around him and said to him, "How
long will you keep us in suspense? If you are the Messiah, tell us
plainly." 25 Jesus answered, "I have told you, and you do not believe.
The works that I do in my Father's name testify to me; 26 but you do
not believe, because you do not belong to my sheep. 27 My sheep hear
my voice. I know them, and they follow me. 28 I give them eternal life,
and they will never perish. No one will snatch them out of my hand. 29
What my Father has given me is greater than all else, and no one can
snatch it out of the Father's hand. 30 The Father and I are one."
31 The Jews took up stones again to stone him. 32 Jesus replied, "I have
shown you many good works from the Father. For which of these are
you going to stone me?" 33 The Jews answered, "It is not for a good
work that we are going to stone you, but for blasphemy, because you,
though only a human being, are making yourself God." 34 Jesus
answered, "Is it not written in your law, 'I said, you are gods'? 35 If
those to whom the word of God came were called 'gods' — and the
scripture cannot be annulled — 36 can you say that the one whom the
Father has sanctified and sent into the world is blaspheming because I
said, 'I am God's Son'? 37 If I am not doing the works of my Father,
then do not believe me. 38 But if I do them, even though you do not
believe me, believe the works, so that you may know and understand
that the Father is in me and I am in the Father." 39 Then they tried to
arrest him again, but he escaped from their hands.
40 He went away again across the Jordan to the place where John had
been baptizing earlier, and he remained there. 41 Many came to him,
and they were saying, "John performed no sign, but everything that
John said about this man was true." 42 And many believed in him
there.

216

JOHN 217

[John 11]
The raising of Lazarus
1 Now a certain man was ill, Lazarus of Bethany, the village of Mary
and her sister Martha. 2 Mary was the one who anointed the Lord with
perfume and wiped his feet with her hair; her brother Lazarus was ill. 3
So the sisters sent a message to Jesus, "Lord, he whom you love is ill." 4
But when Jesus heard it, he said, "This illness does not lead to death;
rather it is for God's glory, so that the Son of God may be glorified
through it." 5 Accordingly, though Jesus loved Martha and her sister
and Lazarus, 6 after having heard that Lazarus was ill, he stayed two
days longer in the place where he was.
7 Then after this he said to the disciples, "Let us go to Judea again." 8
The disciples said to him, "Rabbi, the Jews were just now trying to
stone you, and are you going there again?" 9 Jesus answered, "Are
there not twelve hours of daylight? Those who walk during the day do
not stumble, because they see the light of this world. 10 But those who
walk at night stumble, because the light is not in them." 11 After saying
this, he told them, "Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep, but I am
going there to awaken him." 12 The disciples said to him, "Lord, if he
has fallen asleep, he will be all right." 13 Jesus, however, had been
speaking about his death, but they thought that he was referring
merely to sleep. 14 Then Jesus told them plainly, "Lazarus is dead. 15
For your sake I am glad I was not there, so that you may believe. But let
us go to him." 16 Thomas, who was called the Twin, said to his fellow
disciples, "Let us also go, that we may die with him."
17 When Jesus arrived, he found that Lazarus had already been in the
tomb four days. 18 Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, some two miles
away, 19 and many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary to
console them about their brother. 20 When Martha heard that Jesus
was coming, she went and met him, while Mary stayed at home. 21
Martha said to Jesus, "Lord, if you had been here, my brother would
not have died. 22 But even now I know that God will give you
whatever you ask of him." 23 Jesus said to her, "Your brother will rise
again." 24 Martha said to him, "I know that he will rise again in the
resurrection on the last day." 25 Jesus said to her, "I am the

217

JOHN 218

resurrection and the life. Those who believe in me, even though they
die, will live, 26 and everyone who lives and believes in me will never
die. Do you believe this?" 27 She said to him, "Yes, Lord, I believe that
you are the Messiah, the Son of God, the one coming into the world."
28 When she had said this, she went back and called her sister Mary,
and told her privately, "The Teacher is here and is calling for you." 29
And when she heard it, she got up quickly and went to him. 30 Now
Jesus had not yet come to the village, but was still at the place where
Martha had met him. 31 The Jews who were with her in the house,
consoling her, saw Mary get up quickly and go out. They followed her
because they thought that she was going to the tomb to weep there.
32 When Mary came where Jesus was and saw him, she knelt at his feet
and said to him, "Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not
have died." 33 When Jesus saw her weeping, and the Jews who came
with her also weeping, he was greatly disturbed in spirit and deeply
moved. 34 He said, "Where have you laid him?" They said to him,
"Lord, come and see." 35 Jesus began to weep. 36 So the Jews said,
"See how he loved him!" 37 But some of them said, "Could not he who
opened the eyes of the blind man have kept this man from dying?"
38 Then Jesus, again greatly disturbed, came to the tomb. It was a cave,
and a stone was lying against it. 39 Jesus said, "Take away the stone."
Martha, the sister of the dead man, said to him, "Lord, already there is
a stench because he has been dead four days." 40 Jesus said to her,
"Did I not tell you that if you believed, you would see the glory of
God?" 41 So they took away the stone. And Jesus looked upward and
said, "Father, I thank you for having heard me. 42 I knew that you
always hear me, but I have said this for the sake of the crowd standing
here, so that they may believe that you sent me." 43 When he had said
this, he cried with a loud voice, "Lazarus, come out!" 44 The dead man
came out, his hands and feet bound with strips of cloth, and his face
wrapped in a cloth. Jesus said to them, "Unbind him, and let him go."
45 Many of the Jews therefore, who had come with Mary and had seen
what Jesus did, believed in him. 46 But some of them went to the
Pharisees and told them what he had done. 47 So the chief priests and
the Pharisees called a meeting of the council, and said, "What are we

218

JOHN 219

to do? This man is performing many signs. 48 If we let him go on like
this, everyone will believe in him, and the Romans will come and
destroy both our holy place and our nation." 49 But one of them,
Caiaphas, who was high priest that year, said to them, "You know
nothing at all! 50 You do not understand that it is better for you to
have one man die for the people than to have the whole nation
destroyed." 51 He did not say this on his own, but being high priest
that year he prophesied that Jesus was about to die for the nation, 52
and not for the nation only, but to gather into one the dispersed
children of God. 53 So from that day on they planned to put him to
death.
54 Jesus therefore no longer walked about openly among the Jews,
but went from there to a town called Ephraim in the region near the
wilderness; and he remained there with the disciples.
55 Now the Passover of the Jews was near, and many went up from the
country to Jerusalem before the Passover to purify themselves. 56 They
were looking for Jesus and were asking one another as they stood in
the temple, "What do you think? Surely he will not come to the
festival, will he?" 57 Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had given
orders that anyone who knew where Jesus was should let them know,
so that they might arrest him.
[John 12]
The anointing at Bethany
1 Six days before the Passover Jesus came to Bethany, the home of
Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead. 2 There they gave a
dinner for him. Martha served, and Lazarus was one of those at the
table with him. 3 Mary took a pound of costly perfume made of pure
nard, anointed Jesus' feet, and wiped them with her hair. The house
was filled with the fragrance of the perfume. 4 But Judas Iscariot, one
of his disciples (the one who was about to betray him), said, 5 "Why
was this perfume not sold for three hundred denarii and the money
given to the poor?" 6 (He said this not because he cared about the
poor, but because he was a thief; he kept the common purse and used
to steal what was put into it.) 7 Jesus said, "Leave her alone. She

219

JOHN 220

bought it so that she might keep it for the day of my burial. 8 You
always have the poor with you, but you do not always have me."
9 When the great crowd of the Jews learned that he was there, they
came not only because of Jesus but also to see Lazarus, whom he had
raised from the dead. 10 So the chief priests planned to put Lazarus to
death as well, 11 since it was on account of him that many of the Jews
were deserting and were believing in Jesus.
Jesus' triumphal entry into Jerusalem
12 The next day the great crowd that had come to the festival heard
that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem. 13 So they took branches of palm
trees and went out to meet him, shouting,
"Hosanna!
Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord —
the King of Israel!"
14 Jesus found a young donkey and sat on it; as it is written:
15 "Do not be afraid, daughter of Zion.
Look, your king is coming,
sitting on a donkey's colt!"
16 His disciples did not understand these things at first; but when Jesus
was glorified, then they remembered that these things had been
written of him and had been done to him. 17 So the crowd that had
been with him when he called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him
from the dead continued to testify. 18 It was also because they heard
that he had performed this sign that the crowd went to meet him. 19
The Pharisees then said to one another, "You see, you can do nothing.
Look, the world has gone after him!"
The conclusion of Jesus' public ministry
20 Now among those who went up to worship at the festival were
some Greeks. 21 They came to Philip, who was from Bethsaida in
Galilee, and said to him, "Sir, we wish to see Jesus." 22 Philip went and
told Andrew; then Andrew and Philip went and told Jesus. 23 Jesus
answered them, "The hour has come for the Son of Man to be
glorified. 24 Very truly, I tell you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the

220

JOHN 221

earth and dies, it remains just a single grain; but if it dies, it bears much
fruit. 25 Those who love their life lose it, and those who hate their life
in this world will keep it for eternal life. 26 Whoever serves me must
follow me, and where I am, there will my servant be also. Whoever
serves me, the Father will honor.
27 "Now my soul is troubled. And what should I say — 'Father, save me
from this hour'? No, it is for this reason that I have come to this hour.
28 Father, glorify your name." Then a voice came from heaven, "I have
glorified it, and I will glorify it again." 29 The crowd standing there
heard it and said that it was thunder. Others said, "An angel has
spoken to him." 30 Jesus answered, "This voice has come for your sake,
not for mine. 31 Now is the judgment of this world; now the ruler of
this world will be driven out. 32 And I, when I am lifted up from the
earth, will draw all people to myself." 33 He said this to indicate the
kind of death he was to die. 34 The crowd answered him, "We have
heard from the law that the Messiah remains forever. How can you say
that the Son of Man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of Man?" 35
Jesus said to them, "The light is with you for a little longer. Walk while
you have the light, so that the darkness may not overtake you. If you
walk in the darkness, you do not know where you are going. 36 While
you have the light, believe in the light, so that you may become
children of light."
After Jesus had said this, he departed and hid from them. 37 Although
he had performed so many signs in their presence, they did not believe
in him. 38 This was to fulfill the word spoken by the prophet Isaiah:
"Lord, who has believed our message,
and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?"
39 And so they could not believe, because Isaiah also said,
40 "He has blinded their eyes
and hardened their heart,
so that they might not look with their eyes,
and understand with their heart and turn —
and I would heal them."
41 Isaiah said this because he saw his glory and spoke about him. 42
Nevertheless many, even of the authorities, believed in him. But
because of the Pharisees they did not confess it, for fear that they

221

JOHN 222

would be put out of the synagogue; 43 for they loved human glory
more than the glory that comes from God.
44 Then Jesus cried aloud: "Whoever believes in me believes not in me
but in him who sent me. 45 And whoever sees me sees him who sent
me. 46 I have come as light into the world, so that everyone who
believes in me should not remain in the darkness. 47 I do not judge
anyone who hears my words and does not keep them, for I came not to
judge the world, but to save the world. 48 The one who rejects me and
does not receive my word has a judge; on the last day the word that I
have spoken will serve as judge, 49 for I have not spoken on my own,
but the Father who sent me has himself given me a commandment
about what to say and what to speak. 50 And I know that his
commandment is eternal life. What I speak, therefore, I speak just as
the Father has told me."
[John 13]
The footwashing and betrayal
1 Now before the festival of the Passover, Jesus knew that his hour had
come to depart from this world and go to the Father. Having loved his
own who were in the world, he loved them to the end. 2 The devil had
already put it into the heart of Judas son of Simon Iscariot to betray
him. And during supper 3 Jesus, knowing that the Father had given all
things into his hands, and that he had come from God and was going
to God, 4 got up from the table, took off his outer robe, and tied a
towel around himself. 5 Then he poured water into a basin and began
to wash the disciples' feet and to wipe them with the towel that was
tied around him. 6 He came to Simon Peter, who said to him, "Lord,
are you going to wash my feet?" 7 Jesus answered, "You do not know
now what I am doing, but later you will understand." 8 Peter said to
him, "You will never wash my feet." Jesus answered, "Unless I wash
you, you have no share with me." 9 Simon Peter said to him, "Lord, not
my feet only but also my hands and my head!" 10 Jesus said to him,
"One who has bathed does not need to wash, except for the feet, but
is entirely clean. And you are clean, though not all of you." 11 For he
knew who was to betray him; for this reason he said, "Not all of you
are clean."

222

JOHN 223

12 After he had washed their feet, had put on his robe, and had
returned to the table, he said to them, "Do you know what I have
done to you? 13 You call me Teacher and Lord — and you are right, for
that is what I am. 14 So if I, your Lord and Teacher, have washed your
feet, you also ought to wash one another's feet. 15 For I have set you
an example, that you also should do as I have done to you. 16 Very
truly, I tell you, servants are not greater than their master, nor are
messengers greater than the one who sent them. 17 If you know these
things, you are blessed if you do them. 18 I am not speaking of all of
you; I know whom I have chosen. But it is to fulfill the scripture, 'The
one who ate my bread has lifted his heel against me.' 19 I tell you this
now, before it occurs, so that when it does occur, you may believe that
I am he. 20 Very truly, I tell you, whoever receives one whom I send
receives me; and whoever receives me receives him who sent me."
21 After saying this Jesus was troubled in spirit, and declared, "Very
truly, I tell you, one of you will betray me." 22 The disciples looked at
one another, uncertain of whom he was speaking. 23 One of his
disciples — the one whom Jesus loved — was reclining next to him; 24
Simon Peter therefore motioned to him to ask Jesus of whom he was
speaking. 25 So while reclining next to Jesus, he asked him, "Lord, who
is it?" 26 Jesus answered, "It is the one to whom I give this piece of
bread when I have dipped it in the dish." So when he had dipped the
piece of bread, he gave it to Judas son of Simon Iscariot. 27 After he
received the piece of bread, Satan entered into him. Jesus said to him,
"Do quickly what you are going to do." 28 Now no one at the table
knew why he said this to him. 29 Some thought that, because Judas
had the common purse, Jesus was telling him, "Buy what we need for
the festival"; or, that he should give something to the poor. 30 So,
after receiving the piece of bread, he immediately went out. And it
was night.
Jesus' farewell discourse and prayer
31 When he had gone out, Jesus said, "Now the Son of Man has been
glorified, and God has been glorified in him. 32 If God has been
glorified in him, God will also glorify him in himself and will glorify him
at once. 33 Little children, I am with you only a little longer. You will

223

JOHN 224

look for me; and as I said to the Jews so now I say to you, 'Where I am
going, you cannot come.' 34 I give you a new commandment, that you
love one another. Just as I have loved you, you also should love one
another. 35 By this everyone will know that you are my disciples, if you
have love for one another."
36 Simon Peter said to him, "Lord, where are you going?" Jesus
answered, "Where I am going, you cannot follow me now; but you will
follow afterward." 37 Peter said to him, "Lord, why can I not follow
you now? I will lay down my life for you." 38 Jesus answered, "Will you
lay down your life for me? Very truly, I tell you, before the cock crows,
you will have denied me three times.
[John 14]
The believers' relation to the glorified Christ
1 "Do not let your hearts be troubled. Believe in God, believe also in
me. 2 In my Father's house there are many dwelling places. If it were
not so, would I have told you that I go to prepare a place for you? 3
And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and will take
you to myself, so that where I am, there you may be also. 4 And you
know the way to the place where I am going." 5 Thomas said to him,
"Lord, we do not know where you are going. How can we know the
way?" 6 Jesus said to him, "I am the way, and the truth, and the life.
No one comes to the Father except through me. 7 If you know me, you
will know my Father also. From now on you do know him and have
seen him."
8 Philip said to him, "Lord, show us the Father, and we will be
satisfied." 9 Jesus said to him, "Have I been with you all this time,
Philip, and you still do not know me? Whoever has seen me has seen
the Father. How can you say, 'Show us the Father'? 10 Do you not
believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? The words that
I say to you I do not speak on my own; but the Father who dwells in me
does his works. 11 Believe me that I am in the Father and the Father is
in me; but if you do not, then believe me because of the works
themselves. 12 Very truly, I tell you, the one who believes in me will
also do the works that I do and, in fact, will do greater works than

224

JOHN 225

these, because I am going to the Father. 13 I will do whatever you ask
in my name, so that the Father may be glorified in the Son. 14 If in my
name you ask me for anything, I will do it.
15 "If you love me, you will keep my commandments. 16 And I will ask
the Father, and he will give you another Advocate, to be with you
forever. 17 This is the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive,
because it neither sees him nor knows him. You know him, because he
abides with you, and he will be in you.
18 "I will not leave you orphaned; I am coming to you. 19 In a little
while the world will no longer see me, but you will see me; because I
live, you also will live. 20 On that day you will know that I am in my
Father, and you in me, and I in you. 21 They who have my
commandments and keep them are those who love me; and those who
love me will be loved by my Father, and I will love them and reveal
myself to them." 22 Judas (not Iscariot) said to him, "Lord, how is it
that you will reveal yourself to us, and not to the world?" 23 Jesus
answered him, "Those who love me will keep my word, and my Father
will love them, and we will come to them and make our home with
them. 24 Whoever does not love me does not keep my words; and the
word that you hear is not mine, but is from the Father who sent me.
25 "I have said these things to you while I am still with you. 26 But the
Advocate, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, will
teach you everything, and remind you of all that I have said to you. 27
Peace I leave with you; my peace I give to you. I do not give to you as
the world gives. Do not let your hearts be troubled, and do not let
them be afraid. 28 You heard me say to you, 'I am going away, and I
am coming to you.' If you loved me, you would rejoice that I am going
to the Father, because the Father is greater than I. 29 And now I have
told you this before it occurs, so that when it does occur, you may
believe. 30 I will no longer talk much with you, for the ruler of this
world is coming. He has no power over me; 31 but I do as the Father
has commanded me, so that the world may know that I love the
Father. Rise, let us be on our way.

225

JOHN 226

[John 15]
The pattern of the believer's life
1 "I am the true vine, and my Father is the vinegrower. 2 He removes
every branch in me that bears no fruit. Every branch that bears fruit he
prunes to make it bear more fruit. 3 You have already been cleansed by
the word that I have spoken to you. 4 Abide in me as I abide in you.
Just as the branch cannot bear fruit by itself unless it abides in the vine,
neither can you unless you abide in me. 5 I am the vine, you are the
branches. Those who abide in me and I in them bear much fruit,
because apart from me you can do nothing. 6 Whoever does not abide
in me is thrown away like a branch and withers; such branches are
gathered, thrown into the fire, and burned. 7 If you abide in me, and
my words abide in you, ask for whatever you wish, and it will be done
for you. 8 My Father is glorified by this, that you bear much fruit and
become my disciples. 9 As the Father has loved me, so I have loved you;
abide in my love. 10 If you keep my commandments, you will abide in
my love, just as I have kept my Father's commandments and abide in
his love. 11 I have said these things to you so that my joy may be in you,
and that your joy may be complete.
12 "This is my commandment, that you love one another as I have loved
you. 13 No one has greater love than this, to lay down one's life for
one's friends. 14 You are my friends if you do what I command you. 15 I
do not call you servants any longer, because the servant does not know
what the master is doing; but I have called you friends, because I have
made known to you everything that I have heard from my Father. 16
You did not choose me but I chose you. And I appointed you to go and
bear fruit, fruit that will last, so that the Father will give you whatever
you ask him in my name. 17 I am giving you these commands so that
you may love one another.
18 "If the world hates you, be aware that it hated me before it hated
you. 19 If you belonged to the world, the world would love you as its
own. Because you do not belong to the world, but I have chosen you
out of the world — therefore the world hates you. 20 Remember the
word that I said to you, 'Servants are not greater than their master.' If
they persecuted me, they will persecute you; if they kept my word,

226

JOHN 227

they will keep yours also. 21 But they will do all these things to you on
account of my name, because they do not know him who sent me. 22 If
I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have sin; but now
they have no excuse for their sin. 23 Whoever hates me hates my Father
also. 24 If I had not done among them the works that no one else did,
they would not have sin. But now they have seen and hated both me
and my Father. 25 It was to fulfill the word that is written in their law,
'They hated me without a cause.'
26 "When the Advocate comes, whom I will send to you from the
Father, the Spirit of truth who comes from the Father, he will testify on
my behalf. 27 You also are to testify because you have been with me
from the beginning.
[John 16]
The believer's relation to the world
1 "I have said these things to you to keep you from stumbling. 2 They
will put you out of the synagogues. Indeed, an hour is coming when
those who kill you will think that by doing so they are offering worship
to God. 3 And they will do this because they have not known the
Father or me. 4 But I have said these things to you so that when their
hour comes you may remember that I told you about them.
"I did not say these things to you from the beginning, because I was
with you. 5 But now I am going to him who sent me; yet none of you
asks me, 'Where are you going?' 6 But because I have said these things
to you, sorrow has filled your hearts. 7 Nevertheless I tell you the truth:
it is to your advantage that I go away, for if I do not go away, the
Advocate will not come to you; but if I go, I will send him to you. 8 And
when he comes, he will prove the world wrong about sin and
righteousness and judgment: 9 about sin, because they do not believe
in me; 10 about righteousness, because I am going to the Father and
you will see me no longer; 11 about judgment, because the ruler of this
world has been condemned.

227

JOHN 228

12 "I still have many things to say to you, but you cannot bear them
now. 13 When the Spirit of truth comes, he will guide you into all the
truth; for he will not speak on his own, but will speak whatever he
hears, and he will declare to you the things that are to come. 14 He will
glorify me, because he will take what is mine and declare it to you. 15
All that the Father has is mine. For this reason I said that he will take
what is mine and declare it to you.
16 "A little while, and you will no longer see me, and again a little
while, and you will see me." 17 Then some of his disciples said to one
another, "What does he mean by saying to us, 'A little while, and you
will no longer see me, and again a little while, and you will see me';
and 'Because I am going to the Father'?" 18 They said, "What does he
mean by this 'a little while'? We do not know what he is talking
about." 19 Jesus knew that they wanted to ask him, so he said to them,
"Are you discussing among yourselves what I meant when I said, 'A
little while, and you will no longer see me, and again a little while, and
you will see me'? 20 Very truly, I tell you, you will weep and mourn, but
the world will rejoice; you will have pain, but your pain will turn into
joy. 21 When a woman is in labor, she has pain, because her hour has
come. But when her child is born, she no longer remembers the
anguish because of the joy of having brought a human being into the
world. 22 So you have pain now; but I will see you again, and your
hearts will rejoice, and no one will take your joy from you. 23 On that
day you will ask nothing of me. Very truly, I tell you, if you ask
anything of the Father in my name, he will give it to you. 24 Until now
you have not asked for anything in my name. Ask and you will receive,
so that your joy may be complete.
25 "I have said these things to you in figures of speech. The hour is
coming when I will no longer speak to you in figures, but will tell you
plainly of the Father. 26 On that day you will ask in my name. I do not
say to you that I will ask the Father on your behalf; 27 for the Father
himself loves you, because you have loved me and have believed that I
came from God. 28 I came from the Father and have come into the
world; again, I am leaving the world and am going to the Father."

228

JOHN 229

29 His disciples said, "Yes, now you are speaking plainly, not in any
figure of speech! 30 Now we know that you know all things, and do
not need to have anyone question you; by this we believe that you
came from God." 31 Jesus answered them, "Do you now believe? 32
The hour is coming, indeed it has come, when you will be scattered,
each one to his home, and you will leave me alone. Yet I am not alone
because the Father is with me. 33 I have said this to you, so that in me
you may have peace. In the world you face persecution. But take
courage; I have conquered the world!"
[John 17]
Jesus' final prayer
1 After Jesus had spoken these words, he looked up to heaven and said,
"Father, the hour has come; glorify your Son so that the Son may
glorify you, 2 since you have given him authority over all people, to
give eternal life to all whom you have given him. 3 And this is eternal
life, that they may know you, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
you have sent. 4 I glorified you on earth by finishing the work that you
gave me to do. 5 So now, Father, glorify me in your own presence with
the glory that I had in your presence before the world existed.
6 "I have made your name known to those whom you gave me from
the world. They were yours, and you gave them to me, and they have
kept your word. 7 Now they know that everything you have given me
is from you; 8 for the words that you gave to me I have given to them,
and they have received them and know in truth that I came from you;
and they have believed that you sent me. 9 I am asking on their behalf;
I am not asking on behalf of the world, but on behalf of those whom
you gave me, because they are yours. 10 All mine are yours, and yours
are mine; and I have been glorified in them. 11 And now I am no longer
in the world, but they are in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy
Father, protect them in your name that you have given me, so that
they may be one, as we are one. 12 While I was with them, I protected
them in your name that you have given me. I guarded them, and not
one of them was lost except the one destined to be lost, so that the
scripture might be fulfilled. 13 But now I am coming to you, and I speak
these things in the world so that they may have my joy made complete

229

JOHN 230

in themselves. 14 I have given them your word, and the world has
hated them because they do not belong to the world, just as I do not
belong to the world. 15 I am not asking you to take them out of the
world, but I ask you to protect them from the evil one. 16 They do not
belong to the world, just as I do not belong to the world. 17 Sanctify
them in the truth; your word is truth. 18 As you have sent me into the
world, so I have sent them into the world. 19 And for their sakes I
sanctify myself, so that they also may be sanctified in truth.
20 "I ask not only on behalf of these, but also on behalf of those who
will believe in me through their word, 21 that they may all be one. As
you, Father, are in me and I am in you, may they also be in us, so that
the world may believe that you have sent me. 22 The glory that you
have given me I have given them, so that they may be one, as we are
one, 23 I in them and you in me, that they may become completely
one, so that the world may know that you have sent me and have
loved them even as you have loved me. 24 Father, I desire that those
also, whom you have given me, may be with me where I am, to see my
glory, which you have given me because you loved me before the
foundation of the world.
25 "Righteous Father, the world does not know you, but I know you;
and these know that you have sent me. 26 I made your name known to
them, and I will make it known, so that the love with which you have
loved me may be in them, and I in them."
[John 18]
Arrest, trial, crucifixion, and burial of Jesus
1 After Jesus had spoken these words, he went out with his disciples
across the Kidron valley to a place where there was a garden, which he
and his disciples entered. 2 Now Judas, who betrayed him, also knew
the place, because Jesus often met there with his disciples. 3 So Judas
brought a detachment of soldiers together with police from the chief
priests and the Pharisees, and they came there with lanterns and
torches and weapons. 4 Then Jesus, knowing all that was to happen to
him, came forward and asked them, "Whom are you looking for?" 5
They answered, "Jesus of Nazareth." Jesus replied, "I am he." Judas,

230

JOHN 231

who betrayed him, was standing with them. 6 When Jesus said to
them, "I am he," they stepped back and fell to the ground. 7 Again he
asked them, "Whom are you looking for?" And they said, "Jesus of
Nazareth." 8 Jesus answered, "I told you that I am he. So if you are
looking for me, let these men go." 9 This was to fulfill the word that
he had spoken, "I did not lose a single one of those whom you gave
me." 10 Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, drew it, struck the high
priest's slave, and cut off his right ear. The slave's name was Malchus. 11
Jesus said to Peter, "Put your sword back into its sheath. Am I not to
drink the cup that the Father has given me?"
12 So the soldiers, their officer, and the Jewish police arrested Jesus and
bound him. 13 First they took him to Annas, who was the father-in-law
of Caiaphas, the high priest that year. 14 Caiaphas was the one who
had advised the Jews that it was better to have one person die for the
people.
15 Simon Peter and another disciple followed Jesus. Since that disciple
was known to the high priest, he went with Jesus into the courtyard of
the high priest, 16 but Peter was standing outside at the gate. So the
other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went out, spoke to
the woman who guarded the gate, and brought Peter in. 17 The
woman said to Peter, "You are not also one of this man's disciples, are
you?" He said, "I am not." 18 Now the slaves and the police had made
a charcoal fire because it was cold, and they were standing around it
and warming themselves. Peter also was standing with them and
warming himself.
19 Then the high priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and about
his teaching. 20 Jesus answered, "I have spoken openly to the world; I
have always taught in synagogues and in the temple, where all the
Jews come together. I have said nothing in secret. 21 Why do you ask
me? Ask those who heard what I said to them; they know what I said."
22 When he had said this, one of the police standing nearby struck
Jesus on the face, saying, "Is that how you answer the high priest?" 23
Jesus answered, "If I have spoken wrongly, testify to the wrong. But if I
have spoken rightly, why do you strike me?" 24 Then Annas sent him
bound to Caiaphas the high priest.

231

JOHN 232

25 Now Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. They asked
him, "You are not also one of his disciples, are you?" He denied it and
said, "I am not." 26 One of the slaves of the high priest, a relative of
the man whose ear Peter had cut off, asked, "Did I not see you in the
garden with him?" 27 Again Peter denied it, and at that moment the
cock crowed.
Jesus and Pilate
28 Then they took Jesus from Caiaphas to Pilate's headquarters. It was
early in the morning. They themselves did not enter the headquarters,
so as to avoid ritual defilement and to be able to eat the Passover. 29
So Pilate went out to them and said, "What accusation do you bring
against this man?" 30 They answered, "If this man were not a criminal,
we would not have handed him over to you." 31 Pilate said to them,
"Take him yourselves and judge him according to your law." The Jews
replied, "We are not permitted to put anyone to death." 32 (This was
to fulfill what Jesus had said when he indicated the kind of death he
was to die.)
33 Then Pilate entered the headquarters again, summoned Jesus, and
asked him, "Are you the King of the Jews?" 34 Jesus answered, "Do
you ask this on your own, or did others tell you about me?" 35 Pilate
replied, "I am not a Jew, am I? Your own nation and the chief priests
have handed you over to me. What have you done?" 36 Jesus
answered, "My kingdom is not from this world. If my kingdom were
from this world, my followers would be fighting to keep me from
being handed over to the Jews. But as it is, my kingdom is not from
here." 37 Pilate asked him, "So you are a king?" Jesus answered, "You
say that I am a king. For this I was born, and for this I came into the
world, to testify to the truth. Everyone who belongs to the truth listens
to my voice." 38 Pilate asked him, "What is truth?"
After he had said this, he went out to the Jews again and told them, "I
find no case against him. 39 But you have a custom that I release
someone for you at the Passover. Do you want me to release for you
the King of the Jews?" 40 They shouted in reply, "Not this man, but
Barabbas!" Now Barabbas was a bandit.

232

JOHN 233

[John 19]
1 Then Pilate took Jesus and had him flogged. 2 And the soldiers wove
a crown of thorns and put it on his head, and they dressed him in a
purple robe. 3 They kept coming up to him, saying, "Hail, King of the
Jews!" and striking him on the face. 4 Pilate went out again and said
to them, "Look, I am bringing him out to you to let you know that I
find no case against him." 5 So Jesus came out, wearing the crown of
thorns and the purple robe. Pilate said to them, "Here is the man!" 6
When the chief priests and the police saw him, they shouted, "Crucify
him! Crucify him!" Pilate said to them, "Take him yourselves and
crucify him; I find no case against him." 7 The Jews answered him, "We
have a law, and according to that law he ought to die because he has
claimed to be the Son of God."
8 Now when Pilate heard this, he was more afraid than ever. 9 He
entered his headquarters again and asked Jesus, "Where are you
from?" But Jesus gave him no answer. 10 Pilate therefore said to him,
"Do you refuse to speak to me? Do you not know that I have power to
release you, and power to crucify you?" 11 Jesus answered him, "You
would have no power over me unless it had been given you from
above; therefore the one who handed me over to you is guilty of a
greater sin." 12 From then on Pilate tried to release him, but the Jews
cried out, "If you release this man, you are no friend of the emperor.
Everyone who claims to be a king sets himself against the emperor."
13 When Pilate heard these words, he brought Jesus outside and sat on
the judge's bench at a place called The Stone Pavement, or in Hebrew
Gabbatha. 14 Now it was the day of Preparation for the Passover; and it
was about noon. He said to the Jews, "Here is your King!" 15 They cried
out, "Away with him! Away with him! Crucify him!" Pilate asked them,
"Shall I crucify your King?" The chief priests answered, "We have no
king but the emperor." 16 Then he handed him over to them to be
crucified.

233

JOHN 234

The crucifixion
So they took Jesus; 17 and carrying the cross by himself, he went out to
what is called The Place of the Skull, which in Hebrew is called
Golgotha. 18 There they crucified him, and with him two others, one
on either side, with Jesus between them. 19 Pilate also had an
inscription written and put on the cross. It read, "Jesus of Nazareth, the
King of the Jews." 20 Many of the Jews read this inscription, because
the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city; and it was
written in Hebrew, in Latin, and in Greek. 21 Then the chief priests of
the Jews said to Pilate, "Do not write, 'The King of the Jews,' but, 'This
man said, I am King of the Jews.'" 22 Pilate answered, "What I have
written I have written." 23 When the soldiers had crucified Jesus, they
took his clothes and divided them into four parts, one for each soldier.
They also took his tunic; now the tunic was seamless, woven in one
piece from the top. 24 So they said to one another, "Let us not tear it,
but cast lots for it to see who will get it." This was to fulfill what the
scripture says,
"They divided my clothes among themselves,
and for my clothing they cast lots."
25 And that is what the soldiers did.
Meanwhile, standing near the cross of Jesus were his mother, and his
mother's sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene. 26
When Jesus saw his mother and the disciple whom he loved standing
beside her, he said to his mother, "Woman, here is your son." 27 Then
he said to the disciple, "Here is your mother." And from that hour the
disciple took her into his own home.
28 After this, when Jesus knew that all was now finished, he said (in
order to fulfill the scripture), "I am thirsty." 29 A jar full of sour wine
was standing there. So they put a sponge full of the wine on a branch
of hyssop and held it to his mouth. 30 When Jesus had received the
wine, he said, "It is finished." Then he bowed his head and gave up his
spirit.

234

JOHN 235

31 Since it was the day of Preparation, the Jews did not want the
bodies left on the cross during the sabbath, especially because that
sabbath was a day of great solemnity. So they asked Pilate to have the
legs of the crucified men broken and the bodies removed. 32 Then the
soldiers came and broke the legs of the first and of the other who had
been crucified with him. 33 But when they came to Jesus and saw that
he was already dead, they did not break his legs. 34 Instead, one of the
soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and at once blood and water
came out. 35 (He who saw this has testified so that you also may
believe. His testimony is true, and he knows that he tells the truth.) 36
These things occurred so that the scripture might be fulfilled, "None of
his bones shall be broken." 37 And again another passage of scripture
says, "They will look on the one whom they have pierced."
38 After these things, Joseph of Arimathea, who was a disciple of Jesus,
though a secret one because of his fear of the Jews, asked Pilate to let
him take away the body of Jesus. Pilate gave him permission; so he
came and removed his body. 39 Nicodemus, who had at first come to
Jesus by night, also came, bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes,
weighing about a hundred pounds. 40 They took the body of Jesus and
wrapped it with the spices in linen cloths, according to the burial
custom of the Jews. 41 Now there was a garden in the place where he
was crucified, and in the garden there was a new tomb in which no
one had ever been laid. 42 And so, because it was the Jewish day of
Preparation, and the tomb was nearby, they laid Jesus there.
[John 20]
The resurrection
1 Early on the first day of the week, while it was still dark, Mary
Magdalene came to the tomb and saw that the stone had been
removed from the tomb. 2 So she ran and went to Simon Peter and the
other disciple, the one whom Jesus loved, and said to them, "They have
taken the Lord out of the tomb, and we do not know where they have
laid him." 3 Then Peter and the other disciple set out and went toward
the tomb. 4 The two were running together, but the other disciple
outran Peter and reached the tomb first. 5 He bent down to look in
and saw the linen wrappings lying there, but he did not go in. 6 Then

235

JOHN 236

Simon Peter came, following him, and went into the tomb. He saw the
linen wrappings lying there, 7 and the cloth that had been on Jesus'
head, not lying with the linen wrappings but rolled up in a place by
itself. 8 Then the other disciple, who reached the tomb first, also went
in, and he saw and believed; 9 for as yet they did not understand the
scripture, that he must rise from the dead. 10 Then the disciples
returned to their homes.
11 But Mary stood weeping outside the tomb. As she wept, she bent
over to look into the tomb; 12 and she saw two angels in white, sitting
where the body of Jesus had been lying, one at the head and the other
at the feet. 13 They said to her, "Woman, why are you weeping?" She
said to them, "They have taken away my Lord, and I do not know
where they have laid him." 14 When she had said this, she turned
around and saw Jesus standing there, but she did not know that it was
Jesus. 15 Jesus said to her, "Woman, why are you weeping? Whom are
you looking for?" Supposing him to be the gardener, she said to him,
"Sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have laid him,
and I will take him away." 16 Jesus said to her, "Mary!" She turned and
said to him in Hebrew, "Rabbouni!" (which means Teacher). 17 Jesus
said to her, "Do not hold on to me, because I have not yet ascended to
the Father. But go to my brothers and say to them, 'I am ascending to
my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.'" 18 Mary
Magdalene went and announced to the disciples, "I have seen the
Lord"; and she told them that he had said these things to her.
19 When it was evening on that day, the first day of the week, and the
doors of the house where the disciples had met were locked for fear of
the Jews, Jesus came and stood among them and said, "Peace be with
you." 20 After he said this, he showed them his hands and his side.
Then the disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord. 21 Jesus said to
them again, "Peace be with you. As the Father has sent me, so I send
you." 22 When he had said this, he breathed on them and said to them,
"Receive the Holy Spirit. 23 If you forgive the sins of any, they are
forgiven them; if you retain the sins of any, they are retained."

236

JOHN 237

24 But Thomas (who was called the Twin), one of the twelve, was not
with them when Jesus came. 25 So the other disciples told him, "We
have seen the Lord." But he said to them, "Unless I see the mark of the
nails in his hands, and put my finger in the mark of the nails and my
hand in his side, I will not believe."
26 A week later his disciples were again in the house, and Thomas was
with them. Although the doors were shut, Jesus came and stood
among them and said, "Peace be with you." 27 Then he said to
Thomas, "Put your finger here and see my hands. Reach out your hand
and put it in my side. Do not doubt but believe." 28 Thomas answered
him, "My Lord and my God!" 29 Jesus said to him, "Have you believed
because you have seen me? Blessed are those who have not seen and
yet have come to believe."
30 Now Jesus did many other signs in the presence of his disciples,
which are not written in this book. 31 But these are written so that you
may come to believe that Jesus is the Messiah, the Son of God, and that
through believing you may have life in his name.
[John 21]
Epilogue
1 After these things Jesus showed himself again to the disciples by the
Sea of Tiberias; and he showed himself in this way. 2 Gathered there
together were Simon Peter, Thomas called the Twin, Nathanael of
Cana in Galilee, the sons of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples. 3
Simon Peter said to them, "I am going fishing." They said to him, "We
will go with you." They went out and got into the boat, but that night
they caught nothing.
4 Just after daybreak, Jesus stood on the beach; but the disciples did
not know that it was Jesus. 5 Jesus said to them, "Children, you have
no fish, have you?" They answered him, "No." 6 He said to them, "Cast
the net to the right side of the boat, and you will find some." So they
cast it, and now they were not able to haul it in because there were so
many fish. 7 That disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, "It is the
Lord!" When Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he put on some

237

JOHN 238

clothes, for he was naked, and jumped into the sea. 8 But the other
disciples came in the boat, dragging the net full of fish, for they were
not far from the land, only about a hundred yards off.
9 When they had gone ashore, they saw a charcoal fire there, with fish
on it, and bread. 10 Jesus said to them, "Bring some of the fish that you
have just caught." 11 So Simon Peter went aboard and hauled the net
ashore, full of large fish, a hundred fifty-three of them; and though
there were so many, the net was not torn. 12 Jesus said to them, "Come
and have breakfast." Now none of the disciples dared to ask him,
"Who are you?" because they knew it was the Lord. 13 Jesus came and
took the bread and gave it to them, and did the same with the fish. 14
This was now the third time that Jesus appeared to the disciples after
he was raised from the dead.
15 When they had finished breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter, "Simon
son of John, do you love me more than these?" He said to him, "Yes,
Lord; you know that I love you." Jesus said to him, "Feed my lambs." 16
A second time he said to him, "Simon son of John, do you love me?"
He said to him, "Yes, Lord; you know that I love you." Jesus said to
him, "Tend my sheep." 17 He said to him the third time, "Simon son of
John, do you love me?" Peter felt hurt because he said to him the third
time, "Do you love me?" And he said to him, "Lord, you know
everything; you know that I love you." Jesus said to him, "Feed my
sheep. 18 Very truly, I tell you, when you were younger, you used to
fasten your own belt and to go wherever you wished. But when you
grow old, you will stretch out your hands, and someone else will fasten
a belt around you and take you where you do not wish to go." 19 (He
said this to indicate the kind of death by which he would glorify God.)
After this he said to him, "Follow me."
20 Peter turned and saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following them;
he was the one who had reclined next to Jesus at the supper and had
said, "Lord, who is it that is going to betray you?" 21 When Peter saw
him, he said to Jesus, "Lord, what about him?" 22 Jesus said to him, "If
it is my will that he remain until I come, what is that to you? Follow
me!" 23 So the rumor spread in the community that this disciple would

238

JOHN 239

not die. Yet Jesus did not say to him that he would not die, but, "If it is
my will that he remain until I come, what is that to you?"
24 This is the disciple who is testifying to these things and has written
them, and we know that his testimony is true. 25 But there are also
many other things that Jesus did; if every one of them were written
down, I suppose that the world itself could not contain the books that
would be written.

239

ACTS 240

ACTS
Introduction
The book of Acts tells a dramatic story of the birth and expansion of
the church from the time of the ascension of Jesus until the arrival of
Paul in Rome. Written from the perspective of the late first century CE,
Acts alone among the documents of the earliest Christian period offers
a narrative sequel to the accounts of Jesus' words and deeds found in
the Gospels. Its author, identified by tradition as Luke, had already
produced the Gospel (1.1-2). His purpose in writing again was more
than a matter of antiquarian interest, although Acts can be
appropriately compared with other Hellenistic historical monographs.
The account was intended to imbue Christians of his day with an
unshakable confidence in their future through a didactic survey of
their past. In carrying out that overarching purpose, it addresses and
tries to solve potential and actual social and theological problems
brought about by the church's relationship to its Jewish heritage and
its Roman cultural and political environment. Luke sought to clarify
both how the church was faithful to the God of the Bible and how
Christianity was not incompatible with citizenship in the Roman
Empire. Luke also devotes considerable attention to Paul, constructing
for Christians of a post-Pauline era an image of this important figure
consistent with and supportive of the stance taken on Jewish and
Roman concerns in the book.
As a title, Acts of the Apostles is clearly a misnomer, since Peter is the
only apostle who receives individualized portrayal. Nevertheless, it
does capture one of the key concepts of the book, namely, that the
apostles guarantee continuity with Jesus through their status as
witnesses to everything that happened during his ministry (1.21-22); this
testimony applies above all to his resurrection (10.39-41). The plot line
of Acts begins with the ascension of Jesus, and the narrative first
portrays the life and dynamic growth of the primitive community in
240

ACTS 241

Jerusalem, energized by the Spirit and led by Peter and the apostles up
through the martyrdom of Stephen (chs 1-7). The persecution initiated
upon Stephen's death results in mission activity outside Jerusalem
highlighted by approaches to non-Jews (ch 8). After narrating the
conversion of Saul/Paul (ch 9), Peter is represented as the individual
through whom God establishes the inclusion of the Gentiles (10.1-11.18).
Next the early missionary tour of Barnabas and Paul on behalf of
Antioch is narrated (11.19-14.28), along with a story about Peter's
miraculous escape from death (ch 12). The center of the book recounts
the apostolic council's vindication of the efforts to free the Gentile
mission from the requirements of Jewish ritual law (ch 15). Then Paul's
further missionary travels are depicted (15.36-21.26) in Philippi,
Thessalonica, Athens, Corinth, Ephesus, Miletus, Caesarea, and
Jerusalem. Finally, the book portrays Paul's arrest, imprisonment, and
trials in Jerusalem and Caesarea, and his transfer to Rom (21.27-28.31),
closing with the uplifting image of Paul, while under house arrest,
preaching and teaching without hindrance in the capital city of the
empire.
For Luke, who was most likely a Gentile Christian, the fact that God's
promises in scripture had been made to the ancient people of God
required that the church stand in continuity with Israel. But the
experience of unbelief among Jews and the abandonment of ritual
observance in the mission to the Gentiles threatened to compromise
the integrity of this history. Luke responds by depicting the earliest
Christians as faithful Jews in Jerusalem until persecution pushes them
out. Then, by means of multiple elaborations of the Cornelius episode
(10.1-48; 11.1-18; 15.7-9) and of the story of Paul's conversion (9.1-19; 22.416; 26.9-18), he stresses that the entrance of Gentiles into the church is
nothing less than an act of God, and so by definition in continuity with
Israel's history. Nevertheless, Luke's ideal Gentile convert is one who
continues to practice Jewish piety (10.2), and Gentile Christians are
urged to adhere to behavior that would permit association with Jews
(15.20). Luke's portrayal of Paul's constant visits to synagogues and his
Jewish lifestyle serve to reinforce this maintenance of continuity with
Jewish roots.

241

ACTS 242

One consequence of Luke's larger narrative goals is that his
understanding of Paul stands in considerable tension with biographical
and theological details in Paul's own letters. This raises doubts about
the traditional identification of Luke as a companion of Paul. That
connection was based on speculation centered on the appearance of
Luke's name in Philem 24 and some letters attributed to Paul (Col 4.14;
2 Tim 4.11) in combination with certain "clues" found in the text of
Acts. Irenaeus (ca. 130-200 CE) found in the so-called "we" passages
(16.10-17; 20.5-15; 21.1-18; 27.1-28.16) proof that Luke was Paul's
inseparable collaborator. But it is far from clear that these curious firstperson plural passages reveal any firsthand knowledge of Paul on the
part of the author. Indeed, to raise ony one of the numerous
difficulties, Luke's denial of the status "apostle" to Paul in Acts is a bit
of literary license almost unimaginable for an actual companion of
"Paul the apostle" (Gal 1.1).
It is reasonable to date Acts sometime after Luke's Gospel, which may
be placed around 85-95 CE. Luke's geographical location is uncertain.
Ancient tradition placed him in Antioch, but his obvious attachment to
Paul and Pauline tradition could indicate his connection to one of the
cities of the Pauline mission around the Aegean. Paul's image had
already undergone revision by Luke's day (cf. the Pastoral epistles of 1
and 2 Timothy and Titus), and Luke did not hesitate to portray Paul as
subject to the law in line with his understanding of the continuity of
the history of Israel and the church. Moreover, according to Luke it is
not Paul's theological argument but the conversion of Cornelius
through Peter, ratified by the apostolic council, that establishes the
freedom of Gentile Christians from the law. Discrepancies between the
Paul of Acts and the Paul of the epistles have long been recognized.
Such contradictions arise because Acts preserves an image of Paul from
a period several decades after his death. Paul's role in Acts is thus
dictated not only by the biographical details of his life but also by the
needs of Luke's theology.
Luke offers no guidance concerning the origins of the information
upon which the narrative presented in Acts is based. He appears to
have relied on a mixture of traditional information uncovered by his
own investigation (cf. Lk 11.3) and his imagination of how the founding

242

ACTS 243

events unfolded in Jerusalem. In line with the general practice of
Hellenistic historians, Luke filled his narrative with speeches
appropriate to significant occasions. These speeches, which amount to
nearly one-third of the total text, are properly regarded as Luke's
literary creations, inserted into the narrative to instruct and please the
reader. They serve a subsidiary goal of demonstrating the substantial
unity of the earliest Christian preaching, even as they embody Luke's
own interpretation of the "events" surrounding the emergence of the
church.
Apart from any value Acts has a work of history, it is an important
example of early Christian theology. Luke develops the idea of the
church as a historical entity with its own distinctive period. Moreover,
the earliest church, by being confined to Jerusalem, is set apart from
the church of Luke's day. The ideal and unrepeatable structures of the
early community are accounted for by the presence of the apostles and
eyewitnesses. Luke's concern to highlight the continuity between Israel
and the church is expressed by the continued observance of Jewish
practices in the early period, implicitly in contrast to Luke's later
situation. The gap between Luke's generation and the primitive time is
bridged by the endorsement of the Gentile mission in the deliberations
of the apostolic council and the promulgation of the apostolic decree
(15.20, 29; 21.25). The latter pronouncement may have been of practical
value for Luke's community in particular, creating the conditions
necessary to allow table fellowship between Jewish and Gentile
Christians. Luke's portrayal of Christianity's close ties to Judaism also
bolsters his appeal to Roman officials not to concern themselves with
"internal theological disputes" (25.19, 20). Acts portrays influential
Romans expressing interest in Christianity (13.12; 19.31), or at least
substantiating that it poses no threat to the state (18.15; 19.37; 23.29;
25.25; 26.32). In this way Luke demonstrates the nonsubversive nature
of the church, possibly in an effort to convince Roman citizens of his
own day that nothing stood in the way of their membership in the
Christian community.
Key among the factors promoting continuity within the church itself
throughout the narrative are the descriptions of the church's
proclamation and teaching about Jesus and the constancy of the

243

ACTS 244

presence of the Spirit as the prime mover at the crucial junctures of
early ecclesiastical history (e.g., 8.29; 10.19; 16.6-7). Yet in Acts it is God
who occupies the dominant place. Jesus is described as a man whom
God legitimated by mighty works, wonders, and signs (2.22). The view
of Christ's death as atoning occurs only once in an expression taken
over from the tradition (20.28). The focal point of salvation is the
resurrection, which is marked as the crucial turning point of history.
The combination of all these forces allows Luke to portray the
successful expansion of the early Christian mission throughout the
Roman Empire under the direction of the Spirit according to the
purpose of God.

[Acts 1]
Introduction and summary
1 In the first book, Theophilus, I wrote about all that Jesus did and
taught from the beginning 2 until the day when he was taken up to
heaven, after giving instructions through the Holy Spirit to the apostles
whom he had chosen. 3 After his suffering he presented himself alive
to them by many convincing proofs, appearing to them during forty
days and speaking about the kingdom of God. 4 While staying with
them, he ordered them not to leave Jerusalem, but to wait there for
the promise of the Father. "This," he said, "is what you have heard
from me; 5 for John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with
the Holy Spirit not many days from now."
6 So when they had come together, they asked him, "Lord, is this the
time when you will restore the kingdom to Israel?" 7 He replied, "It is
not for you to know the times or periods that the Father has set by his
own authority. 8 But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit has
come upon you; and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, in all Judea
and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth." 9 When he had said this, as
they were watching, he was lifted up, and a cloud took him out of
their sight. 10 While he was going and they were gazing up toward
heaven, suddenly two men in white robes stood by them. 11 They said,

244

ACTS 245

"Men of Galilee, why do you stand looking up toward heaven? This
Jesus, who has been taken up from you into heaven, will come in the
same way as you saw him go into heaven."
12 Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet,
which is near Jerusalem, a sabbath day's journey away. 13 When they
had entered the city, they went to the room upstairs where they were
staying, Peter, and John, and James, and Andrew, Philip and Thomas,
Bartholomew and Matthew, James son of Alphaeus, and Simon the
Zealot, and Judas son of James. 14 All these were constantly devoting
themselves to prayer, together with certain women, including Mary the
mother of Jesus, as well as his brothers.
The restoration of the twelve
15 In those days Peter stood up among the believers (together the
crowd numbered about one hundred twenty persons) and said, 16
"Friends, the scripture had to be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit
through David foretold concerning Judas, who became a guide for
those who arrested Jesus — 17 for he was numbered among us and was
allotted his share in this ministry." 18 (Now this man acquired a field
with the reward of his wickedness; and falling headlong, he burst open
in the middle and all his bowels gushed out. 19 This became known to
all the residents of Jerusalem, so that the field was called in their
language Hakeldama, that is, Field of Blood.) 20 "For it is written in the
book of Psalms,
'Let his homestead become desolate,
and let there be no one to live in it';
and
'Let another take his position of overseer.'
21 So one of the men who have accompanied us during all the time
that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us, 22 beginning from the
baptism of John until the day when he was taken up from us — one of
these must become a witness with us to his resurrection." 23 So they
proposed two, Joseph called Barsabbas, who was also known as Justus,
and Matthias. 24 Then they prayed and said, "Lord, you know
everyone's heart. Show us which one of these two you have chosen 25
to take the place in this ministry and apostleship from which Judas

245

ACTS 246

turned aside to go to his own place." 26 And they cast lots for them,
and the lot fell on Matthias; and he was added to the eleven apostles.
[Acts 2]
The day of Pentecost
1 When the day of Pentecost had come, they were all together in one
place. 2 And suddenly from heaven there came a sound like the rush of
a violent wind, and it filled the entire house where they were sitting. 3
Divided tongues, as of fire, appeared among them, and a tongue
rested on each of them. 4 All of them were filled with the Holy Spirit
and began to speak in other languages, as the Spirit gave them ability.
5 Now there were devout Jews from every nation under heaven living
in Jerusalem. 6 And at this sound the crowd gathered and was
bewildered, because each one heard them speaking in the native
language of each. 7 Amazed and astonished, they asked, "Are not all
these who are speaking Galileans? 8 And how is it that we hear, each
of us, in our own native language? 9 Parthians, Medes, Elamites, and
residents of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia, 10
Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts of Libya belonging to
Cyrene, and visitors from Rome, both Jews and proselytes, 11 Cretans
and Arabs — in our own languages we hear them speaking about
God's deeds of power." 12 All were amazed and perplexed, saying to
one another, "What does this mean?" 13 But others sneered and said,
"They are filled with new wine."
14 But Peter, standing with the eleven, raised his voice and addressed
them, "Men of Judea and all who live in Jerusalem, let this be known
to you, and listen to what I say. 15 Indeed, these are not drunk, as you
suppose, for it is only nine o'clock in the morning. 16 No, this is what
was spoken through the prophet Joel:
17 'In the last days it will be, God declares,
that I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh,
and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy,
and your young men shall see visions,
and your old men shall dream dreams.

246

ACTS 247

18 Even upon my slaves, both men and women,
in those days I will pour out my Spirit;
and they shall prophesy.
19 And I will show portents in the heaven above
and signs on the earth below,
blood, and fire, and smoky mist.
20 The sun shall be turned to darkness
and the moon to blood,
before the coming of the LORD's great and glorious day.
21 Then everyone who calls on the name of the Lord shall be saved.'
22 "You that are Israelites, listen to what I have to say: Jesus of
Nazareth, a man attested to you by God with deeds of power,
wonders, and signs that God did through him among you, as you
yourselves know — 23 this man, handed over to you according to the
definite plan and foreknowledge of God, you crucified and killed by
the hands of those outside the law. 24 But God raised him up, having
freed him from death, because it was impossible for him to be held in
its power. 25 For David says concerning him,
'I saw the Lord always before me,
for he is at my right hand so that I will not be shaken;
26 therefore my heart was glad, and my tongue rejoiced;
moreover my flesh will live in hope.
27 For you will not abandon my soul to Hades,
or let your Holy One experience corruption.
28 You have made known to me the ways of life;
you will make me full of gladness with your presence.'
29 "Fellow Israelites, I may say to you confidently of our ancestor David
that he both died and was buried, and his tomb is with us to this day.
30 Since he was a prophet, he knew that God had sworn with an oath
to him that he would put one of his descendants on his throne. 31
Foreseeing this, David spoke of the resurrection of the Messiah, saying,
'He was not abandoned to Hades,
nor did his flesh experience corruption.'
32 This Jesus God raised up, and of that all of us are witnesses. 33 Being
therefore exalted at the right hand of God, and having received from
the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this that

247

ACTS 248

you both see and hear. 34 For David did not ascend into the heavens,
but he himself says,
'The Lord said to my Lord,
"Sit at my right hand,
35
until I make your enemies your footstool."'
36 Therefore let the entire house of Israel know with certainty that
God has made him both Lord and Messiah, this Jesus whom you
crucified."
37 Now when they heard this, they were cut to the heart and said to
Peter and to the other apostles, "Brothers, what should we do?" 38
Peter said to them, "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the
name of Jesus Christ so that your sins may be forgiven; and you will
receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. 39 For the promise is for you, for
your children, and for all who are far away, everyone whom the Lord
our God calls to him." 40 And he testified with many other arguments
and exhorted them, saying, "Save yourselves from this corrupt
generation." 41 So those who welcomed his message were baptized,
and that day about three thousand persons were added. 42 They
devoted themselves to the apostles' teaching and fellowship, to the
breaking of bread and the prayers.
Life in the first Christian community
43 Awe came upon everyone, because many wonders and signs were
being done by the apostles. 44 All who believed were together and
had all things in common; 45 they would sell their possessions and
goods and distribute the proceeds to all, as any had need. 46 Day by
day, as they spent much time together in the temple, they broke bread
at home and ate their food with glad and generous hearts, 47 praising
God and having the goodwill of all the people. And day by day the
Lord added to their number those who were being saved.
[Acts 3]
Peter's healing miracle in the Temple
1 One day Peter and John were going up to the temple at the hour of
prayer, at three o'clock in the afternoon. 2 And a man lame from birth

248

ACTS 249

was being carried in. People would lay him daily at the gate of the
temple called the Beautiful Gate so that he could ask for alms from
those entering the temple. 3 When he saw Peter and John about to go
into the temple, he asked them for alms. 4 Peter looked intently at
him, as did John, and said, "Look at us." 5 And he fixed his attention
on them, expecting to receive something from them. 6 But Peter said,
"I have no silver or gold, but what I have I give you; in the name of
Jesus Christ of Nazareth, stand up and walk." 7 And he took him by the
right hand and raised him up; and immediately his feet and ankles
were made strong. 8 Jumping up, he stood and began to walk, and he
entered the temple with them, walking and leaping and praising God.
9 All the people saw him walking and praising God, 10 and they
recognized him as the one who used to sit and ask for alms at the
Beautiful Gate of the temple; and they were filled with wonder and
amazement at what had happened to him.
Peter's explanation
11 While he clung to Peter and John, all the people ran together to
them in the portico called Solomon's Portico, utterly astonished. 12
When Peter saw it, he addressed the people, "You Israelites, why do
you wonder at this, or why do you stare at us, as though by our own
power or piety we had made him walk? 13 The God of Abraham, the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, the God of our ancestors has
glorified his servant Jesus, whom you handed over and rejected in the
presence of Pilate, though he had decided to release him. 14 But you
rejected the Holy and Righteous One and asked to have a murderer
given to you, 15 and you killed the Author of life, whom God raised
from the dead. To this we are witnesses. 16 And by faith in his name,
his name itself has made this man strong, whom you see and know;
and the faith that is through Jesus has given him this perfect health in
the presence of all of you.
17 "And now, friends, I know that you acted in ignorance, as did also
your rulers. 18 In this way God fulfilled what he had foretold through
all the prophets, that his Messiah would suffer. 19 Repent therefore,
and turn to God so that your sins may be wiped out, 20 so that times of
refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord, and that he may

249

ACTS 250

send the Messiah appointed for you, that is, Jesus, 21 who must remain
in heaven until the time of universal restoration that God announced
long ago through his holy prophets. 22 Moses said, 'The Lord your God
will raise up for you from your own people a prophet like me. You
must listen to whatever he tells you. 23 And it will be that everyone
who does not listen to that prophet will be utterly rooted out of the
people.' 24 And all the prophets, as many as have spoken, from Samuel
and those after him, also predicted these days. 25 You are the
descendants of the prophets and of the covenant that God gave to
your ancestors, saying to Abraham, 'And in your descendants all the
families of the earth shall be blessed.' 26 When God raised up his
servant, he sent him first to you, to bless you by turning each of you
from your wicked ways."
[Acts 4]
Arrest and release of Peter and John
1 While Peter and John were speaking to the people, the priests, the
captain of the temple, and the Sadducees came to them, 2 much
annoyed because they were teaching the people and proclaiming that
in Jesus there is the resurrection of the dead. 3 So they arrested them
and put them in custody until the next day, for it was already evening.
4 But many of those who heard the word believed; and they numbered
about five thousand.
5 The next day their rulers, elders, and scribes assembled in Jerusalem,
6 with Annas the high priest, Caiaphas, John, and Alexander, and all
who were of the high-priestly family. 7 When they had made the
prisoners stand in their midst, they inquired, "By what power or by
what name did you do this?" 8 Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit,
said to them, "Rulers of the people and elders, 9 if we are questioned
today because of a good deed done to someone who was sick and are
asked how this man has been healed, 10 let it be known to all of you,
and to all the people of Israel, that this man is standing before you in
good health by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you
crucified, whom God raised from the dead. 11 This Jesus is
'the stone that was rejected by you, the builders;
it has become the cornerstone.'

250

ACTS 251

12 There is salvation in no one else, for there is no other name under
heaven given among mortals by which we must be saved."
13 Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John and realized
that they were uneducated and ordinary men, they were amazed and
recognized them as companions of Jesus. 14 When they saw the man
who had been cured standing beside them, they had nothing to say in
opposition. 15 So they ordered them to leave the council while they
discussed the matter with one another. 16 They said, "What will we do
with them? For it is obvious to all who live in Jerusalem that a notable
sign has been done through them; we cannot deny it. 17 But to keep it
from spreading further among the people, let us warn them to speak
no more to anyone in this name." 18 So they called them and ordered
them not to speak or teach at all in the name of Jesus. 19 But Peter and
John answered them, "Whether it is right in God's sight to listen to you
rather than to God, you must judge; 20 for we cannot keep from
speaking about what we have seen and heard." 21 After threatening
them again, they let them go, finding no way to punish them because
of the people, for all of them praised God for what had happened. 22
For the man on whom this sign of healing had been performed was
more than forty years old.
Prayer of the community
23 After they were released, they went to their friends and reported
what the chief priests and the elders had said to them. 24 When they
heard it, they raised their voices together to God and said, "Sovereign
Lord, who made the heaven and the earth, the sea, and everything in
them, 25 it is you who said by the Holy Spirit through our ancestor
David, your servant:
'Why did the Gentiles rage,
and the peoples imagine vain things?
26 The kings of the earth took their stand,
and the rulers have gathered together
against the Lord and against his Messiah.'
27 For in this city, in fact, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the
Gentiles and the peoples of Israel, gathered together against your holy
servant Jesus, whom you anointed, 28 to do whatever your hand and

251

ACTS 252

your plan had predestined to take place. 29 And now, Lord, look at
their threats, and grant to your servants to speak your word with all
boldness, 30 while you stretch out your hand to heal, and signs and
wonders are performed through the name of your holy servant Jesus."
31 When they had prayed, the place in which they were gathered
together was shaken; and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and
spoke the word of God with boldness.
The sharing of goods
32 Now the whole group of those who believed were of one heart and
soul, and no one claimed private ownership of any possessions, but
everything they owned was held in common. 33 With great power the
apostles gave their testimony to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and
great grace was upon them all. 34 There was not a needy person
among them, for as many as owned lands or houses sold them and
brought the proceeds of what was sold. 35 They laid it at the apostles'
feet, and it was distributed to each as any had need. 36 There was a
Levite, a native of Cyprus, Joseph, to whom the apostles gave the name
Barnabas (which means "son of encouragement"). 37 He sold a field
that belonged to him, then brought the money, and laid it at the
apostles' feet.
[Acts 5]
1 But a man named Ananias, with the consent of his wife Sapphira, sold
a piece of property; 2 with his wife's knowledge, he kept back some of
the proceeds, and brought only a part and laid it at the apostles' feet. 3
"Ananias," Peter asked, "why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the
Holy Spirit and to keep back part of the proceeds of the land? 4 While
it remained unsold, did it not remain your own? And after it was sold,
were not the proceeds at your disposal? How is it that you have
contrived this deed in your heart? You did not lie to us but to God!" 5
Now when Ananias heard these words, he fell down and died. And
great fear seized all who heard of it. 6 The young men came and
wrapped up his body, then carried him out and buried him.

252

ACTS 253

7 After an interval of about three hours his wife came in, not knowing
what had happened. 8 Peter said to her, "Tell me whether you and
your husband sold the land for such and such a price." And she said,
"Yes, that was the price." 9 Then Peter said to her, "How is it that you
have agreed together to put the Spirit of the Lord to the test? Look,
the feet of those who have buried your husband are at the door, and
they will carry you out." 10 Immediately she fell down at his feet and
died. When the young men came in they found her dead, so they
carried her out and buried her beside her husband. 11 And great fear
seized the whole church and all who heard of these things.
12 Now many signs and wonders were done among the people through
the apostles. And they were all together in Solomon's Portico. 13 None
of the rest dared to join them, but the people held them in high
esteem. 14 Yet more than ever believers were added to the Lord, great
numbers of both men and women, 15 so that they even carried out the
sick into the streets, and laid them on cots and mats, in order that
Peter's shadow might fall on some of them as he came by. 16 A great
number of people would also gather from the towns around
Jerusalem, bringing the sick and those tormented by unclean spirits,
and they were all cured.
Second arrest of the apostles
17 Then the high priest took action; he and all who were with him (that
is, the sect of the Sadducees), being filled with jealousy, 18 arrested the
apostles and put them in the public prison. 19 But during the night an
angel of the Lord opened the prison doors, brought them out, and
said, 20 "Go, stand in the temple and tell the people the whole
message about this life." 21 When they heard this, they entered the
temple at daybreak and went on with their teaching.
When the high priest and those with him arrived, they called together
the council and the whole body of the elders of Israel, and sent to the
prison to have them brought. 22 But when the temple police went
there, they did not find them in the prison; so they returned and
reported, 23 "We found the prison securely locked and the guards
standing at the doors, but when we opened them, we found no one

253

ACTS 254

inside." 24 Now when the captain of the temple and the chief priests
heard these words, they were perplexed about them, wondering what
might be going on. 25 Then someone arrived and announced, "Look,
the men whom you put in prison are standing in the temple and
teaching the people!" 26 Then the captain went with the temple police
and brought them, but without violence, for they were afraid of being
stoned by the people.
27 When they had brought them, they had them stand before the
council. The high priest questioned them, 28 saying, "We gave you
strict orders not to teach in this name, yet here you have filled
Jerusalem with your teaching and you are determined to bring this
man's blood on us." 29 But Peter and the apostles answered, "We must
obey God rather than any human authority. 30 The God of our
ancestors raised up Jesus, whom you had killed by hanging him on a
tree. 31 God exalted him at his right hand as Leader and Savior that he
might give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins. 32 And we are
witnesses to these things, and so is the Holy Spirit whom God has given
to those who obey him."
33 When they heard this, they were enraged and wanted to kill them.
34 But a Pharisee in the council named Gamaliel, a teacher of the law,
respected by all the people, stood up and ordered the men to be put
outside for a short time. 35 Then he said to them, "Fellow Israelites,
consider carefully what you propose to do to these men. 36 For some
time ago Theudas rose up, claiming to be somebody, and a number of
men, about four hundred, joined him; but he was killed, and all who
followed him were dispersed and disappeared. 37 After him Judas the
Galilean rose up at the time of the census and got people to follow
him; he also perished, and all who followed him were scattered. 38 So
in the present case, I tell you, keep away from these men and let them
alone; because if this plan or this undertaking is of human origin, it will
fail; 39 but if it is of God, you will not be able to overthrow them — in
that case you may even be found fighting against God!"
They were convinced by him, 40 and when they had called in the
apostles, they had them flogged. Then they ordered them not to speak
in the name of Jesus, and let them go. 41 As they left the council, they

254

ACTS 255

rejoiced that they were considered worthy to suffer dishonor for the
sake of the name. 42 And every day in the temple and at home they
did not cease to teach and proclaim Jesus as the Messiah.
[Acts 6]
Choice of the seven
1 Now during those days, when the disciples were increasing in
number, the Hellenists complained against the Hebrews because their
widows were being neglected in the daily distribution of food. 2 And
the twelve called together the whole community of the disciples and
said, "It is not right that we should neglect the word of God in order to
wait on tables. 3 Therefore, friends, select from among yourselves
seven men of good standing, full of the Spirit and of wisdom, whom
we may appoint to this task, 4 while we, for our part, will devote
ourselves to prayer and to serving the word." 5 What they said pleased
the whole community, and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and
the Holy Spirit, together with Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon,
Parmenas, and Nicolaus, a proselyte of Antioch. 6 They had these men
stand before the apostles, who prayed and laid their hands on them.
7 The word of God continued to spread; the number of the disciples
increased greatly in Jerusalem, and a great many of the priests became
obedient to the faith.
Preaching and martyrdom of Stephen
8 Stephen, full of grace and power, did great wonders and signs
among the people. 9 Then some of those who belonged to the
synagogue of the Freedmen (as it was called), Cyrenians, Alexandrians,
and others of those from Cilicia and Asia, stood up and argued with
Stephen. 10 But they could not withstand the wisdom and the Spirit
with which he spoke. 11 Then they secretly instigated some men to say,
"We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and
God." 12 They stirred up the people as well as the elders and the
scribes; then they suddenly confronted him, seized him, and brought
him before the council. 13 They set up false witnesses who said, "This
man never stops saying things against this holy place and the law; 14

255

ACTS 256

for we have heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this
place and will change the customs that Moses handed on to us." 15
And all who sat in the council looked intently at him, and they saw
that his face was like the face of an angel.
[Acts 7]
1 Then the high priest asked him, "Are these things so?" 2 And Stephen
replied:
"Brothers and fathers, listen to me. The God of glory appeared to our
ancestor Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, before he lived in
Haran, 3 and said to him, 'Leave your country and your relatives and go
to the land that I will show you.' 4 Then he left the country of the
Chaldeans and settled in Haran. After his father died, God had him
move from there to this country in which you are now living. 5 He did
not give him any of it as a heritage, not even a foot's length, but
promised to give it to him as his possession and to his descendants
after him, even though he had no child. 6 And God spoke in these
terms, that his descendants would be resident aliens in a country
belonging to others, who would enslave them and mistreat them
during four hundred years. 7 'But I will judge the nation that they
serve,' said God, 'and after that they shall come out and worship me in
this place.' 8 Then he gave him the covenant of circumcision. And so
Abraham became the father of Isaac and circumcised him on the eighth
day; and Isaac became the father of Jacob, and Jacob of the twelve
patriarchs.
9 "The patriarchs, jealous of Joseph, sold him into Egypt; but God was
with him, 10 and rescued him from all his afflictions, and enabled him
to win favor and to show wisdom when he stood before Pharaoh, king
of Egypt, who appointed him ruler over Egypt and over all his
household. 11 Now there came a famine throughout Egypt and Canaan,
and great suffering, and our ancestors could find no food. 12 But when
Jacob heard that there was grain in Egypt, he sent our ancestors there
on their first visit. 13 On the second visit Joseph made himself known to
his brothers, and Joseph's family became known to Pharaoh. 14 Then
Joseph sent and invited his father Jacob and all his relatives to come to
him, seventy-five in all; 15 so Jacob went down to Egypt. He himself

256

ACTS 257

died there as well as our ancestors, 16 and their bodies were brought
back to Shechem and laid in the tomb that Abraham had bought for a
sum of silver from the sons of Hamor in Shechem.
17 "But as the time drew near for the fulfillment of the promise that
God had made to Abraham, our people in Egypt increased and
multiplied 18 until another king who had not known Joseph ruled over
Egypt. 19 He dealt craftily with our race and forced our ancestors to
abandon their infants so that they would die. 20 At this time Moses
was born, and he was beautiful before God. For three months he was
brought up in his father's house; 21 and when he was abandoned,
Pharaoh's daughter adopted him and brought him up as her own son.
22 So Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians and was
powerful in his words and deeds.
23 "When he was forty years old, it came into his heart to visit his
relatives, the Israelites. 24 When he saw one of them being wronged,
he defended the oppressed man and avenged him by striking down
the Egyptian. 25 He supposed that his kinsfolk would understand that
God through him was rescuing them, but they did not understand. 26
The next day he came to some of them as they were quarreling and
tried to reconcile them, saying, 'Men, you are brothers; why do you
wrong each other?' 27 But the man who was wronging his neighbor
pushed Moses aside, saying, 'Who made you a ruler and a judge over
us? 28 Do you want to kill me as you killed the Egyptian yesterday?' 29
When he heard this, Moses fled and became a resident alien in the
land of Midian. There he became the father of two sons.
30 "Now when forty years had passed, an angel appeared to him in the
wilderness of Mount Sinai, in the flame of a burning bush. 31 When
Moses saw it, he was amazed at the sight; and as he approached to
look, there came the voice of the Lord: 32 'I am the God of your
ancestors, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.' Moses began to
tremble and did not dare to look. 33 Then the Lord said to him, 'Take
off the sandals from your feet, for the place where you are standing is
holy ground. 34 I have surely seen the mistreatment of my people who
are in Egypt and have heard their groaning, and I have come down to
rescue them. Come now, I will send you to Egypt.'

257

ACTS 258

35 "It was this Moses whom they rejected when they said, 'Who made
you a ruler and a judge?' and whom God now sent as both ruler and
liberator through the angel who appeared to him in the bush. 36 He
led them out, having performed wonders and signs in Egypt, at the
Red Sea, and in the wilderness for forty years. 37 This is the Moses who
said to the Israelites, 'God will raise up a prophet for you from your
own people as he raised me up.' 38 He is the one who was in the
congregation in the wilderness with the angel who spoke to him at
Mount Sinai, and with our ancestors; and he received living oracles to
give to us. 39 Our ancestors were unwilling to obey him; instead, they
pushed him aside, and in their hearts they turned back to Egypt, 40
saying to Aaron, 'Make gods for us who will lead the way for us; as for
this Moses who led us out from the land of Egypt, we do not know
what has happened to him.' 41 At that time they made a calf, offered a
sacrifice to the idol, and reveled in the works of their hands. 42 But
God turned away from them and handed them over to worship the
host of heaven, as it is written in the book of the prophets:
'Did you offer to me slain victims and sacrifices
forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?
43 No; you took along the tent of Moloch,
and the star of your god Rephan,
the images that you made to worship;
so I will remove you beyond Babylon.'
44 "Our ancestors had the tent of testimony in the wilderness, as God
directed when he spoke to Moses, ordering him to make it according
to the pattern he had seen. 45 Our ancestors in turn brought it in with
Joshua when they dispossessed the nations that God drove out before
our ancestors. And it was there until the time of David, 46 who found
favor with God and asked that he might find a dwelling place for the
house of Jacob. 47 But it was Solomon who built a house for him. 48
Yet the Most High does not dwell in houses made with human hands;
as the prophet says,
49 'Heaven is my throne,
and the earth is my footstool.
What kind of house will you build for me, says the Lord,
or what is the place of my rest?
50 Did not my hand make all these things?'

258

ACTS 259

51 "You stiff-necked people, uncircumcised in heart and ears, you are
forever opposing the Holy Spirit, just as your ancestors used to do. 52
Which of the prophets did your ancestors not persecute? They killed
those who foretold the coming of the Righteous One, and now you
have become his betrayers and murderers. 53 You are the ones that
received the law as ordained by angels, and yet you have not kept it."
54 When they heard these things, they became enraged and ground
their teeth at Stephen. 55 But filled with the Holy Spirit, he gazed into
heaven and saw the glory of God and Jesus standing at the right hand
of God. 56 "Look," he said, "I see the heavens opened and the Son of
Man standing at the right hand of God!" 57 But they covered their
ears, and with a loud shout all rushed together against him. 58 Then
they dragged him out of the city and began to stone him; and the
witnesses laid their coats at the feet of a young man named Saul. 59
While they were stoning Stephen, he prayed, "Lord Jesus, receive my
spirit." 60 Then he knelt down and cried out in a loud voice, "Lord, do
not hold this sin against them." When he had said this, he died. [Acts
8] 1a And Saul approved of their killing him.
[Acts 8]
Spread of the gospel to Samaria and beyond
1b That day a severe persecution began against the church in
Jerusalem, and all except the apostles were scattered throughout the
countryside of Judea and Samaria. 2 Devout men buried Stephen and
made loud lamentation over him. 3 But Saul was ravaging the church
by entering house after house; dragging off both men and women, he
committed them to prison.
4 Now those who were scattered went from place to place, proclaiming
the word. 5 Philip went down to the city of Samaria and proclaimed
the Messiah to them. 6 The crowds with one accord listened eagerly to
what was said by Philip, hearing and seeing the signs that he did, 7 for
unclean spirits, crying with loud shrieks, came out of many who were
possessed; and many others who were paralyzed or lame were cured. 8
So there was great joy in that city.

259

ACTS 260

9 Now a certain man named Simon had previously practiced magic in
the city and amazed the people of Samaria, saying that he was
someone great. 10 All of them, from the least to the greatest, listened
to him eagerly, saying, "This man is the power of God that is called
Great." 11 And they listened eagerly to him because for a long time he
had amazed them with his magic. 12 But when they believed Philip,
who was proclaiming the good news about the kingdom of God and
the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women. 13
Even Simon himself believed. After being baptized, he stayed
constantly with Philip and was amazed when he saw the signs and
great miracles that took place.
14 Now when the apostles at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had
accepted the word of God, they sent Peter and John to them. 15 The
two went down and prayed for them that they might receive the Holy
Spirit 16 (for as yet the Spirit had not come upon any of them; they had
only been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus). 17 Then Peter and
John laid their hands on them, and they received the Holy Spirit. 18
Now when Simon saw that the Spirit was given through the laying on
of the apostles' hands, he offered them money, 19 saying, "Give me
also this power so that anyone on whom I lay my hands may receive
the Holy Spirit." 20 But Peter said to him, "May your silver perish with
you, because you thought you could obtain God's gift with money! 21
You have no part or share in this, for your heart is not right before
God. 22 Repent therefore of this wickedness of yours, and pray to the
Lord that, if possible, the intent of your heart may be forgiven you. 23
For I see that you are in the gall of bitterness and the chains of
wickedness." 24 Simon answered, "Pray for me to the Lord, that
nothing of what you have said may happen to me."
25 Now after Peter and John had testified and spoken the word of the
Lord, they returned to Jerusalem, proclaiming the good news to many
villages of the Samaritans.
26 Then an angel of the Lord said to Philip, "Get up and go toward the
south to the road that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza." (This is a
wilderness road.) 27 So he got up and went. Now there was an
Ethiopian eunuch, a court official of the Candace, queen of the

260

ACTS 261

Ethiopians, in charge of her entire treasury. He had come to Jerusalem
to worship 28 and was returning home; seated in his chariot, he was
reading the prophet Isaiah. 29 Then the Spirit said to Philip, "Go over
to this chariot and join it." 30 So Philip ran up to it and heard him
reading the prophet Isaiah. He asked, "Do you understand what you
are reading?" 31 He replied, "How can I, unless someone guides me?"
And he invited Philip to get in and sit beside him. 32 Now the passage
of the scripture that he was reading was this:
"Like a sheep he was led to the slaughter,
and like a lamb silent before its shearer,
so he does not open his mouth.
33 In his humiliation justice was denied him.
Who can describe his generation?
For his life is taken away from the earth."
34 The eunuch asked Philip, "About whom, may I ask you, does the
prophet say this, about himself or about someone else?" 35 Then Philip
began to speak, and starting with this scripture, he proclaimed to him
the good news about Jesus. 36 As they were going along the road, they
came to some water; and the eunuch said, "Look, here is water! What
is to prevent me from being baptized?" 38 He commanded the chariot
to stop, and both of them, Philip and the eunuch, went down into the
water, and Philip baptized him. 39 When they came up out of the
water, the Spirit of the Lord snatched Philip away; the eunuch saw him
no more, and went on his way rejoicing. 40 But Philip found himself at
Azotus, and as he was passing through the region, he proclaimed the
good news to all the towns until he came to Caesarea.
[Acts 9]
The conversion and call of Saul of Tarsus
1 Meanwhile Saul, still breathing threats and murder against the
disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest 2 and asked him for letters
to the synagogues at Damascus, so that if he found any who belonged
to the Way, men or women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem.
3 Now as he was going along and approaching Damascus, suddenly a
light from heaven flashed around him. 4 He fell to the ground and
heard a voice saying to him, "Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?" 5
He asked, "Who are you, Lord?" The reply came, "I am Jesus, whom

261

ACTS 262

you are persecuting. 6 But get up and enter the city, and you will be
told what you are to do." 7 The men who were traveling with him
stood speechless because they heard the voice but saw no one. 8 Saul
got up from the ground, and though his eyes were open, he could see
nothing; so they led him by the hand and brought him into Damascus.
9 For three days he was without sight, and neither ate nor drank.
10 Now there was a disciple in Damascus named Ananias. The Lord said
to him in a vision, "Ananias." He answered, "Here I am, Lord." 11 The
Lord said to him, "Get up and go to the street called Straight, and at
the house of Judas look for a man of Tarsus named Saul. At this
moment he is praying, 12 and he has seen in a vision a man named
Ananias come in and lay his hands on him so that he might regain his
sight." 13 But Ananias answered, "Lord, I have heard from many about
this man, how much evil he has done to your saints in Jerusalem; 14
and here he has authority from the chief priests to bind all who invoke
your name." 15 But the Lord said to him, "Go, for he is an instrument
whom I have chosen to bring my name before Gentiles and kings and
before the people of Israel; 16 I myself will show him how much he
must suffer for the sake of my name." 17 So Ananias went and entered
the house. He laid his hands on Saul and said, "Brother Saul, the Lord
Jesus, who appeared to you on your way here, has sent me so that you
may regain your sight and be filled with the Holy Spirit." 18 And
immediately something like scales fell from his eyes, and his sight was
restored. Then he got up and was baptized, 19 and after taking some
food, he regained his strength.
Saul's preaching in Damascus and first visit to Jerusalem
For several days he was with the disciples in Damascus, 20 and
immediately he began to proclaim Jesus in the synagogues, saying, "He
is the Son of God." 21 All who heard him were amazed and said, "Is not
this the man who made havoc in Jerusalem among those who invoked
this name? And has he not come here for the purpose of bringing
them bound before the chief priests?" 22 Saul became increasingly
more powerful and confounded the Jews who lived in Damascus by
proving that Jesus was the Messiah.

262

ACTS 263

23 After some time had passed, the Jews plotted to kill him, 24 but
their plot became known to Saul. They were watching the gates day
and night so that they might kill him; 25 but his disciples took him by
night and let him down through an opening in the wall, lowering him
in a basket.
26 When he had come to Jerusalem, he attempted to join the disciples;
and they were all afraid of him, for they did not believe that he was a
disciple. 27 But Barnabas took him, brought him to the apostles, and
described for them how on the road he had seen the Lord, who had
spoken to him, and how in Damascus he had spoken boldly in the
name of Jesus. 28 So he went in and out among them in Jerusalem,
speaking boldly in the name of the Lord. 29 He spoke and argued with
the Hellenists; but they were attempting to kill him. 30 When the
believers learned of it, they brought him down to Caesarea and sent
him off to Tarsus.
31 Meanwhile the church throughout Judea, Galilee, and Samaria had
peace and was built up. Living in the fear of the Lord and in the
comfort of the Holy Spirit, it increased in numbers.
Peter in Lydda and Joppa
32 Now as Peter went here and there among all the believers, he came
down also to the saints living in Lydda. 33 There he found a man
named Aeneas, who had been bedridden for eight years, for he was
paralyzed. 34 Peter said to him, "Aeneas, Jesus Christ heals you; get up
and make your bed!" And immediately he got up. 35 And all the
residents of Lydda and Sharon saw him and turned to the Lord.
36 Now in Joppa there was a disciple whose name was Tabitha, which
in Greek is Dorcas. She was devoted to good works and acts of charity.
37 At that time she became ill and died. When they had washed her,
they laid her in a room upstairs. 38 Since Lydda was near Joppa, the
disciples, who heard that Peter was there, sent two men to him with
the request, "Please come to us without delay." 39 So Peter got up and
went with them; and when he arrived, they took him to the room
upstairs. All the widows stood beside him, weeping and showing tunics

263

ACTS 264

and other clothing that Dorcas had made while she was with them. 40
Peter put all of them outside, and then he knelt down and prayed. He
turned to the body and said, "Tabitha, get up." Then she opened her
eyes, and seeing Peter, she sat up. 41 He gave her his hand and helped
her up. Then calling the saints and widows, he showed her to be alive.
42 This became known throughout Joppa, and many believed in the
Lord. 43 Meanwhile he stayed in Joppa for some time with a certain
Simon, a tanner.
[Acts 10]
The conversion of Cornelius
1 In Caesarea there was a man named Cornelius, a centurion of the
Italian Cohort, as it was called. 2 He was a devout man who feared God
with all his household; he gave alms generously to the people and
prayed constantly to God. 3 One afternoon at about three o'clock he
had a vision in which he clearly saw an angel of God coming in and
saying to him, "Cornelius." 4 He stared at him in terror and said, "What
is it, Lord?" He answered, "Your prayers and your alms have ascended
as a memorial before God. 5 Now send men to Joppa for a certain
Simon who is called Peter; 6 he is lodging with Simon, a tanner, whose
house is by the seaside." 7 When the angel who spoke to him had left,
he called two of his slaves and a devout soldier from the ranks of those
who served him, 8 and after telling them everything, he sent them to
Joppa.
9 About noon the next day, as they were on their journey and
approaching the city, Peter went up on the roof to pray. 10 He became
hungry and wanted something to eat; and while it was being
prepared, he fell into a trance. 11 He saw the heaven opened and
something like a large sheet coming down, being lowered to the
ground by its four corners. 12 In it were all kinds of four-footed
creatures and reptiles and birds of the air. 13 Then he heard a voice
saying, "Get up, Peter; kill and eat." 14 But Peter said, "By no means,
Lord; for I have never eaten anything that is profane or unclean." 15
The voice said to him again, a second time, "What God has made clean,
you must not call profane." 16 This happened three times, and the
thing was suddenly taken up to heaven.

264

ACTS 265

17 Now while Peter was greatly puzzled about what to make of the
vision that he had seen, suddenly the men sent by Cornelius appeared.
They were asking for Simon's house and were standing by the gate. 18
They called out to ask whether Simon, who was called Peter, was
staying there. 19 While Peter was still thinking about the vision, the
Spirit said to him, "Look, three men are searching for you. 20 Now get
up, go down, and go with them without hesitation; for I have sent
them." 21 So Peter went down to the men and said, "I am the one you
are looking for; what is the reason for your coming?" 22 They
answered, "Cornelius, a centurion, an upright and God-fearing man,
who is well spoken of by the whole Jewish nation, was directed by a
holy angel to send for you to come to his house and to hear what you
have to say." 23 So Peter invited them in and gave them lodging.
The next day he got up and went with them, and some of the believers
from Joppa accompanied him. 24 The following day they came to
Caesarea. Cornelius was expecting them and had called together his
relatives and close friends. 25 On Peter's arrival Cornelius met him, and
falling at his feet, worshiped him. 26 But Peter made him get up,
saying, "Stand up; I am only a mortal." 27 And as he talked with him,
he went in and found that many had assembled; 28 and he said to
them, "You yourselves know that it is unlawful for a Jew to associate
with or to visit a Gentile; but God has shown me that I should not call
anyone profane or unclean. 29 So when I was sent for, I came without
objection. Now may I ask why you sent for me?"
30 Cornelius replied, "Four days ago at this very hour, at three o'clock, I
was praying in my house when suddenly a man in dazzling clothes
stood before me. 31 He said, 'Cornelius, your prayer has been heard
and your alms have been remembered before God. 32 Send therefore
to Joppa and ask for Simon, who is called Peter; he is staying in the
home of Simon, a tanner, by the sea.' 33 Therefore I sent for you
immediately, and you have been kind enough to come. So now all of
us are here in the presence of God to listen to all that the Lord has
commanded you to say."

265

ACTS 266

34 Then Peter began to speak to them: "I truly understand that God
shows no partiality, 35 but in every nation anyone who fears him and
does what is right is acceptable to him. 36 You know the message he
sent to the people of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ — he is
Lord of all. 37 That message spread throughout Judea, beginning in
Galilee after the baptism that John announced: 38 how God anointed
Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Spirit and with power; how he went
about doing good and healing all who were oppressed by the devil, for
God was with him. 39 We are witnesses to all that he did both in Judea
and in Jerusalem. They put him to death by hanging him on a tree; 40
but God raised him on the third day and allowed him to appear, 41 not
to all the people but to us who were chosen by God as witnesses, and
who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead. 42 He
commanded us to preach to the people and to testify that he is the one
ordained by God as judge of the living and the dead. 43 All the
prophets testify about him that everyone who believes in him receives
forgiveness of sins through his name."
44 While Peter was still speaking, the Holy Spirit fell upon all who
heard the word. 45 The circumcised believers who had come with Peter
were astounded that the gift of the Holy Spirit had been poured out
even on the Gentiles, 46 for they heard them speaking in tongues and
extolling God. Then Peter said, 47 "Can anyone withhold the water for
baptizing these people who have received the Holy Spirit just as we
have?" 48 So he ordered them to be baptized in the name of Jesus
Christ. Then they invited him to stay for several days.
[Acts 11]
Peter's defense
1 Now the apostles and the believers who were in Judea heard that the
Gentiles had also accepted the word of God. 2 So when Peter went up
to Jerusalem, the circumcised believers criticized him, 3 saying, "Why
did you go to uncircumcised men and eat with them?" 4 Then Peter
began to explain it to them, step by step, saying, 5 "I was in the city of
Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw a vision. There was something like
a large sheet coming down from heaven, being lowered by its four
corners; and it came close to me. 6 As I looked at it closely I saw four-

266

ACTS 267

footed animals, beasts of prey, reptiles, and birds of the air. 7 I also
heard a voice saying to me, 'Get up, Peter; kill and eat.' 8 But I replied,
'By no means, Lord; for nothing profane or unclean has ever entered
my mouth.' 9 But a second time the voice answered from heaven,
'What God has made clean, you must not call profane.' 10 This
happened three times; then everything was pulled up again to heaven.
11 At that very moment three men, sent to me from Caesarea, arrived
at the house where we were. 12 The Spirit told me to go with them and
not to make a distinction between them and us. These six brothers also
accompanied me, and we entered the man's house. 13 He told us how
he had seen the angel standing in his house and saying, 'Send to Joppa
and bring Simon, who is called Peter; 14 he will give you a message by
which you and your entire household will be saved.' 15 And as I began
to speak, the Holy Spirit fell upon them just as it had upon us at the
beginning. 16 And I remembered the word of the Lord, how he had
said, 'John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy
Spirit.' 17 If then God gave them the same gift that he gave us when
we believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I that I could hinder
God?" 18 When they heard this, they were silenced. And they praised
God, saying, "Then God has given even to the Gentiles the repentance
that leads to life."
Mission to the Greeks in Antioch
19 Now those who were scattered because of the persecution that took
place over Stephen traveled as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch,
and they spoke the word to no one except Jews. 20 But among them
were some men of Cyprus and Cyrene who, on coming to Antioch,
spoke to the Hellenists also, proclaiming the Lord Jesus. 21 The hand of
the Lord was with them, and a great number became believers and
turned to the Lord. 22 News of this came to the ears of the church in
Jerusalem, and they sent Barnabas to Antioch. 23 When he came and
saw the grace of God, he rejoiced, and he exhorted them all to remain
faithful to the Lord with steadfast devotion; 24 for he was a good man,
full of the Holy Spirit and of faith. And a great many people were
brought to the Lord. 25 Then Barnabas went to Tarsus to look for Saul,
26 and when he had found him, he brought him to Antioch. So it was
that for an entire year they met with the church and taught a great

267

ACTS 268

many people, and it was in Antioch that the disciples were first called
"Christians."
Antioch aids Jerusalem
27 At that time prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch. 28
One of them named Agabus stood up and predicted by the Spirit that
there would be a severe famine over all the world; and this took place
during the reign of Claudius. 29 The disciples determined that
according to their ability, each would send relief to the believers living
in Judea; 30 this they did, sending it to the elders by Barnabas and Saul.
[Acts 12]
Persecution touches the apostles
1 About that time King Herod laid violent hands upon some who
belonged to the church. 2 He had James, the brother of John, killed
with the sword. 3 After he saw that it pleased the Jews, he proceeded
to arrest Peter also. (This was during the festival of Unleavened Bread.)
4 When he had seized him, he put him in prison and handed him over
to four squads of soldiers to guard him, intending to bring him out to
the people after the Passover. 5 While Peter was kept in prison, the
church prayed fervently to God for him.
6 The very night before Herod was going to bring him out, Peter,
bound with two chains, was sleeping between two soldiers, while
guards in front of the door were keeping watch over the prison. 7
Suddenly an angel of the Lord appeared and a light shone in the cell.
He tapped Peter on the side and woke him, saying, "Get up quickly."
And the chains fell off his wrists. 8 The angel said to him, "Fasten your
belt and put on your sandals." He did so. Then he said to him, "Wrap
your cloak around you and follow me." 9 Peter went out and followed
him; he did not realize that what was happening with the angel's help
was real; he thought he was seeing a vision. 10 After they had passed
the first and the second guard, they came before the iron gate leading
into the city. It opened for them of its own accord, and they went
outside and walked along a lane, when suddenly the angel left him. 11
Then Peter came to himself and said, "Now I am sure that the Lord has

268

ACTS 269

sent his angel and rescued me from the hands of Herod and from all
that the Jewish people were expecting."
12 As soon as he realized this, he went to the house of Mary, the
mother of John whose other name was Mark, where many had
gathered and were praying. 13 When he knocked at the outer gate, a
maid named Rhoda came to answer. 14 On recognizing Peter's voice,
she was so overjoyed that, instead of opening the gate, she ran in and
announced that Peter was standing at the gate. 15 They said to her,
"You are out of your mind!" But she insisted that it was so. They said,
"It is his angel." 16 Meanwhile Peter continued knocking; and when
they opened the gate, they saw him and were amazed. 17 He motioned
to them with his hand to be silent, and described for them how the
Lord had brought him out of the prison. And he added, "Tell this to
James and to the believers." Then he left and went to another place.
18 When morning came, there was no small commotion among the
soldiers over what had become of Peter. 19 When Herod had searched
for him and could not find him, he examined the guards and ordered
them to be put to death. Then he went down from Judea to Caesarea
and stayed there.
Death of Herod Agrippa
20 Now Herod was angry with the people of Tyre and Sidon. So they
came to him in a body; and after winning over Blastus, the king's
chamberlain, they asked for a reconciliation, because their country
depended on the king's country for food. 21 On an appointed day
Herod put on his royal robes, took his seat on the platform, and
delivered a public address to them. 22 The people kept shouting, "The
voice of a god, and not of a mortal!" 23 And immediately, because he
had not given the glory to God, an angel of the Lord struck him down,
and he was eaten by worms and died.

269

ACTS 270

Commission at Antioch
24 But the word of God continued to advance and gain adherents. 25
Then after completing their mission Barnabas and Saul returned to
Jerusalem and brought with them John, whose other name was Mark.
[Acts 13]
1 Now in the church at Antioch there were prophets and teachers:
Barnabas, Simeon who was called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen a
member of the court of Herod the ruler, and Saul. 2 While they were
worshiping the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, "Set apart for me
Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them." 3 Then
after fasting and praying they laid their hands on them and sent them
off.
Cyprus
4 So, being sent out by the Holy Spirit, they went down to Seleucia;
and from there they sailed to Cyprus. 5 When they arrived at Salamis,
they proclaimed the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews. And
they had John also to assist them. 6 When they had gone through the
whole island as far as Paphos, they met a certain magician, a Jewish
false prophet, named Bar-Jesus. 7 He was with the proconsul, Sergius
Paulus, an intelligent man, who summoned Barnabas and Saul and
wanted to hear the word of God. 8 But the magician Elymas (for that is
the translation of his name) opposed them and tried to turn the
proconsul away from the faith. 9 But Saul, also known as Paul, filled
with the Holy Spirit, looked intently at him 10 and said, "You son of the
devil, you enemy of all righteousness, full of all deceit and villainy, will
you not stop making crooked the straight paths of the Lord? 11 And
now listen — the hand of the Lord is against you, and you will be blind
for a while, unable to see the sun." Immediately mist and darkness
came over him, and he went about groping for someone to lead him
by the hand. 12 When the proconsul saw what had happened, he
believed, for he was astonished at the teaching about the Lord.

270

ACTS 271

Journey to Antioch of Pisidia and Iconium
13 Then Paul and his companions set sail from Paphos and came to
Perga in Pamphylia. John, however, left them and returned to
Jerusalem; 14 but they went on from Perga and came to Antioch in
Pisidia. And on the sabbath day they went into the synagogue and sat
down. 15 After the reading of the law and the prophets, the officials of
the synagogue sent them a message, saying, "Brothers, if you have any
word of exhortation for the people, give it." 16 So Paul stood up and
with a gesture began to speak:
"You Israelites, and others who fear God, listen. 17 The God of this
people Israel chose our ancestors and made the people great during
their stay in the land of Egypt, and with uplifted arm he led them out
of it. 18 For about forty years he put up with them in the wilderness. 19
After he had destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, he gave
them their land as an inheritance 20 for about four hundred fifty years.
After that he gave them judges until the time of the prophet Samuel.
21 Then they asked for a king; and God gave them Saul son of Kish, a
man of the tribe of Benjamin, who reigned for forty years. 22 When he
had removed him, he made David their king. In his testimony about
him he said, 'I have found David, son of Jesse, to be a man after my
heart, who will carry out all my wishes.' 23 Of this man's posterity God
has brought to Israel a Savior, Jesus, as he promised; 24 before his
coming John had already proclaimed a baptism of repentance to all the
people of Israel. 25 And as John was finishing his work, he said, 'What
do you suppose that I am? I am not he. No, but one is coming after me;
I am not worthy to untie the thong of the sandals on his feet.'
26 "My brothers, you descendants of Abraham's family, and others
who fear God, to us the message of this salvation has been sent. 27
Because the residents of Jerusalem and their leaders did not recognize
him or understand the words of the prophets that are read every
sabbath, they fulfilled those words by condemning him. 28 Even
though they found no cause for a sentence of death, they asked Pilate
to have him killed. 29 When they had carried out everything that was
written about him, they took him down from the tree and laid him in a
tomb. 30 But God raised him from the dead; 31 and for many days he

271

ACTS 272

appeared to those who came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem,
and they are now his witnesses to the people. 32 And we bring you the
good news that what God promised to our ancestors 33 he has fulfilled
for us, their children, by raising Jesus; as also it is written in the second
psalm,
'You are my Son;
today I have begotten you.'
34 As to his raising him from the dead, no more to return to
corruption, he has spoken in this way,
'I will give you the holy promises made to David.'
35 Therefore he has also said in another psalm,
'You will not let your Holy One experience corruption.'
36 For David, after he had served the purpose of God in his own
generation, died, was laid beside his ancestors, and experienced
corruption; 37 but he whom God raised up experienced no corruption.
38 Let it be known to you therefore, my brothers, that through this
man forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to you; 39 by this Jesus everyone
who believes is set free from all those sins from which you could not be
freed by the law of Moses. 40 Beware, therefore, that what the
prophets said does not happen to you:
41 'Look, you scoffers!
Be amazed and perish,
for in your days I am doing a work,
a work that you will never believe, even if someone tells you.'"
42 As Paul and Barnabas were going out, the people urged them to
speak about these things again the next sabbath. 43 When the meeting
of the synagogue broke up, many Jews and devout converts to Judaism
followed Paul and Barnabas, who spoke to them and urged them to
continue in the grace of God.
44 The next sabbath almost the whole city gathered to hear the word
of the Lord. 45 But when the Jews saw the crowds, they were filled
with jealousy; and blaspheming, they contradicted what was spoken by
Paul. 46 Then both Paul and Barnabas spoke out boldly, saying, "It was
necessary that the word of God should be spoken first to you. Since
you reject it and judge yourselves to be unworthy of eternal life, we

272

ACTS 273

are now turning to the Gentiles. 47 For so the Lord has commanded us,
saying,
'I have set you to be a light for the Gentiles,
so that you may bring salvation to the ends of the earth.'"
48 When the Gentiles heard this, they were glad and praised the word
of the Lord; and as many as had been destined for eternal life became
believers. 49 Thus the word of the Lord spread throughout the region.
50 But the Jews incited the devout women of high standing and the
leading men of the city, and stirred up persecution against Paul and
Barnabas, and drove them out of their region. 51 So they shook the
dust off their feet in protest against them, and went to Iconium. 52
And the disciples were filled with joy and with the Holy Spirit.
[Acts 14]
Ministry in the Iconium region and return to Antioch
1 The same thing occurred in Iconium, where Paul and Barnabas went
into the Jewish synagogue and spoke in such a way that a great
number of both Jews and Greeks became believers. 2 But the
unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles and poisoned their minds
against the brothers. 3 So they remained for a long time, speaking
boldly for the Lord, who testified to the word of his grace by granting
signs and wonders to be done through them. 4 But the residents of the
city were divided; some sided with the Jews, and some with the
apostles. 5 And when an attempt was made by both Gentiles and Jews,
with their rulers, to mistreat them and to stone them, 6 the apostles
learned of it and fled to Lystra and Derbe, cities of Lycaonia, and to the
surrounding country; 7 and there they continued proclaiming the good
news.
8 In Lystra there was a man sitting who could not use his feet and had
never walked, for he had been crippled from birth. 9 He listened to
Paul as he was speaking. And Paul, looking at him intently and seeing
that he had faith to be healed, 10 said in a loud voice, "Stand upright
on your feet." And the man sprang up and began to walk. 11 When the
crowds saw what Paul had done, they shouted in the Lycaonian
language, "The gods have come down to us in human form!" 12

273

ACTS 274

Barnabas they called Zeus, and Paul they called Hermes, because he
was the chief speaker. 13 The priest of Zeus, whose temple was just
outside the city, brought oxen and garlands to the gates; he and the
crowds wanted to offer sacrifice. 14 When the apostles Barnabas and
Paul heard of it, they tore their clothes and rushed out into the crowd,
shouting, 15 "Friends, why are you doing this? We are mortals just like
you, and we bring you good news, that you should turn from these
worthless things to the living God, who made the heaven and the
earth and the sea and all that is in them. 16 In past generations he
allowed all the nations to follow their own ways; 17 yet he has not left
himself without a witness in doing good — giving you rains from
heaven and fruitful seasons, and filling you with food and your hearts
with joy." 18 Even with these words, they scarcely restrained the
crowds from offering sacrifice to them.
19 But Jews came there from Antioch and Iconium and won over the
crowds. Then they stoned Paul and dragged him out of the city,
supposing that he was dead. 20 But when the disciples surrounded him,
he got up and went into the city. The next day he went on with
Barnabas to Derbe.
21 After they had proclaimed the good news to that city and had made
many disciples, they returned to Lystra, then on to Iconium and
Antioch. 22 There they strengthened the souls of the disciples and
encouraged them to continue in the faith, saying, "It is through many
persecutions that we must enter the kingdom of God." 23 And after
they had appointed elders for them in each church, with prayer and
fasting they entrusted them to the Lord in whom they had come to
believe.
24 Then they passed through Pisidia and came to Pamphylia. 25 When
they had spoken the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia. 26
From there they sailed back to Antioch, where they had been
commended to the grace of God for the work that they had
completed. 27 When they arrived, they called the church together and
related all that God had done with them, and how he had opened a
door of faith for the Gentiles. 28 And they stayed there with the
disciples for some time.

274

ACTS 275

[Acts 15]
Jerusalem affirms the admission of Gentiles
1 Then certain individuals came down from Judea and were teaching
the brothers, "Unless you are circumcised according to the custom of
Moses, you cannot be saved." 2 And after Paul and Barnabas had no
small dissension and debate with them, Paul and Barnabas and some of
the others were appointed to go up to Jerusalem to discuss this
question with the apostles and the elders. 3 So they were sent on their
way by the church, and as they passed through both Phoenicia and
Samaria, they reported the conversion of the Gentiles, and brought
great joy to all the believers. 4 When they came to Jerusalem, they
were welcomed by the church and the apostles and the elders, and
they reported all that God had done with them. 5 But some believers
who belonged to the sect of the Pharisees stood up and said, "It is
necessary for them to be circumcised and ordered to keep the law of
Moses."
6 The apostles and the elders met together to consider this matter. 7
After there had been much debate, Peter stood up and said to them,
"My brothers, you know that in the early days God made a choice
among you, that I should be the one through whom the Gentiles
would hear the message of the good news and become believers. 8
And God, who knows the human heart, testified to them by giving
them the Holy Spirit, just as he did to us; 9 and in cleansing their hearts
by faith he has made no distinction between them and us. 10 Now
therefore why are you putting God to the test by placing on the neck
of the disciples a yoke that neither our ancestors nor we have been
able to bear? 11 On the contrary, we believe that we will be saved
through the grace of the Lord Jesus, just as they will."
12 The whole assembly kept silence, and listened to Barnabas and Paul
as they told of all the signs and wonders that God had done through
them among the Gentiles. 13 After they finished speaking, James
replied, "My brothers, listen to me. 14 Simeon has related how God
first looked favorably on the Gentiles, to take from among them a
people for his name. 15 This agrees with the words of the prophets, as
it is written,

275

ACTS 276

16 'After this I will return,
and I will rebuild the dwelling of David, which has fallen;
from its ruins I will rebuild it,
and I will set it up,
17 so that all other peoples may seek the Lord —
even all the Gentiles over whom my name has been called.
Thus says the Lord, who has been making these things 18 known
from long ago.'
19 Therefore I have reached the decision that we should not trouble
those Gentiles who are turning to God, 20 but we should write to them
to abstain only from things polluted by idols and from fornication and
from whatever has been strangled and from blood. 21 For in every city,
for generations past, Moses has had those who proclaim him, for he
has been read aloud every sabbath in the synagogues."
22 Then the apostles and the elders, with the consent of the whole
church, decided to choose men from among their members and to send
them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas. They sent Judas called
Barsabbas, and Silas, leaders among the brothers, 23 with the following
letter: "The brothers, both the apostles and the elders, to the believers
of Gentile origin in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia, greetings. 24 Since we
have heard that certain persons who have gone out from us, though
with no instructions from us, have said things to disturb you and have
unsettled your minds, 25 we have decided unanimously to choose
representatives and send them to you, along with our beloved
Barnabas and Paul, 26 who have risked their lives for the sake of our
Lord Jesus Christ. 27 We have therefore sent Judas and Silas, who
themselves will tell you the same things by word of mouth. 28 For it
has seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us to impose on you no
further burden than these essentials: 29 that you abstain from what
has been sacrificed to idols and from blood and from what is strangled
and from fornication. If you keep yourselves from these, you will do
well. Farewell."
30 So they were sent off and went down to Antioch. When they
gathered the congregation together, they delivered the letter. 31
When its members read it, they rejoiced at the exhortation. 32 Judas
and Silas, who were themselves prophets, said much to encourage and

276

ACTS 277

strengthen the believers. 33 After they had been there for some time,
they were sent off in peace by the believers to those who had sent
them. 35 But Paul and Barnabas remained in Antioch, and there, with
many others, they taught and proclaimed the word of the Lord.
Paul revisits the churches of the previous mission
36 After some days Paul said to Barnabas, "Come, let us return and visit
the believers in every city where we proclaimed the word of the Lord
and see how they are doing." 37 Barnabas wanted to take with them
John called Mark. 38 But Paul decided not to take with them one who
had deserted them in Pamphylia and had not accompanied them in the
work. 39 The disagreement became so sharp that they parted company;
Barnabas took Mark with him and sailed away to Cyprus. 40 But Paul
chose Silas and set out, the believers commending him to the grace of
the Lord. 41 He went through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the
churches.
[Acts 16]
1 Paul went on also to Derbe and to Lystra, where there was a disciple
named Timothy, the son of a Jewish woman who was a believer; but
his father was a Greek. 2 He was well spoken of by the believers in
Lystra and Iconium. 3 Paul wanted Timothy to accompany him; and he
took him and had him circumcised because of the Jews who were in
those places, for they all knew that his father was a Greek. 4 As they
went from town to town, they delivered to them for observance the
decisions that had been reached by the apostles and elders who were
in Jerusalem. 5 So the churches were strengthened in the faith and
increased in numbers daily.
Directed by the Spirit through Asia Minor to Troas
6 They went through the region of Phrygia and Galatia, having been
forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia. 7 When they
had come opposite Mysia, they attempted to go into Bithynia, but the
Spirit of Jesus did not allow them; 8 so, passing by Mysia, they went
down to Troas. 9 During the night Paul had a vision: there stood a man

277

ACTS 278

of Macedonia pleading with him and saying, "Come over to Macedonia
and help us." 10 When he had seen the vision, we immediately tried to
cross over to Macedonia, being convinced that God had called us to
proclaim the good news to them.
Paul and Silas in Philippi
11 We set sail from Troas and took a straight course to Samothrace, the
following day to Neapolis, 12 and from there to Philippi, which is a
leading city of the district of Macedonia and a Roman colony. We
remained in this city for some days. 13 On the sabbath day we went
outside the gate by the river, where we supposed there was a place of
prayer; and we sat down and spoke to the women who had gathered
there. 14 A certain woman named Lydia, a worshiper of God, was
listening to us; she was from the city of Thyatira and a dealer in purple
cloth. The Lord opened her heart to listen eagerly to what was said by
Paul. 15 When she and her household were baptized, she urged us,
saying, "If you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come and
stay at my home." And she prevailed upon us.
16 One day, as we were going to the place of prayer, we met a slavegirl who had a spirit of divination and brought her owners a great deal
of money by fortune-telling. 17 While she followed Paul and us, she
would cry out, "These men are slaves of the Most High God, who
proclaim to you a way of salvation." 18 She kept doing this for many
days. But Paul, very much annoyed, turned and said to the spirit, "I
order you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her." And it came
out that very hour.
19 But when her owners saw that their hope of making money was
gone, they seized Paul and Silas and dragged them into the
marketplace before the authorities. 20 When they had brought them
before the magistrates, they said, "These men are disturbing our city;
they are Jews 21 and are advocating customs that are not lawful for us
as Romans to adopt or observe." 22 The crowd joined in attacking
them, and the magistrates had them stripped of their clothing and
ordered them to be beaten with rods. 23 After they had given them a
severe flogging, they threw them into prison and ordered the jailer to

278

ACTS 279

keep them securely. 24 Following these instructions, he put them in the
innermost cell and fastened their feet in the stocks.
25 About midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to
God, and the prisoners were listening to them. 26 Suddenly there was
an earthquake, so violent that the foundations of the prison were
shaken; and immediately all the doors were opened and everyone's
chains were unfastened. 27 When the jailer woke up and saw the
prison doors wide open, he drew his sword and was about to kill
himself, since he supposed that the prisoners had escaped. 28 But Paul
shouted in a loud voice, "Do not harm yourself, for we are all here." 29
The jailer called for lights, and rushing in, he fell down trembling
before Paul and Silas. 30 Then he brought them outside and said, "Sirs,
what must I do to be saved?" 31 They answered, "Believe on the Lord
Jesus, and you will be saved, you and your household." 32 They spoke
the word of the Lord to him and to all who were in his house. 33 At the
same hour of the night he took them and washed their wounds; then
he and his entire family were baptized without delay. 34 He brought
them up into the house and set food before them; and he and his
entire household rejoiced that he had become a believer in God.
35 When morning came, the magistrates sent the police, saying, "Let
those men go." 36 And the jailer reported the message to Paul, saying,
"The magistrates sent word to let you go; therefore come out now and
go in peace." 37 But Paul replied, "They have beaten us in public,
uncondemned, men who are Roman citizens, and have thrown us into
prison; and now are they going to discharge us in secret? Certainly not!
Let them come and take us out themselves." 38 The police reported
these words to the magistrates, and they were afraid when they heard
that they were Roman citizens; 39 so they came and apologized to
them. And they took them out and asked them to leave the city. 40
After leaving the prison they went to Lydia's home; and when they had
seen and encouraged the brothers and sisters there, they departed.

279

ACTS 280

[Acts 17]
From Thessalonica to Athens
1 After Paul and Silas had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia,
they came to Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of the Jews. 2
And Paul went in, as was his custom, and on three sabbath days argued
with them from the scriptures, 3 explaining and proving that it was
necessary for the Messiah to suffer and to rise from the dead, and
saying, "This is the Messiah, Jesus whom I am proclaiming to you." 4
Some of them were persuaded and joined Paul and Silas, as did a great
many of the devout Greeks and not a few of the leading women. 5 But
the Jews became jealous, and with the help of some ruffians in the
marketplaces they formed a mob and set the city in an uproar. While
they were searching for Paul and Silas to bring them out to the
assembly, they attacked Jason's house. 6 When they could not find
them, they dragged Jason and some believers before the city
authorities, shouting, "These people who have been turning the world
upside down have come here also, 7 and Jason has entertained them as
guests. They are all acting contrary to the decrees of the emperor,
saying that there is another king named Jesus." 8 The people and the
city officials were disturbed when they heard this, 9 and after they had
taken bail from Jason and the others, they let them go.
10 That very night the believers sent Paul and Silas off to Beroea; and
when they arrived, they went to the Jewish synagogue. 11 These Jews
were more receptive than those in Thessalonica, for they welcomed the
message very eagerly and examined the scriptures every day to see
whether these things were so. 12 Many of them therefore believed,
including not a few Greek women and men of high standing. 13 But
when the Jews of Thessalonica learned that the word of God had been
proclaimed by Paul in Beroea as well, they came there too, to stir up
and incite the crowds. 14 Then the believers immediately sent Paul
away to the coast, but Silas and Timothy remained behind. 15 Those
who conducted Paul brought him as far as Athens; and after receiving
instructions to have Silas and Timothy join him as soon as possible, they
left him.

280

ACTS 281

Paul at Athens
16 While Paul was waiting for them in Athens, he was deeply distressed
to see that the city was full of idols. 17 So he argued in the synagogue
with the Jews and the devout persons, and also in the marketplace
every day with those who happened to be there. 18 Also some
Epicurean and Stoic philosophers debated with him. Some said, "What
does this babbler want to say?" Others said, "He seems to be a
proclaimer of foreign divinities." (This was because he was telling the
good news about Jesus and the resurrection.) 19 So they took him and
brought him to the Areopagus and asked him, "May we know what
this new teaching is that you are presenting? 20 It sounds rather
strange to us, so we would like to know what it means." 21 Now all the
Athenians and the foreigners living there would spend their time in
nothing but telling or hearing something new.
22 Then Paul stood in front of the Areopagus and said, "Athenians, I
see how extremely religious you are in every way. 23 For as I went
through the city and looked carefully at the objects of your worship, I
found among them an altar with the inscription, 'To an unknown god.'
What therefore you worship as unknown, this I proclaim to you. 24 The
God who made the world and everything in it, he who is Lord of
heaven and earth, does not live in shrines made by human hands, 25
nor is he served by human hands, as though he needed anything, since
he himself gives to all mortals life and breath and all things. 26 From
one ancestor he made all nations to inhabit the whole earth, and he
allotted the times of their existence and the boundaries of the places
where they would live, 27 so that they would search for God and
perhaps grope for him and find him — though indeed he is not far
from each one of us. 28 For 'In him we live and move and have our
being'; as even some of your own poets have said,
'For we too are his offspring.'
29 Since we are God's offspring, we ought not to think that the deity is
like gold, or silver, or stone, an image formed by the art and
imagination of mortals. 30 While God has overlooked the times of
human ignorance, now he commands all people everywhere to repent,
31 because he has fixed a day on which he will have the world judged

281

ACTS 282

in righteousness by a man whom he has appointed, and of this he has
given assurance to all by raising him from the dead."
32 When they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some scoffed; but
others said, "We will hear you again about this." 33 At that point Paul
left them. 34 But some of them joined him and became believers,
including Dionysius the Areopagite and a woman named Damaris, and
others with them.
[Acts 18]
Paul in Corinth
1 After this Paul left Athens and went to Corinth. 2 There he found a
Jew named Aquila, a native of Pontus, who had recently come from
Italy with his wife Priscilla, because Claudius had ordered all Jews to
leave Rome. Paul went to see them, 3 and, because he was of the same
trade, he stayed with them, and they worked together — by trade they
were tentmakers. 4 Every sabbath he would argue in the synagogue
and would try to convince Jews and Greeks.
5 When Silas and Timothy arrived from Macedonia, Paul was occupied
with proclaiming the word, testifying to the Jews that the Messiah was
Jesus. 6 When they opposed and reviled him, in protest he shook the
dust from his clothes and said to them, "Your blood be on your own
heads! I am innocent. From now on I will go to the Gentiles." 7 Then he
left the synagogue and went to the house of a man named Titius
Justus, a worshiper of God; his house was next door to the synagogue.
8 Crispus, the official of the synagogue, became a believer in the Lord,
together with all his household; and many of the Corinthians who
heard Paul became believers and were baptized. 9 One night the Lord
said to Paul in a vision, "Do not be afraid, but speak and do not be
silent; 10 for I am with you, and no one will lay a hand on you to harm
you, for there are many in this city who are my people." 11 He stayed
there a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.
12 But when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews made a united
attack on Paul and brought him before the tribunal. 13 They said, "This
man is persuading people to worship God in ways that are contrary to

282

ACTS 283

the law." 14 Just as Paul was about to speak, Gallio said to the Jews, "If
it were a matter of crime or serious villainy, I would be justified in
accepting the complaint of you Jews; 15 but since it is a matter of
questions about words and names and your own law, see to it
yourselves; I do not wish to be a judge of these matters." 16 And he
dismissed them from the tribunal. 17 Then all of them seized Sosthenes,
the official of the synagogue, and beat him in front of the tribunal. But
Gallio paid no attention to any of these things.
End of the second missionary journey and beginning of the third
18 After staying there for a considerable time, Paul said farewell to the
believers and sailed for Syria, accompanied by Priscilla and Aquila. At
Cenchreae he had his hair cut, for he was under a vow. 19 When they
reached Ephesus, he left them there, but first he himself went into the
synagogue and had a discussion with the Jews. 20 When they asked
him to stay longer, he declined; 21 but on taking leave of them, he said,
"I will return to you, if God wills." Then he set sail from Ephesus.
22 When he had landed at Caesarea, he went up to Jerusalem and
greeted the church, and then went down to Antioch. 23 After spending
some time there he departed and went from place to place through
the region of Galatia and Phrygia, strengthening all the disciples.
Apollos in Ephesus
24 Now there came to Ephesus a Jew named Apollos, a native of
Alexandria. He was an eloquent man, well-versed in the scriptures. 25
He had been instructed in the Way of the Lord; and he spoke with
burning enthusiasm and taught accurately the things concerning Jesus,
though he knew only the baptism of John. 26 He began to speak boldly
in the synagogue; but when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took
him aside and explained the Way of God to him more accurately. 27
And when he wished to cross over to Achaia, the believers encouraged
him and wrote to the disciples to welcome him. On his arrival he
greatly helped those who through grace had become believers, 28 for
he powerfully refuted the Jews in public, showing by the scriptures

283

ACTS 284

that the Messiah is Jesus.
[Acts 19]
Paul's long ministry in Ephesus
1 While Apollos was in Corinth, Paul passed through the interior
regions and came to Ephesus, where he found some disciples. 2 He said
to them, "Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you became believers?"
They replied, "No, we have not even heard that there is a Holy Spirit."
3 Then he said, "Into what then were you baptized?" They answered,
"Into John's baptism." 4 Paul said, "John baptized with the baptism of
repentance, telling the people to believe in the one who was to come
after him, that is, in Jesus." 5 On hearing this, they were baptized in
the name of the Lord Jesus. 6 When Paul had laid his hands on them,
the Holy Spirit came upon them, and they spoke in tongues and
prophesied — 7 altogether there were about twelve of them.
8 He entered the synagogue and for three months spoke out boldly,
and argued persuasively about the kingdom of God. 9 When some
stubbornly refused to believe and spoke evil of the Way before the
congregation, he left them, taking the disciples with him, and argued
daily in the lecture hall of Tyrannus. 10 This continued for two years, so
that all the residents of Asia, both Jews and Greeks, heard the word of
the Lord.
11 God did extraordinary miracles through Paul, 12 so that when the
handkerchiefs or aprons that had touched his skin were brought to the
sick, their diseases left them, and the evil spirits came out of them. 13
Then some itinerant Jewish exorcists tried to use the name of the Lord
Jesus over those who had evil spirits, saying, "I adjure you by the Jesus
whom Paul proclaims." 14 Seven sons of a Jewish high priest named
Sceva were doing this. 15 But the evil spirit said to them in reply, "Jesus
I know, and Paul I know; but who are you?" 16 Then the man with the
evil spirit leaped on them, mastered them all, and so overpowered
them that they fled out of the house naked and wounded. 17 When
this became known to all residents of Ephesus, both Jews and Greeks,
everyone was awestruck; and the name of the Lord Jesus was praised.
18 Also many of those who became believers confessed and disclosed

284

ACTS 285

their practices. 19 A number of those who practiced magic collected
their books and burned them publicly; when the value of these books
was calculated, it was found to come to fifty thousand silver coins. 20
So the word of the Lord grew mightily and prevailed.
21 Now after these things had been accomplished, Paul resolved in the
Spirit to go through Macedonia and Achaia, and then to go on to
Jerusalem. He said, "After I have gone there, I must also see Rome." 22
So he sent two of his helpers, Timothy and Erastus, to Macedonia,
while he himself stayed for some time longer in Asia.
23 About that time no little disturbance broke out concerning the Way.
24 A man named Demetrius, a silversmith who made silver shrines of
Artemis, brought no little business to the artisans. 25 These he
gathered together, with the workers of the same trade, and said,
"Men, you know that we get our wealth from this business. 26 You
also see and hear that not only in Ephesus but in almost the whole of
Asia this Paul has persuaded and drawn away a considerable number
of people by saying that gods made with hands are not gods. 27 And
there is danger not only that this trade of ours may come into
disrepute but also that the temple of the great goddess Artemis will be
scorned, and she will be deprived of her majesty that brought all Asia
and the world to worship her."
28 When they heard this, they were enraged and shouted, "Great is
Artemis of the Ephesians!" 29 The city was filled with the confusion;
and people rushed together to the theater, dragging with them Gaius
and Aristarchus, Macedonians who were Paul's travel companions. 30
Paul wished to go into the crowd, but the disciples would not let him;
31 even some officials of the province of Asia, who were friendly to
him, sent him a message urging him not to venture into the theater. 32
Meanwhile, some were shouting one thing, some another; for the
assembly was in confusion, and most of them did not know why they
had come together. 33 Some of the crowd gave instructions to
Alexander, whom the Jews had pushed forward. And Alexander
motioned for silence and tried to make a defense before the people. 34
But when they recognized that he was a Jew, for about two hours all
of them shouted in unison, "Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!" 35 But

285

ACTS 286

when the town clerk had quieted the crowd, he said, "Citizens of
Ephesus, who is there that does not know that the city of the Ephesians
is the temple keeper of the great Artemis and of the statue that fell
from heaven? 36 Since these things cannot be denied, you ought to be
quiet and do nothing rash. 37 You have brought these men here who
are neither temple robbers nor blasphemers of our goddess. 38 If
therefore Demetrius and the artisans with him have a complaint
against anyone, the courts are open, and there are proconsuls; let them
bring charges there against one another. 39 If there is anything further
you want to know, it must be settled in the regular assembly. 40 For
we are in danger of being charged with rioting today, since there is no
cause that we can give to justify this commotion." 41 When he had said
this, he dismissed the assembly.
[Acts 20]
The visit to Greece
1 After the uproar had ceased, Paul sent for the disciples; and after
encouraging them and saying farewell, he left for Macedonia. 2 When
he had gone through those regions and had given the believers much
encouragement, he came to Greece, 3 where he stayed for three
months. He was about to set sail for Syria when a plot was made
against him by the Jews, and so he decided to return through
Macedonia. 4 He was accompanied by Sopater son of Pyrrhus from
Beroea, by Aristarchus and Secundus from Thessalonica, by Gaius from
Derbe, and by Timothy, as well as by Tychicus and Trophimus from
Asia. 5 They went ahead and were waiting for us in Troas; 6 but we
sailed from Philippi after the days of Unleavened Bread, and in five
days we joined them in Troas, where we stayed for seven days.
The raising of Eutychus and the speech to the Ephesian elders
7 On the first day of the week, when we met to break bread, Paul was
holding a discussion with them; since he intended to leave the next
day, he continued speaking until midnight. 8 There were many lamps
in the room upstairs where we were meeting. 9 A young man named
Eutychus, who was sitting in the window, began to sink off into a deep
sleep while Paul talked still longer. Overcome by sleep, he fell to the

286

ACTS 287

ground three floors below and was picked up dead. 10 But Paul went
down, and bending over him took him in his arms, and said, "Do not
be alarmed, for his life is in him." 11 Then Paul went upstairs, and after
he had broken bread and eaten, he continued to converse with them
until dawn; then he left. 12 Meanwhile they had taken the boy away
alive and were not a little comforted.
13 We went ahead to the ship and set sail for Assos, intending to take
Paul on board there; for he had made this arrangement, intending to
go by land himself. 14 When he met us in Assos, we took him on board
and went to Mitylene. 15 We sailed from there, and on the following
day we arrived opposite Chios. The next day we touched at Samos, and
the day after that we came to Miletus. 16 For Paul had decided to sail
past Ephesus, so that he might not have to spend time in Asia; he was
eager to be in Jerusalem, if possible, on the day of Pentecost.
17 From Miletus he sent a message to Ephesus, asking the elders of the
church to meet him. 18 When they came to him, he said to them:
"You yourselves know how I lived among you the entire time from the
first day that I set foot in Asia, 19 serving the Lord with all humility and
with tears, enduring the trials that came to me through the plots of
the Jews. 20 I did not shrink from doing anything helpful, proclaiming
the message to you and teaching you publicly and from house to
house, 21 as I testified to both Jews and Greeks about repentance
toward God and faith toward our Lord Jesus. 22 And now, as a captive
to the Spirit, I am on my way to Jerusalem, not knowing what will
happen to me there, 23 except that the Holy Spirit testifies to me in
every city that imprisonment and persecutions are waiting for me. 24
But I do not count my life of any value to myself, if only I may finish my
course and the ministry that I received from the Lord Jesus, to testify to
the good news of God's grace.
25 "And now I know that none of you, among whom I have gone
about proclaiming the kingdom, will ever see my face again. 26
Therefore I declare to you this day that I am not responsible for the
blood of any of you, 27 for I did not shrink from declaring to you the
whole purpose of God. 28 Keep watch over yourselves and over all the

287

ACTS 288

flock, of which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers, to shepherd the
church of God that he obtained with the blood of his own Son. 29 I
know that after I have gone, savage wolves will come in among you,
not sparing the flock. 30 Some even from your own group will come
distorting the truth in order to entice the disciples to follow them. 31
Therefore be alert, remembering that for three years I did not cease
night or day to warn everyone with tears. 32 And now I commend you
to God and to the message of his grace, a message that is able to build
you up and to give you the inheritance among all who are sanctified.
33 I coveted no one's silver or gold or clothing. 34 You know for
yourselves that I worked with my own hands to support myself and my
companions. 35 In all this I have given you an example that by such
work we must support the weak, remembering the words of the Lord
Jesus, for he himself said, 'It is more blessed to give than to receive.'"
36 When he had finished speaking, he knelt down with them all and
prayed. 37 There was much weeping among them all; they embraced
Paul and kissed him, 38 grieving especially because of what he had
said, that they would not see him again. Then they brought him to the
ship.
[Acts 21]
Journey to Jerusalem
1 When we had parted from them and set sail, we came by a straight
course to Cos, and the next day to Rhodes, and from there to Patara. 2
When we found a ship bound for Phoenicia, we went on board and set
sail. 3 We came in sight of Cyprus; and leaving it on our left, we sailed
to Syria and landed at Tyre, because the ship was to unload its cargo
there. 4 We looked up the disciples and stayed there for seven days.
Through the Spirit they told Paul not to go on to Jerusalem. 5 When
our days there were ended, we left and proceeded on our journey; and
all of them, with wives and children, escorted us outside the city. There
we knelt down on the beach and prayed 6 and said farewell to one
another. Then we went on board the ship, and they returned home.

288

ACTS 289

7 When we had finished the voyage from Tyre, we arrived at Ptolemais;
and we greeted the believers and stayed with them for one day. 8 The
next day we left and came to Caesarea; and we went into the house of
Philip the evangelist, one of the seven, and stayed with him. 9 He had
four unmarried daughters who had the gift of prophecy. 10 While we
were staying there for several days, a prophet named Agabus came
down from Judea. 11 He came to us and took Paul's belt, bound his
own feet and hands with it, and said, "Thus says the Holy Spirit, 'This is
the way the Jews in Jerusalem will bind the man who owns this belt
and will hand him over to the Gentiles.'" 12 When we heard this, we
and the people there urged him not to go up to Jerusalem. 13 Then
Paul answered, "What are you doing, weeping and breaking my heart?
For I am ready not only to be bound but even to die in Jerusalem for
the name of the Lord Jesus." 14 Since he would not be persuaded, we
remained silent except to say, "The LORD's will be done."
15 After these days we got ready and started to go up to Jerusalem. 16
Some of the disciples from Caesarea also came along and brought us to
the house of Mnason of Cyprus, an early disciple, with whom we were
to stay.
Paul's conformity to Judaism
17 When we arrived in Jerusalem, the brothers welcomed us warmly. 18
The next day Paul went with us to visit James; and all the elders were
present. 19 After greeting them, he related one by one the things that
God had done among the Gentiles through his ministry. 20 When they
heard it, they praised God. Then they said to him, "You see, brother,
how many thousands of believers there are among the Jews, and they
are all zealous for the law. 21 They have been told about you that you
teach all the Jews living among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, and that
you tell them not to circumcise their children or observe the customs.
22 What then is to be done? They will certainly hear that you have
come. 23 So do what we tell you. We have four men who are under a
vow. 24 Join these men, go through the rite of purification with them,
and pay for the shaving of their heads. Thus all will know that there is
nothing in what they have been told about you, but that you yourself
observe and guard the law. 25 But as for the Gentiles who have

289

ACTS 290

become believers, we have sent a letter with our judgment that they
should abstain from what has been sacrificed to idols and from blood
and from what is strangled and from fornication." 26 Then Paul took
the men, and the next day, having purified himself, he entered the
temple with them, making public the completion of the days of
purification when the sacrifice would be made for each of them.
Uproar in the Temple and arrest of Paul
27 When the seven days were almost completed, the Jews from Asia,
who had seen him in the temple, stirred up the whole crowd. They
seized him, 28 shouting, "Fellow Israelites, help! This is the man who is
teaching everyone everywhere against our people, our law, and this
place; more than that, he has actually brought Greeks into the temple
and has defiled this holy place." 29 For they had previously seen
Trophimus the Ephesian with him in the city, and they supposed that
Paul had brought him into the temple. 30 Then all the city was
aroused, and the people rushed together. They seized Paul and
dragged him out of the temple, and immediately the doors were shut.
31 While they were trying to kill him, word came to the tribune of the
cohort that all Jerusalem was in an uproar. 32 Immediately he took
soldiers and centurions and ran down to them. When they saw the
tribune and the soldiers, they stopped beating Paul. 33 Then the
tribune came, arrested him, and ordered him to be bound with two
chains; he inquired who he was and what he had done. 34 Some in the
crowd shouted one thing, some another; and as he could not learn the
facts because of the uproar, he ordered him to be brought into the
barracks. 35 When Paul came to the steps, the violence of the mob was
so great that he had to be carried by the soldiers. 36 The crowd that
followed kept shouting, "Away with him!"
37 Just as Paul was about to be brought into the barracks, he said to
the tribune, "May I say something to you?" The tribune replied, "Do
you know Greek? 38 Then you are not the Egyptian who recently
stirred up a revolt and led the four thousand assassins out into the
wilderness?" 39 Paul replied, "I am a Jew, from Tarsus in Cilicia, a
citizen of an important city; I beg you, let me speak to the people." 40
When he had given him permission, Paul stood on the steps and

290

ACTS 291

motioned to the people for silence; and when there was a great hush,
he addressed them in the Hebrew language, saying:
[Acts 22]
Defense in the Temple and Roman custody
1 "Brothers and fathers, listen to the defense that I now make before
you."
2 When they heard him addressing them in Hebrew, they became even
more quiet. Then he said:
3 "I am a Jew, born in Tarsus in Cilicia, but brought up in this city at the
feet of Gamaliel, educated strictly according to our ancestral law, being
zealous for God, just as all of you are today. 4 I persecuted this Way up
to the point of death by binding both men and women and putting
them in prison, 5 as the high priest and the whole council of elders can
testify about me. From them I also received letters to the brothers in
Damascus, and I went there in order to bind those who were there and
to bring them back to Jerusalem for punishment.
6 "While I was on my way and approaching Damascus, about noon a
great light from heaven suddenly shone about me. 7 I fell to the
ground and heard a voice saying to me, 'Saul, Saul, why are you
persecuting me?' 8 I answered, 'Who are you, Lord?' Then he said to
me, 'I am Jesus of Nazareth whom you are persecuting.' 9 Now those
who were with me saw the light but did not hear the voice of the one
who was speaking to me. 10 I asked, 'What am I to do, Lord?' The Lord
said to me, 'Get up and go to Damascus; there you will be told
everything that has been assigned to you to do.' 11 Since I could not see
because of the brightness of that light, those who were with me took
my hand and led me to Damascus.
12 "A certain Ananias, who was a devout man according to the law and
well spoken of by all the Jews living there, 13 came to me; and standing
beside me, he said, 'Brother Saul, regain your sight!' In that very hour I
regained my sight and saw him. 14 Then he said, 'The God of our
ancestors has chosen you to know his will, to see the Righteous One
and to hear his own voice; 15 for you will be his witness to all the world

291

ACTS 292

of what you have seen and heard. 16 And now why do you delay? Get
up, be baptized, and have your sins washed away, calling on his name.'
17 "After I had returned to Jerusalem and while I was praying in the
temple, I fell into a trance 18 and saw Jesus saying to me, 'Hurry and
get out of Jerusalem quickly, because they will not accept your
testimony about me.' 19 And I said, 'Lord, they themselves know that in
every synagogue I imprisoned and beat those who believed in you. 20
And while the blood of your witness Stephen was shed, I myself was
standing by, approving and keeping the coats of those who killed him.'
21 Then he said to me, 'Go, for I will send you far away to the
Gentiles.'"
22 Up to this point they listened to him, but then they shouted, "Away
with such a fellow from the earth! For he should not be allowed to
live." 23 And while they were shouting, throwing off their cloaks, and
tossing dust into the air, 24 the tribune directed that he was to be
brought into the barracks, and ordered him to be examined by
flogging, to find out the reason for this outcry against him. 25 But
when they had tied him up with thongs, Paul said to the centurion
who was standing by, "Is it legal for you to flog a Roman citizen who is
uncondemned?" 26 When the centurion heard that, he went to the
tribune and said to him, "What are you about to do? This man is a
Roman citizen." 27 The tribune came and asked Paul, "Tell me, are you
a Roman citizen?" And he said, "Yes." 28 The tribune answered, "It
cost me a large sum of money to get my citizenship." Paul said, "But I
was born a citizen." 29 Immediately those who were about to examine
him drew back from him; and the tribune also was afraid, for he
realized that Paul was a Roman citizen and that he had bound him.
Paul before the Sanhedrin
30 Since he wanted to find out what Paul was being accused of by the
Jews, the next day he released him and ordered the chief priests and
the entire council to meet. He brought Paul down and had him stand
before them.

292

ACTS 293

[Acts 23]
1 While Paul was looking intently at the council he said, "Brothers, up
to this day I have lived my life with a clear conscience before God." 2
Then the high priest Ananias ordered those standing near him to strike
him on the mouth. 3 At this Paul said to him, "God will strike you, you
whitewashed wall! Are you sitting there to judge me according to the
law, and yet in violation of the law you order me to be struck?" 4
Those standing nearby said, "Do you dare to insult God's high priest?"
5 And Paul said, "I did not realize, brothers, that he was high priest; for
it is written, 'You shall not speak evil of a leader of your people.'"
6 When Paul noticed that some were Sadducees and others were
Pharisees, he called out in the council, "Brothers, I am a Pharisee, a son
of Pharisees. I am on trial concerning the hope of the resurrection of
the dead." 7 When he said this, a dissension began between the
Pharisees and the Sadducees, and the assembly was divided. 8 (The
Sadducees say that there is no resurrection, or angel, or spirit; but the
Pharisees acknowledge all three.) 9 Then a great clamor arose, and
certain scribes of the Pharisees' group stood up and contended, "We
find nothing wrong with this man. What if a spirit or an angel has
spoken to him?" 10 When the dissension became violent, the tribune,
fearing that they would tear Paul to pieces, ordered the soldiers to go
down, take him by force, and bring him into the barracks.
11 That night the Lord stood near him and said, "Keep up your
courage! For just as you have testified for me in Jerusalem, so you must
bear witness also in Rome."
A plot to kill Paul results in his transfer to Caesarea
12 In the morning the Jews joined in a conspiracy and bound
themselves by an oath neither to eat nor drink until they had killed
Paul. 13 There were more than forty who joined in this conspiracy. 14
They went to the chief priests and elders and said, "We have strictly
bound ourselves by an oath to taste no food until we have killed Paul.
15 Now then, you and the council must notify the tribune to bring him
down to you, on the pretext that you want to make a more thorough

293

ACTS 294

examination of his case. And we are ready to do away with him before
he arrives."
16 Now the son of Paul's sister heard about the ambush; so he went
and gained entrance to the barracks and told Paul. 17 Paul called one
of the centurions and said, "Take this young man to the tribune, for he
has something to report to him." 18 So he took him, brought him to
the tribune, and said, "The prisoner Paul called me and asked me to
bring this young man to you; he has something to tell you." 19 The
tribune took him by the hand, drew him aside privately, and asked,
"What is it that you have to report to me?" 20 He answered, "The Jews
have agreed to ask you to bring Paul down to the council tomorrow, as
though they were going to inquire more thoroughly into his case. 21
But do not be persuaded by them, for more than forty of their men are
lying in ambush for him. They have bound themselves by an oath
neither to eat nor drink until they kill him. They are ready now and are
waiting for your consent." 22 So the tribune dismissed the young man,
ordering him, "Tell no one that you have informed me of this."
23 Then he summoned two of the centurions and said, "Get ready to
leave by nine o'clock tonight for Caesarea with two hundred soldiers,
seventy horsemen, and two hundred spearmen. 24 Also provide
mounts for Paul to ride, and take him safely to Felix the governor." 25
He wrote a letter to this effect:
26 "Claudius Lysias to his Excellency the governor Felix, greetings. 27
This man was seized by the Jews and was about to be killed by them,
but when I had learned that he was a Roman citizen, I came with the
guard and rescued him. 28 Since I wanted to know the charge for
which they accused him, I had him brought to their council. 29 I found
that he was accused concerning questions of their law, but was
charged with nothing deserving death or imprisonment. 30 When I was
informed that there would be a plot against the man, I sent him to you
at once, ordering his accusers also to state before you what they have
against him."

294

ACTS 295

31 So the soldiers, according to their instructions, took Paul and
brought him during the night to Antipatris. 32 The next day they let
the horsemen go on with him, while they returned to the barracks. 33
When they came to Caesarea and delivered the letter to the governor,
they presented Paul also before him. 34 On reading the letter, he asked
what province he belonged to, and when he learned that he was from
Cilicia, 35 he said, "I will give you a hearing when your accusers arrive."
Then he ordered that he be kept under guard in Herod's headquarters.
[Acts 24]
Paul before Felix
1 Five days later the high priest Ananias came down with some elders
and an attorney, a certain Tertullus, and they reported their case
against Paul to the governor. 2 When Paul had been summoned,
Tertullus began to accuse him, saying:
"Your Excellency, because of you we have long enjoyed peace, and
reforms have been made for this people because of your foresight. 3
We welcome this in every way and everywhere with utmost gratitude.
4 But, to detain you no further, I beg you to hear us briefly with your
customary graciousness. 5 We have, in fact, found this man a pestilent
fellow, an agitator among all the Jews throughout the world, and a
ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes. 6 He even tried to profane the
temple, and so we seized him. 8 By examining him yourself you will be
able to learn from him concerning everything of which we accuse
him."
9 The Jews also joined in the charge by asserting that all this was true.
10 When the governor motioned to him to speak, Paul replied:
"I cheerfully make my defense, knowing that for many years you have
been a judge over this nation. 11 As you can find out, it is not more
than twelve days since I went up to worship in Jerusalem. 12 They did
not find me disputing with anyone in the temple or stirring up a crowd
either in the synagogues or throughout the city. 13 Neither can they
prove to you the charge that they now bring against me. 14 But this I
admit to you, that according to the Way, which they call a sect, I

295

ACTS 296

worship the God of our ancestors, believing everything laid down
according to the law or written in the prophets. 15 I have a hope in
God — a hope that they themselves also accept — that there will be a
resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous. 16 Therefore I
do my best always to have a clear conscience toward God and all
people. 17 Now after some years I came to bring alms to my nation and
to offer sacrifices. 18 While I was doing this, they found me in the
temple, completing the rite of purification, without any crowd or
disturbance. 19 But there were some Jews from Asia — they ought to
be here before you to make an accusation, if they have anything
against me. 20 Or let these men here tell what crime they had found
when I stood before the council, 21 unless it was this one sentence that
I called out while standing before them, 'It is about the resurrection of
the dead that I am on trial before you today.'"
22 But Felix, who was rather well informed about the Way, adjourned
the hearing with the comment, "When Lysias the tribune comes down,
I will decide your case." 23 Then he ordered the centurion to keep him
in custody, but to let him have some liberty and not to prevent any of
his friends from taking care of his needs.
24 Some days later when Felix came with his wife Drusilla, who was
Jewish, he sent for Paul and heard him speak concerning faith in Christ
Jesus. 25 And as he discussed justice, self-control, and the coming
judgment, Felix became frightened and said, "Go away for the present;
when I have an opportunity, I will send for you." 26 At the same time
he hoped that money would be given him by Paul, and for that reason
he used to send for him very often and converse with him.
27 After two years had passed, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus;
and since he wanted to grant the Jews a favor, Felix left Paul in prison.
[Acts 25]
Appeal to the emperor
1 Three days after Festus had arrived in the province, he went up from
Caesarea to Jerusalem 2 where the chief priests and the leaders of the
Jews gave him a report against Paul. They appealed to him 3 and

296

ACTS 297

requested, as a favor to them against Paul, to have him transferred to
Jerusalem. They were, in fact, planning an ambush to kill him along the
way. 4 Festus replied that Paul was being kept at Caesarea, and that he
himself intended to go there shortly. 5 "So," he said, "let those of you
who have the authority come down with me, and if there is anything
wrong about the man, let them accuse him."
6 After he had stayed among them not more than eight or ten days, he
went down to Caesarea; the next day he took his seat on the tribunal
and ordered Paul to be brought. 7 When he arrived, the Jews who had
gone down from Jerusalem surrounded him, bringing many serious
charges against him, which they could not prove. 8 Paul said in his
defense, "I have in no way committed an offense against the law of
the Jews, or against the temple, or against the emperor." 9 But Festus,
wishing to do the Jews a favor, asked Paul, "Do you wish to go up to
Jerusalem and be tried there before me on these charges?" 10 Paul
said, "I am appealing to the emperor's tribunal; this is where I should
be tried. I have done no wrong to the Jews, as you very well know. 11
Now if I am in the wrong and have committed something for which I
deserve to die, I am not trying to escape death; but if there is nothing
to their charges against me, no one can turn me over to them. I appeal
to the emperor." 12 Then Festus, after he had conferred with his
council, replied, "You have appealed to the emperor; to the emperor
you will go."
Paul's defense before Agrippa
13 After several days had passed, King Agrippa and Bernice arrived at
Caesarea to welcome Festus. 14 Since they were staying there several
days, Festus laid Paul's case before the king, saying, "There is a man
here who was left in prison by Felix. 15 When I was in Jerusalem, the
chief priests and the elders of the Jews informed me about him and
asked for a sentence against him. 16 I told them that it was not the
custom of the Romans to hand over anyone before the accused had
met the accusers face to face and had been given an opportunity to
make a defense against the charge. 17 So when they met here, I lost no
time, but on the next day took my seat on the tribunal and ordered the
man to be brought. 18 When the accusers stood up, they did not

297

ACTS 298

charge him with any of the crimes that I was expecting. 19 Instead they
had certain points of disagreement with him about their own religion
and about a certain Jesus, who had died, but whom Paul asserted to be
alive. 20 Since I was at a loss how to investigate these questions, I asked
whether he wished to go to Jerusalem and be tried there on these
charges. 21 But when Paul had appealed to be kept in custody for the
decision of his Imperial Majesty, I ordered him to be held until I could
send him to the emperor." 22 Agrippa said to Festus, "I would like to
hear the man myself." "Tomorrow," he said, "you will hear him."
23 So on the next day Agrippa and Bernice came with great pomp, and
they entered the audience hall with the military tribunes and the
prominent men of the city. Then Festus gave the order and Paul was
brought in. 24 And Festus said, "King Agrippa and all here present with
us, you see this man about whom the whole Jewish community
petitioned me, both in Jerusalem and here, shouting that he ought not
to live any longer. 25 But I found that he had done nothing deserving
death; and when he appealed to his Imperial Majesty, I decided to send
him. 26 But I have nothing definite to write to our sovereign about
him. Therefore I have brought him before all of you, and especially
before you, King Agrippa, so that, after we have examined him, I may
have something to write — 27 for it seems to me unreasonable to send
a prisoner without indicating the charges against him."
[Acts 26]
1 Agrippa said to Paul, "You have permission to speak for yourself."
Then Paul stretched out his hand and began to defend himself:
2 "I consider myself fortunate that it is before you, King Agrippa, I am
to make my defense today against all the accusations of the Jews, 3
because you are especially familiar with all the customs and
controversies of the Jews; therefore I beg of you to listen to me
patiently.
4 "All the Jews know my way of life from my youth, a life spent from
the beginning among my own people and in Jerusalem. 5 They have
known for a long time, if they are willing to testify, that I have

298

ACTS 299

belonged to the strictest sect of our religion and lived as a Pharisee. 6
And now I stand here on trial on account of my hope in the promise
made by God to our ancestors, 7 a promise that our twelve tribes hope
to attain, as they earnestly worship day and night. It is for this hope,
your Excellency, that I am accused by Jews! 8 Why is it thought
incredible by any of you that God raises the dead?
9 "Indeed, I myself was convinced that I ought to do many things
against the name of Jesus of Nazareth. 10 And that is what I did in
Jerusalem; with authority received from the chief priests, I not only
locked up many of the saints in prison, but I also cast my vote against
them when they were being condemned to death. 11 By punishing
them often in all the synagogues I tried to force them to blaspheme;
and since I was so furiously enraged at them, I pursued them even to
foreign cities.
12 "With this in mind, I was traveling to Damascus with the authority
and commission of the chief priests, 13 when at midday along the road,
your Excellency, I saw a light from heaven, brighter than the sun,
shining around me and my companions. 14 When we had all fallen to
the ground, I heard a voice saying to me in the Hebrew language,
'Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me? It hurts you to kick against
the goads.' 15 I asked, 'Who are you, Lord?' The Lord answered, 'I am
Jesus whom you are persecuting. 16 But get up and stand on your feet;
for I have appeared to you for this purpose, to appoint you to serve
and testify to the things in which you have seen me and to those in
which I will appear to you. 17 I will rescue you from your people and
from the Gentiles — to whom I am sending you 18 to open their eyes
so that they may turn from darkness to light and from the power of
Satan to God, so that they may receive forgiveness of sins and a place
among those who are sanctified by faith in me.'
19 "After that, King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly
vision, 20 but declared first to those in Damascus, then in Jerusalem
and throughout the countryside of Judea, and also to the Gentiles, that
they should repent and turn to God and do deeds consistent with
repentance. 21 For this reason the Jews seized me in the temple and
tried to kill me. 22 To this day I have had help from God, and so I stand

299

ACTS 300

here, testifying to both small and great, saying nothing but what the
prophets and Moses said would take place: 23 that the Messiah must
suffer, and that, by being the first to rise from the dead, he would
proclaim light both to our people and to the Gentiles."
24 While he was making this defense, Festus exclaimed, "You are out
of your mind, Paul! Too much learning is driving you insane!" 25 But
Paul said, "I am not out of my mind, most excellent Festus, but I am
speaking the sober truth. 26 Indeed the king knows about these things,
and to him I speak freely; for I am certain that none of these things has
escaped his notice, for this was not done in a corner. 27 King Agrippa,
do you believe the prophets? I know that you believe." 28 Agrippa said
to Paul, "Are you so quickly persuading me to become a Christian?" 29
Paul replied, "Whether quickly or not, I pray to God that not only you
but also all who are listening to me today might become such as I am
— except for these chains."
30 Then the king got up, and with him the governor and Bernice and
those who had been seated with them; 31 and as they were leaving,
they said to one another, "This man is doing nothing to deserve death
or imprisonment." 32 Agrippa said to Festus, "This man could have
been set free if he had not appealed to the emperor."
[Acts 27]
Shipwreck
1 When it was decided that we were to sail for Italy, they transferred
Paul and some other prisoners to a centurion of the Augustan Cohort,
named Julius. 2 Embarking on a ship of Adramyttium that was about to
set sail to the ports along the coast of Asia, we put to sea,
accompanied by Aristarchus, a Macedonian from Thessalonica. 3 The
next day we put in at Sidon; and Julius treated Paul kindly, and
allowed him to go to his friends to be cared for. 4 Putting out to sea
from there, we sailed under the lee of Cyprus, because the winds were
against us. 5 After we had sailed across the sea that is off Cilicia and
Pamphylia, we came to Myra in Lycia. 6 There the centurion found an
Alexandrian ship bound for Italy and put us on board. 7 We sailed
slowly for a number of days and arrived with difficulty off Cnidus, and

300

ACTS 301

as the wind was against us, we sailed under the lee of Crete off
Salmone. 8 Sailing past it with difficulty, we came to a place called Fair
Havens, near the city of Lasea.
9 Since much time had been lost and sailing was now dangerous,
because even the Fast had already gone by, Paul advised them, 10
saying, "Sirs, I can see that the voyage will be with danger and much
heavy loss, not only of the cargo and the ship, but also of our lives." 11
But the centurion paid more attention to the pilot and to the owner of
the ship than to what Paul said. 12 Since the harbor was not suitable
for spending the winter, the majority was in favor of putting to sea
from there, on the chance that somehow they could reach Phoenix,
where they could spend the winter. It was a harbor of Crete, facing
southwest and northwest.
13 When a moderate south wind began to blow, they thought they
could achieve their purpose; so they weighed anchor and began to sail
past Crete, close to the shore. 14 But soon a violent wind, called the
northeaster, rushed down from Crete. 15 Since the ship was caught and
could not be turned head-on into the wind, we gave way to it and
were driven. 16 By running under the lee of a small island called Cauda
we were scarcely able to get the ship's boat under control. 17 After
hoisting it up they took measures to undergird the ship; then, fearing
that they would run on the Syrtis, they lowered the sea anchor and so
were driven. 18 We were being pounded by the storm so violently that
on the next day they began to throw the cargo overboard, 19 and on
the third day with their own hands they threw the ship's tackle
overboard. 20 When neither sun nor stars appeared for many days, and
no small tempest raged, all hope of our being saved was at last
abandoned.
21 Since they had been without food for a long time, Paul then stood
up among them and said, "Men, you should have listened to me and
not have set sail from Crete and thereby avoided this damage and loss.
22 I urge you now to keep up your courage, for there will be no loss of
life among you, but only of the ship. 23 For last night there stood by
me an angel of the God to whom I belong and whom I worship, 24 and
he said, 'Do not be afraid, Paul; you must stand before the emperor;

301

ACTS 302

and indeed, God has granted safety to all those who are sailing with
you.' 25 So keep up your courage, men, for I have faith in God that it
will be exactly as I have been told. 26 But we will have to run aground
on some island."
27 When the fourteenth night had come, as we were drifting across the
sea of Adria, about midnight the sailors suspected that they were
nearing land. 28 So they took soundings and found twenty fathoms; a
little farther on they took soundings again and found fifteen fathoms.
29 Fearing that we might run on the rocks, they let down four anchors
from the stern and prayed for day to come. 30 But when the sailors
tried to escape from the ship and had lowered the boat into the sea,
on the pretext of putting out anchors from the bow, 31 Paul said to the
centurion and the soldiers, "Unless these men stay in the ship, you
cannot be saved." 32 Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of the boat
and set it adrift.
33 Just before daybreak, Paul urged all of them to take some food,
saying, "Today is the fourteenth day that you have been in suspense
and remaining without food, having eaten nothing. 34 Therefore I
urge you to take some food, for it will help you survive; for none of
you will lose a hair from your heads." 35 After he had said this, he took
bread; and giving thanks to God in the presence of all, he broke it and
began to eat. 36 Then all of them were encouraged and took food for
themselves. 37 (We were in all two hundred seventy-six persons in the
ship.) 38 After they had satisfied their hunger, they lightened the ship
by throwing the wheat into the sea.
39 In the morning they did not recognize the land, but they noticed a
bay with a beach, on which they planned to run the ship ashore, if they
could. 40 So they cast off the anchors and left them in the sea. At the
same time they loosened the ropes that tied the steering-oars; then
hoisting the foresail to the wind, they made for the beach. 41 But
striking a reef, they ran the ship aground; the bow stuck and remained
immovable, but the stern was being broken up by the force of the
waves. 42 The soldiers' plan was to kill the prisoners, so that none
might swim away and escape; 43 but the centurion, wishing to save
Paul, kept them from carrying out their plan. He ordered those who

302

ACTS 303

could swim to jump overboard first and make for the land, 44 and the
rest to follow, some on planks and others on pieces of the ship. And so
it was that all were brought safely to land.
[Acts 28]
Paul on Malta
1 After we had reached safety, we then learned that the island was
called Malta. 2 The natives showed us unusual kindness. Since it had
begun to rain and was cold, they kindled a fire and welcomed all of us
around it. 3 Paul had gathered a bundle of brushwood and was putting
it on the fire, when a viper, driven out by the heat, fastened itself on
his hand. 4 When the natives saw the creature hanging from his hand,
they said to one another, "This man must be a murderer; though he
has escaped from the sea, justice has not allowed him to live." 5 He,
however, shook off the creature into the fire and suffered no harm. 6
They were expecting him to swell up or drop dead, but after they had
waited a long time and saw that nothing unusual had happened to
him, they changed their minds and began to say that he was a god.
7 Now in the neighborhood of that place were lands belonging to the
leading man of the island, named Publius, who received us and
entertained us hospitably for three days. 8 It so happened that the
father of Publius lay sick in bed with fever and dysentery. Paul visited
him and cured him by praying and putting his hands on him. 9 After
this happened, the rest of the people on the island who had diseases
also came and were cured. 10 They bestowed many honors on us, and
when we were about to sail, they put on board all the provisions we
needed.
The journey to Rome
11 Three months later we set sail on a ship that had wintered at the
island, an Alexandrian ship with the Twin Brothers as its figurehead. 12
We put in at Syracuse and stayed there for three days; 13 then we
weighed anchor and came to Rhegium. After one day there a south
wind sprang up, and on the second day we came to Puteoli. 14 There
we found believers and were invited to stay with them for seven days.

303

ACTS 304

And so we came to Rome. 15 The believers from there, when they
heard of us, came as far as the Forum of Appius and Three Taverns to
meet us. On seeing them, Paul thanked God and took courage.
16 When we came into Rome, Paul was allowed to live by himself, with
the soldier who was guarding him.
Paul and the Jews of Rome
17 Three days later he called together the local leaders of the Jews.
When they had assembled, he said to them, "Brothers, though I had
done nothing against our people or the customs of our ancestors, yet I
was arrested in Jerusalem and handed over to the Romans. 18 When
they had examined me, the Romans wanted to release me, because
there was no reason for the death penalty in my case. 19 But when the
Jews objected, I was compelled to appeal to the emperor — even
though I had no charge to bring against my nation. 20 For this reason
therefore I have asked to see you and speak with you, since it is for the
sake of the hope of Israel that I am bound with this chain." 21 They
replied, "We have received no letters from Judea about you, and none
of the brothers coming here has reported or spoken anything evil
about you. 22 But we would like to hear from you what you think, for
with regard to this sect we know that everywhere it is spoken against."
23 After they had set a day to meet with him, they came to him at his
lodgings in great numbers. From morning until evening he explained
the matter to them, testifying to the kingdom of God and trying to
convince them about Jesus both from the law of Moses and from the
prophets. 24 Some were convinced by what he had said, while others
refused to believe. 25 So they disagreed with each other; and as they
were leaving, Paul made one further statement: "The Holy Spirit was
right in saying to your ancestors through the prophet Isaiah,
26 'Go to this people and say,
You will indeed listen, but never understand,
and you will indeed look, but never perceive.

304

ACTS 305

27 For this people's heart has grown dull,
and their ears are hard of hearing,
and they have shut their eyes;
so that they might not look with their eyes,
and listen with their ears,
and understand with their heart and turn —
and I would heal them.'
28 Let it be known to you then that this salvation of God has been sent
to the Gentiles; they will listen."
Conclusion
30 He lived there two whole years at his own expense and welcomed
all who came to him, 31 proclaiming the kingdom of God and teaching
about the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness and without hindrance.

305

INTRO TO THE NEW TESTAMENT EPISTLES 306

INTRODUCTION TO THE
LETTERS/EPISTLES OF THE
NEW TESTAMENT
Classification and Authorship of the New Testament Letters
Letters are the earliest documents in the New Testament, and its most
common literary form: Some scholars date 1 Thessalonians before 50
CE, twenty years before Mark's gospel, and there are twenty-one
separate letters in the New Testament. Thirteen of these are from Paul
or his missionary associates: Romans, 1 and 2 Corinthians, Ephesians,
Philippians, Colossians, Galatians, 1 and 2 Thessalonians, 1 and 2
Timothy, Titus, and Philemon. When Hebrews was attributed to Paul,
the number of Pauline letters in ancient manuscripts and lists came to
be fourteen. Another seven letters, which appears pseudonymously
attributed to other apostles, round out the group; 1 and 2 Peter, 1, 2,
and 3 John, James, and Jude. The Greek word "epistole," "letter,"
originally referred to an oral communication sent by messenger
(Herodotus, Histories 4.10.1). Even in the New Testament period, the
letter-carrier might be entrusted with crucial information about a
letter's content. Paul often makes a point of including missionary
associates in the greeting of his letters (1 Cor 1.1; 2 Cor 1.1; Phil 1.1; Col
1.1; 1 Thess 1.1; Philem 1). He omits them in Galatians, where he has no
future plans to visit the region, and in Romans, addressed to a church
he did not found. Ephesians lacks a specific destination in the best
manuscripts and may be a circular exhortation by a later disciple of
Paul.
Several other Pauline epistles also differ in language and theological
emphasis from the major Pauline letters. The so-called Pastorals (1 and
2 Timothy and Titus), addressed to his key assistants, treat them as
youthful bishops of local churches. They look to a future in which
306

INTRO TO THE NEW TESTAMENT EPISTLES 307

Christians are established in the larger society. While both 1 and 2
Thessalonians have as their principal theme the return of the Lord Jesus
in the end time, the second letter stresses living in the present, and
this, as well as its warning against pseudo-Pauline writings, has led
some scholars to the conclusions that it too was written by a later
disciple of Paul. Since Paul had a number of close associates in his
missionary activities, it would hardly be surprising if they used a
familiar medium, the apostolic letter, to continue dealing with
concrete issues in the churches of the Pauline mission. Although many
of the letters unquestionably by Paul are considerably longer than
ordinary private letters, they address concrete situations in the
churches.
Ephesians, however, lacks not only an address but also references to
specific individuals or problems. Among the non-Pauline letters,
Hebrews and James also appear to be tractates or general
exhortations, rather than letters to specific communities. Jude
addresses a sharp apocalyptic warning to Christians in general. First
John speaks to concrete problems in its church circles, but lacks the
form of a letter; 2 and 3 John are both personal letters, though
addressed to different problems. First Peter used the letter form as
exhortation for suffering Christians in Asia Minor. Finally, 2 Peter
appears to be the latest epistle in the New Testament. It contains a
possible allusion to the Gospel account of the Transfiguration (1.16-18;
cf. Mk 9.2-8) and to Christians who misinterpret Paul's letters (3.15-16).
Like 2 Timothy, 2 Peter is presented as the last testament of an apostle.
It affirms the unity of apostolic teaching concerning the Day of the
Lord against some who used Paul's authority to deny that God would
end the world.
Writing and Sending Letters in Antiquity
Letters from antiquity include imperial decrees addressed to subjects in
a particular area, such as that by the emperor Claudius to "the city of
Alexandria" in 41 CE concerning Jewish agitation for citizen rights;
collections of philosophical letters by prominent figures like Cicero,
Pliny, and Seneca; and hundreds of papyri from Egypt documenting the
concerns of ordinary people. Royal diplomatic correspondence has its

307

INTRO TO THE NEW TESTAMENT EPISTLES 308

own formalities of language which are echoed in the so-called letter
that the heavenly Christ addresses to the angels of the churches in
Revelation 2-3. Philosophical letters often adopt a rhetorical formalism,
which indicates that such letters were intended to be preserved for
posterity. They are typically longer than private letters, which are
generally described as "documentary" to distinguish them from such
literary creations. Authors often retained copies of and existed only for
the many purposes of the moment, such as dealing with problems at
home, urging an absent husband or son to return, reporting on a
military posting, pleading for legal redress, engaging in commerce,
describing one's circumstances to family or friends, recommending the
bearer of the letter to its recipient, and so on.
The existence of so many letters from private individuals does not
imply a high right of literacy among craftsmen, traders, or women. A
letter could be dictated to a scribe who would be charged with the
actual writing. Even those who could write often preferred to employ
the services of a scribe (Rom 16.22; Gal 6.11). The letter-carrier or
another party might read the letter at its destination and, depending
upon the carrier's relationship to the sender, might also interpret the
content of the letter. Some documentary letters in Egypt suggest that
after the letter has been read in Greek, it will have to be translated
into the local dialect so that the women in the sender's audience can
understand it.
The formal parts of the ancient letter — to be distinguished from other
rhetorical patterns authors of literary epistles might use — are
straightforward. The opening or prescript identifies sender(s) and
recipient(s) and concludes with a greeting or salutation. Epithets,
information about geographical locations, and terms of endearment
often expand on individuals named. Paul regularly shifts to a Semitic
form of salutation, "grace and peace," expanded with reference to
God and Christ Jesus (2 Cor 1.2). When his apostolic authority is an issue
between himself and the recipients, that note may be attached as a
self-designation (2 Cor 1.1; Rom 1.1-5, a community for which Paul is not
an apostle founder). Ancient letters may follow the opening with a
formal statement of the sender's wish for the health of the recipients.
Such formulas may also be employed to close the letter. Another

308

INTRO TO THE NEW TESTAMENT EPISTLES 309

common formula expresses the sender's prayer to the gods or
thanksgiving on behalf of the recipients. In the Pauline letter type, this
conventional way of opening a letter commonly develops into a much
longer thanksgiving or blessing section. That section often previews
items from the body of the letter that follows.
After the opening formalities, the body of the letter states the actual
business or request that is the reason for the letter. The sender may
either give information about his own future travel plans or request it
about others. Paul usually has such travel reports near the end of his
letter-body. Various formulas can be used to conclude the letter. Often
greetings are conveyed from or to others not mentioned in the letterbody.
Once the letter was written, the sender had to find a person to convey
the letter to its recipient. Often the presence of someone who is on the
way to the desired location provides an opportunity for writing. There
was no guaranteed overnight global delivery in antiquity! Even letters
entrusted to friends for delivery had an uncertain fate. Under the best
of circumstances a response was weeks or months away. The sender
would ordinarily have retained a copy, and some scholars have
suggested that the first collection of Paul's letters was due to the
apostle's own editing of his copies of Romans, 1 and 2 Corinthians, and
Galatians. This hypothesis accounts for the start of the process of
collecting and editing Pauline letters, but lacking any specific
manuscript evidence, it remains speculative.

Copyright ©2001, New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha: New Revised Standard
Version. Ed. Michael D. Coogan. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001. Used by
permission. All rights reserved.

309

ROMANS 310

ROMANS
Introduction
Although, because of its length, it is the first in the letters of the New
Testament, Romans was probably the latest of Paul's undisputed letters
to be written (see the article, Introduction to the Letters/Epistles in the
New Testament). Romans also contains the longest and most complex
sustained argument in any of Paul's letters even though it is addressed
to Christians he has never met (1.13). For these reasons the letter,
especially chs 1-8, has often been read as Paul's theological "last will
and testament," a reflection on and a summary of the gospel of
salvation in Christ. It was also intended to persuade the Christians of
Rome to support Paul's prospective mission to Spain (15.23-24).
HT

TH

Paul wanted more from his readers, however. He meant to proclaim to
the Christians of Rome the gospel, "the power of God for salvation"
(1.15-16; 15.18-19), and thus to strengthen and encourage them (1.11-12).
Romans is, like Paul's other letters, an instrument of moral instruction
and exhortation (see 15.14-15).
The letter was occasioned in part by circumstances in Rome during the
reign of the emperor Nero (54-68 CE). The greetings in ch 16 include
Prisca and Aquila, known from Acts 18.2 as among the Jews expelled
from Rome by the emperor Claudius around 49 CE. Their presence in
Rome at the time Paul writes may reflect Nero's reversal of his
predecessor's edict (Suetonius, Life of Claudius 25.3). The recent return
of Jews to the imperials capital, including Jewish Christians like Prisca
and Aquila, who had been driven out and probably lost property and
community ties during their exile, may well have aroused tensions
within Christian house groups in which Gentile believers had become
predominant.

310

ROMANS 311

Paul's appeal to Gentile Christians in Rome not to "boast" over Jews
(11.13-36) comes at the end of chs 9.11, the climax of the letter. Paul's
argument responds to an incipient anti-Judaism, already rife among
the Roman aristocracy and beginning to penetrate the Christian
community as well. Given the recent horror of an anti-Jewish pogrom
in Alexandria (38-41 CE), and even more recent tax riots that had
turned deadly in nearby Puteoli, Paul is concerned to prevent in Rome
the sort of civic disturbance in which the city's minority Jewish
population might be especially vulnerable. This is at least one
explanation for the notorious exhortation to "be subject to the
governing authorities" (13.1-7). Sometimes read as Paul's "theology of
the state," these verses stand in tension with his view elsewhere of the
"rulers of this age" (1 Cor 2.6-8; 15.24-26; 1 Thess 5.3-11), and with his
own willingness to suffer punishment from civil authorities (2 Cor 11.23,
25-27). This teaching is conventional (Wis 6.1-3; 1 Pet 2.13-17; 3.13), and
there are other attitudes to civil authorities in the New Testament (Acts
5.29; Rev 13.2,5, 11-18). These verses may have had a very specific
application in preventing further violence against Jews. Similarly, Paul's
admonitions regarding the "weak in faith," concerned with the
observance of diet and special days (14.1-15.13), may address tensions
between Jewish Christians, who would have had such observances, and
Gentile Christians, who would not.
The theme of God's "righteousness" (1.17) or "justice" (3.5) resonates
throughout the letter. At stake is God's faithfulness in the face human
faithlessness, as the rhetorical questions that punctuate the letter show
(2.3-4, 21-23; 3.3, 5, 7, 9, 27, 29; 4.1; 6.1-3, 15-16; 7.7, 13; 9.14, 19, 30; 11.1,
11). God's righteousness is manifest in the uncompromising judgment
of all impiety and wickedness, and also in unwavering loyalty to the
covenant with Israel. Paul wants the Christians of Rome to respect
God's integrity in the salvation offered them through the faithful
obedience of Jesus (5.6, 18-19; 3.22, 26). Paul's emphasizes God's
integrity and justice, now "revealed" (1.17), not in putting up with sin
but in dealing with it decisively through the faith of Jesus Christ or one
who has faith in Jesus Christ.

311

ROMANS 312

Paul is Christ's apostle, obligated to "bring about the obedience of
faith among all the Gentiles," among whom he includes his Roman
audience (1.1-6). He declares the gospel of God's salvation to all who
believe, Jews and Greeks alike, but "to the Jew first" (1.16). The priority
of the Jew in God's plan of salvation is an important theme in the
letter (3.1-2; 9.1-4). Paul's mission to Gentiles should provoke his fellow
Jews to jealousy (11.13-14), perhaps by convincing them that the last
days prophesied by Isaiah were at hand (15.12). At last, Paul declares,
"all Israel will be saved" (11.26), and all the nations will join Israel in the
worship of the one true God (15.7-13).
As he writes, the apostle is about to present to his compatriots in
Jerusalem both monetary aid from churches in his mission field (15.2527) and an embassy of converts from paganism (1 Cor 16.3-4; on the
eventual catastrophe of this mission, see Acts 21.27-30). Although the
Roman Christians have not had the opportunity to contribute to this
mission in tangible ways, Paul asks for their prayers (15.30-32). He also
writes to safeguard the sanctity of the "offering of the Gentiles" (15.1516) by exhorting the Christians of Rome to holy living (12.1-3; 15.7-9).
The underlying structure of Paul's exhortation resembles other letters
written to congregations Paul had founded. By virtue of their baptism
into Christ, Christians must no longer let sin have dominion over them
(6.1-14). They are to live no longer as the pagan world does (1.18-32),
but to give "spiritual worship" to God through sobriety of thought and
bodily purity (12.1-3). Just so Paul had reminded the Corinthians,
Galatians, and Thessalonians that they must no longer live as "the
Gentiles who do not know God," having been sanctified by Christ (1
Cor 6.9-11; Gal 5.22-24; 1 Thess 4.1-5).
Universal accountability before God, Paul's theme throughout the early
chapters of the letter, is more specifically applied in chs 12-16. Rather
than being a treatise on Christian salvation, Romans is a sustained
appeal for holy living, directed to Gentile Christians tempted to look
down on their beleaguered Jewish neighbors, within the Christian
congregations and without. The apostle's call to realize in common life
the justice of God which the Christian congregation celebrates is the
letter's enduring legacy.

312

ROMANS 313

[Romans 1]
Salutation
1 Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, set apart for
the gospel of God, 2 which he promised beforehand through his
prophets in the holy scriptures, 3 the gospel concerning his Son, who
was descended from David according to the flesh 4 and was declared
to be Son of God with power according to the spirit of holiness by
resurrection from the dead, Jesus Christ our Lord, 5 through whom we
have received grace and apostleship to bring about the obedience of
faith among all the Gentiles for the sake of his name, 6 including
yourselves who are called to belong to Jesus Christ,
7 To all God's beloved in Rome, who are called to be saints:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Thanksgiving
8 First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, because your
faith is proclaimed throughout the world. 9 For God, whom I serve
with my spirit by announcing the gospel of his Son, is my witness that
without ceasing I remember you always in my prayers, 10 asking that
by God's will I may somehow at last succeed in coming to you. 11 For I
am longing to see you so that I may share with you some spiritual gift
to strengthen you — 12 or rather so that we may be mutually
encouraged by each other's faith, both yours and mine. 13 I want you
to know, brothers and sisters, that I have often intended to come to
you (but thus far have been prevented), in order that I may reap some
harvest among you as I have among the rest of the Gentiles. 14 I am a
debtor both to Greeks and to barbarians, both to the wise and to the
foolish 15 — hence my eagerness to proclaim the gospel to you also
who are in Rome.
16 For I am not ashamed of the gospel; it is the power of God for
salvation to everyone who has faith, to the Jew first and also to the
Greek. 17 For in it the righteousness of God is revealed through faith
for faith; as it is written, "The one who is righteous will live by faith."

313

ROMANS 314

An indictment of human wickedness and injustice
18 For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and wickedness of those who by their wickedness suppress
the truth. 19 For what can be known about God is plain to them,
because God has shown it to them. 20 Ever since the creation of the
world his eternal power and divine nature, invisible though they are,
have been understood and seen through the things he has made. So
they are without excuse; 21 for though they knew God, they did not
honor him as God or give thanks to him, but they became futile in their
thinking, and their senseless minds were darkened. 22 Claiming to be
wise, they became fools; 23 and they exchanged the glory of the
immortal God for images resembling a mortal human being or birds or
four-footed animals or reptiles.
24 Therefore God gave them up in the lusts of their hearts to impurity,
to the degrading of their bodies among themselves, 25 because they
exchanged the truth about God for a lie and worshiped and served the
creature rather than the Creator, who is blessed forever! Amen.
26 For this reason God gave them up to degrading passions. Their
women exchanged natural intercourse for unnatural, 27 and in the
same way also the men, giving up natural intercourse with women,
were consumed with passion for one another. Men committed
shameless acts with men and received in their own persons the due
penalty for their error.
28 And since they did not see fit to acknowledge God, God gave them
up to a debased mind and to things that should not be done. 29 They
were filled with every kind of wickedness, evil, covetousness, malice.
Full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, craftiness, they are gossips, 30
slanderers, God-haters, insolent, haughty, boastful, inventors of evil,
rebellious toward parents, 31 foolish, faithless, heartless, ruthless. 32
They know God's decree, that those who practice such things deserve
to die — yet they not only do them but even applaud others who
practice them.

314

ROMANS 315

[Romans 2]
All are accountable before God for their works
1 Therefore you have no excuse, whoever you are, when you judge
others; for in passing judgment on another you condemn yourself,
because you, the judge, are doing the very same things. 2 You say, "We
know that God's judgment on those who do such things is in
accordance with truth." 3 Do you imagine, whoever you are, that when
you judge those who do such things and yet do them yourself, you will
escape the judgment of God? 4 Or do you despise the riches of his
kindness and forbearance and patience? Do you not realize that God's
kindness is meant to lead you to repentance? 5 But by your hard and
impenitent heart you are storing up wrath for yourself on the day of
wrath, when God's righteous judgment will be revealed. 6 For he will
repay according to each one's deeds: 7 to those who by patiently doing
good seek for glory and honor and immortality, he will give eternal
life; 8 while for those who are self-seeking and who obey not the truth
but wickedness, there will be wrath and fury. 9 There will be anguish
and distress for everyone who does evil, the Jew first and also the
Greek, 10 but glory and honor and peace for everyone who does good,
the Jew first and also the Greek. 11 For God shows no partiality.
12 All who have sinned apart from the law will also perish apart from
the law, and all who have sinned under the law will be judged by the
law. 13 For it is not the hearers of the law who are righteous in God's
sight, but the doers of the law who will be justified. 14 When Gentiles,
who do not possess the law, do instinctively what the law requires,
these, though not having the law, are a law to themselves. 15 They
show that what the law requires is written on their hearts, to which
their own conscience also bears witness; and their conflicting thoughts
will accuse or perhaps excuse them 16 on the day when, according to
my gospel, God, through Jesus Christ, will judge the secret thoughts of
all.
Does being a Jew relieve one from accountability to God?
17 But if you call yourself a Jew and rely on the law and boast of your
relation to God 18 and know his will and determine what is best

315

ROMANS 316

because you are instructed in the law, 19 and if you are sure that you
are a guide to the blind, a light to those who are in darkness, 20 a
corrector of the foolish, a teacher of children, having in the law the
embodiment of knowledge and truth, 21 you, then, that teach others,
will you not teach yourself? While you preach against stealing, do you
steal? 22 You that forbid adultery, do you commit adultery? You that
abhor idols, do you rob temples? 23 You that boast in the law, do you
dishonor God by breaking the law? 24 For, as it is written, "The name
of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you."
25 Circumcision indeed is of value if you obey the law; but if you break
the law, your circumcision has become uncircumcision. 26 So, if those
who are uncircumcised keep the requirements of the law, will not their
uncircumcision be regarded as circumcision? 27 Then those who are
physically uncircumcised but keep the law will condemn you that have
the written code and circumcision but break the law. 28 For a person is
not a Jew who is one outwardly, nor is true circumcision something
external and physical. 29 Rather, a person is a Jew who is one inwardly,
and real circumcision is a matter of the heart — it is spiritual and not
literal. Such a person receives praise not from others but from God.
[Romans 3]
God's integrity in the covenant with Israel
1 Then what advantage has the Jew? Or what is the value of
circumcision? 2 Much, in every way. For in the first place the Jews were
entrusted with the oracles of God. 3 What if some were unfaithful?
Will their faithlessness nullify the faithfulness of God? 4 By no means!
Although everyone is a liar, let God be proved true, as it is written,
"So that you may be justified in your words,
and prevail in your judging."
5 But if our injustice serves to confirm the justice of God, what should
we say? That God is unjust to inflict wrath on us? (I speak in a human
way.) 6 By no means! For then how could God judge the world? 7 But if
through my falsehood God's truthfulness abounds to his glory, why am
I still being condemned as a sinner? 8 And why not say (as some people
slander us by saying that we say), "Let us do evil so that good may
come"? Their condemnation is deserved!

316

ROMANS 317

The universality of God's judgment
9 What then? Are we any better off? No, not at all; for we have
already charged that all, both Jews and Greeks, are under the power of
sin, 10 as it is written:
"There is no one who is righteous, not even one;
11
there is no one who has understanding,
there is no one who seeks God.
12 All have turned aside, together they have become worthless;
there is no one who shows kindness,
there is not even one."
13 "Their throats are opened graves;
they use their tongues to deceive."
"The venom of vipers is under their lips."
14 "Their mouths are full of cursing and bitterness."
15 "Their feet are swift to shed blood;
16
ruin and misery are in their paths,
17 and the way of peace they have not known."
18
"There is no fear of God before their eyes."
19 Now we know that whatever the law says, it speaks to those who
are under the law, so that every mouth may be silenced, and the whole
world may be held accountable to God. 20 For "no human being will
be justified in his sight" by deeds prescribed by the law, for through
the law comes the knowledge of sin.
The revelation of God's judgment
21 But now, apart from law, the righteousness of God has been
disclosed, and is attested by the law and the prophets, 22 the
righteousness of God through the faith of Jesus Christ for all who
believe. For there is no distinction, 23 since all have sinned and fall
short of the glory of God; 24 they are now justified by his grace as a
gift, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, 25 whom God put
forward as a sacrifice of atonement by his blood, effective through
faith. He did this to show his righteousness, because in his divine
forbearance he had passed over the sins previously committed; 26 it

317

ROMANS 318

was to prove at the present time that he himself is righteous and that
he justifies the one who has faith in Jesus.
27 Then what becomes of boasting? It is excluded. By what law? By
that of works? No, but by the law of faith. 28 For we hold that a
person is justified by faith apart from works prescribed by the law. 29
Or is God the God of Jews only? Is he not the God of Gentiles also? Yes,
of Gentiles also, 30 since God is one; and he will justify the circumcised
on the ground of faith and the uncircumcised through that same faith.
31 Do we then overthrow the law by this faith? By no means! On the
contrary, we uphold the law.
[Romans 4]
Abraham as a test case
1 What then are we to say was gained by Abraham, our ancestor
according to the flesh? 2 For if Abraham was justified by works, he has
something to boast about, but not before God. 3 For what does the
scripture say? "Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him as
righteousness." 4 Now to one who works, wages are not reckoned as a
gift but as something due. 5 But to one who without works trusts him
who justifies the ungodly, such faith is reckoned as righteousness. 6 So
also David speaks of the blessedness of those to whom God reckons
righteousness apart from works:
7 "Blessed are those whose iniquities are forgiven,
and whose sins are covered;
8 blessed is the one against whom the Lord will not reckon sin."
9 Is this blessedness, then, pronounced only on the circumcised, or also
on the uncircumcised? We say, "Faith was reckoned to Abraham as
righteousness." 10 How then was it reckoned to him? Was it before or
after he had been circumcised? It was not after, but before he was
circumcised. 11 He received the sign of circumcision as a seal of the
righteousness that he had by faith while he was still uncircumcised. The
purpose was to make him the ancestor of all who believe without
being circumcised and who thus have righteousness reckoned to them,
12 and likewise the ancestor of the circumcised who are not only

318

ROMANS 319

circumcised but who also follow the example of the faith that our
ancestor Abraham had before he was circumcised.
13 For the promise that he would inherit the world did not come to
Abraham or to his descendants through the law but through the
righteousness of faith. 14 If it is the adherents of the law who are to be
the heirs, faith is null and the promise is void. 15 For the law brings
wrath; but where there is no law, neither is there violation.
The example of Abraham's faith
16 For this reason it depends on faith, in order that the promise may
rest on grace and be guaranteed to all his descendants, not only to the
adherents of the law but also to those who share the faith of Abraham
(for he is the father of all of us, 17 as it is written, "I have made you the
father of many nations") — in the presence of the God in whom he
believed, who gives life to the dead and calls into existence the things
that do not exist. 18 Hoping against hope, he believed that he would
become "the father of many nations," according to what was said, "So
numerous shall your descendants be." 19 He did not weaken in faith
when he considered his own body, which was already as good as dead
(for he was about a hundred years old), or when he considered the
barrenness of Sarah's womb. 20 No distrust made him waver
concerning the promise of God, but he grew strong in his faith as he
gave glory to God, 21 being fully convinced that God was able to do
what he had promised. 22 Therefore his faith "was reckoned to him as
righteousness." 23 Now the words, "it was reckoned to him," were
written not for his sake alone, 24 but for ours also. It will be reckoned
to us who believe in him who raised Jesus our Lord from the dead, 25
who was handed over to death for our trespasses and was raised for
our justification.
[Romans 5]
The nature of justification in Christ
1 Therefore, since we are justified by faith, we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 through whom we have obtained
access to this grace in which we stand; and we boast in our hope of

319

ROMANS 320

sharing the glory of God. 3 And not only that, but we also boast in our
sufferings, knowing that suffering produces endurance, 4 and
endurance produces character, and character produces hope, 5 and
hope does not disappoint us, because God's love has been poured into
our hearts through the Holy Spirit that has been given to us.
6 For while we were still weak, at the right time Christ died for the
ungodly. 7 Indeed, rarely will anyone die for a righteous person —
though perhaps for a good person someone might actually dare to die.
8 But God proves his love for us in that while we still were sinners
Christ died for us. 9 Much more surely then, now that we have been
justified by his blood, will we be saved through him from the wrath of
God. 10 For if while we were enemies, we were reconciled to God
through the death of his Son, much more surely, having been
reconciled, will we be saved by his life. 11 But more than that, we even
boast in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have
now received reconciliation.
Adam and Christ
12 Therefore, just as sin came into the world through one man, and
death came through sin, and so death spread to all because all have
sinned — 13 sin was indeed in the world before the law, but sin is not
reckoned when there is no law. 14 Yet death exercised dominion from
Adam to Moses, even over those whose sins were not like the
transgression of Adam, who is a type of the one who was to come.
15 But the free gift is not like the trespass. For if the many died
through the one man's trespass, much more surely have the grace of
God and the free gift in the grace of the one man, Jesus Christ,
abounded for the many. 16 And the free gift is not like the effect of
the one man's sin. For the judgment following one trespass brought
condemnation, but the free gift following many trespasses brings
justification. 17 If, because of the one man's trespass, death exercised
dominion through that one, much more surely will those who receive
the abundance of grace and the free gift of righteousness exercise
dominion in life through the one man, Jesus Christ.

320

ROMANS 321

18 Therefore just as one man's trespass led to condemnation for all, so
one man's act of righteousness leads to justification and life for all. 19
For just as by the one man's disobedience the many were made sinners,
so by the one man's obedience the many will be made righteous. 20
But law came in, with the result that the trespass multiplied; but where
sin increased, grace abounded all the more, 21 so that, just as sin
exercised dominion in death, so grace might also exercise dominion
through justification leading to eternal life through Jesus Christ our
Lord.
[Romans 6]
Life in Christ requires obedience
1 What then are we to say? Should we continue in sin in order that
grace may abound? 2 By no means! How can we who died to sin go on
living in it? 3 Do you not know that all of us who have been baptized
into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death? 4 Therefore we have
been buried with him by baptism into death, so that, just as Christ was
raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we too might walk
in newness of life.
5 For if we have been united with him in a death like his, we will
certainly be united with him in a resurrection like his. 6 We know that
our old self was crucified with him so that the body of sin might be
destroyed, and we might no longer be enslaved to sin. 7 For whoever
has died is freed from sin. 8 But if we have died with Christ, we believe
that we will also live with him. 9 We know that Christ, being raised
from the dead, will never die again; death no longer has dominion
over him. 10 The death he died, he died to sin, once for all; but the life
he lives, he lives to God. 11 So you also must consider yourselves dead
to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus.
12 Therefore, do not let sin exercise dominion in your mortal bodies, to
make you obey their passions. 13 No longer present your members to
sin as instruments of wickedness, but present yourselves to God as
those who have been brought from death to life, and present your
members to God as instruments of righteousness. 14 For sin will have
no dominion over you, since you are not under law but under grace.

321

ROMANS 322

15 What then? Should we sin because we are not under law but under
grace? By no means! 16 Do you not know that if you present yourselves
to anyone as obedient slaves, you are slaves of the one whom you
obey, either of sin, which leads to death, or of obedience, which leads
to righteousness? 17 But thanks be to God that you, having once been
slaves of sin, have become obedient from the heart to the form of
teaching to which you were entrusted, 18 and that you, having been
set free from sin, have become slaves of righteousness. 19 I am
speaking in human terms because of your natural limitations. For just
as you once presented your members as slaves to impurity and to
greater and greater iniquity, so now present your members as slaves to
righteousness for sanctification.
20 When you were slaves of sin, you were free in regard to
righteousness. 21 So what advantage did you then get from the things
of which you now are ashamed? The end of those things is death. 22
But now that you have been freed from sin and enslaved to God, the
advantage you get is sanctification. The end is eternal life. 23 For the
wages of sin is death, but the free gift of God is eternal life in Christ
Jesus our Lord.
[Romans 7]
The law's poisonous interaction with sin
1 Do you not know, brothers and sisters — for I am speaking to those
who know the law — that the law is binding on a person only during
that person's lifetime? 2 Thus a married woman is bound by the law to
her husband as long as he lives; but if her husband dies, she is
discharged from the law concerning the husband. 3 Accordingly, she
will be called an adulteress if she lives with another man while her
husband is alive. But if her husband dies, she is free from that law, and
if she marries another man, she is not an adulteress.
4 In the same way, my friends, you have died to the law through the
body of Christ, so that you may belong to another, to him who has
been raised from the dead in order that we may bear fruit for God. 5
While we were living in the flesh, our sinful passions, aroused by the
law, were at work in our members to bear fruit for death. 6 But now

322

ROMANS 323

we are discharged from the law, dead to that which held us captive, so
that we are slaves not under the old written code but in the new life of
the Spirit.
7 What then should we say? That the law is sin? By no means! Yet, if it
had not been for the law, I would not have known sin. I would not
have known what it is to covet if the law had not said, "You shall not
covet." 8 But sin, seizing an opportunity in the commandment,
produced in me all kinds of covetousness. Apart from the law sin lies
dead. 9 I was once alive apart from the law, but when the
commandment came, sin revived 10 and I died, and the very
commandment that promised life proved to be death to me. 11 For sin,
seizing an opportunity in the commandment, deceived me and
through it killed me. 12 So the law is holy, and the commandment is
holy and just and good.
13 Did what is good, then, bring death to me? By no means! It was sin,
working death in me through what is good, in order that sin might be
shown to be sin, and through the commandment might become sinful
beyond measure.
Even the disobedient acknowledge the rightness of the law's verdict
14 For we know that the law is spiritual; but I am of the flesh, sold into
slavery under sin. 15 I do not understand my own actions. For I do not
do what I want, but I do the very thing I hate. 16 Now if I do what I do
not want, I agree that the law is good. 17 But in fact it is no longer I
that do it, but sin that dwells within me. 18 For I know that nothing
good dwells within me, that is, in my flesh. I can will what is right, but I
cannot do it. 19 For I do not do the good I want, but the evil I do not
want is what I do. 20 Now if I do what I do not want, it is no longer I
that do it, but sin that dwells within me.
21 So I find it to be a law that when I want to do what is good, evil lies
close at hand. 22 For I delight in the law of God in my inmost self, 23
but I see in my members another law at war with the law of my mind,
making me captive to the law of sin that dwells in my members. 24

323

ROMANS 324

Wretched man that I am! Who will rescue me from this body of death?
25 Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord!
So then, with my mind I am a slave to the law of God, but with my
flesh I am a slave to the law of sin.
[Romans 8]
Life in the Spirit
1 There is therefore now no condemnation for those who are in Christ
Jesus. 2 For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set you free
from the law of sin and of death. 3 For God has done what the law,
weakened by the flesh, could not do: by sending his own Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and to deal with sin, he condemned sin in the
flesh, 4 so that the just requirement of the law might be fulfilled in us,
who walk not according to the flesh but according to the Spirit. 5 For
those who live according to the flesh set their minds on the things of
the flesh, but those who live according to the Spirit set their minds on
the things of the Spirit. 6 To set the mind on the flesh is death, but to
set the mind on the Spirit is life and peace. 7 For this reason the mind
that is set on the flesh is hostile to God; it does not submit to God's law
— indeed it cannot, 8 and those who are in the flesh cannot please
God.
9 But you are not in the flesh; you are in the Spirit, since the Spirit of
God dwells in you. Anyone who does not have the Spirit of Christ does
not belong to him. 10 But if Christ is in you, though the body is dead
because of sin, the Spirit is life because of righteousness. 11 If the Spirit
of him who raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you, he who raised
Christ from the dead will give life to your mortal bodies also through
his Spirit that dwells in you.
12 So then, brothers and sisters, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live
according to the flesh — 13 for if you live according to the flesh, you
will die; but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body,
you will live. 14 For all who are led by the Spirit of God are children of
God. 15 For you did not receive a spirit of slavery to fall back into fear,
but you have received a spirit of adoption. When we cry, "Abba!

324

ROMANS 325

Father!" 16 it is that very Spirit bearing witness with our spirit that we
are children of God, 17 and if children, then heirs, heirs of God and
joint heirs with Christ — if, in fact, we suffer with him so that we may
also be glorified with him.
Suffering, and hope in God's promise
18 I consider that the sufferings of this present time are not worth
comparing with the glory about to be revealed to us. 19 For the
creation waits with eager longing for the revealing of the children of
God; 20 for the creation was subjected to futility, not of its own will
but by the will of the one who subjected it, in hope 21 that the creation
itself will be set free from its bondage to decay and will obtain the
freedom of the glory of the children of God. 22 We know that the
whole creation has been groaning in labor pains until now; 23 and not
only the creation, but we ourselves, who have the first fruits of the
Spirit, groan inwardly while we wait for adoption, the redemption of
our bodies. 24 For in hope we were saved. Now hope that is seen is not
hope. For who hopes for what is seen? 25 But if we hope for what we
do not see, we wait for it with patience.
26 Likewise the Spirit helps us in our weakness; for we do not know
how to pray as we ought, but that very Spirit intercedes with sighs too
deep for words. 27 And God, who searches the heart, knows what is
the mind of the Spirit, because the Spirit intercedes for the saints
according to the will of God.
28 We know that all things work together for good for those who love
God, who are called according to his purpose. 29 For those whom he
foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son,
in order that he might be the firstborn within a large family. 30 And
those whom he predestined he also called; and those whom he called
he also justified; and those whom he justified he also glorified.
31 What then are we to say about these things? If God is for us, who is
against us? 32 He who did not withhold his own Son, but gave him up
for all of us, will he not with him also give us everything else? 33 Who
will bring any charge against God's elect? It is God who justifies. 34

325

ROMANS 326

Who is to condemn? It is Christ Jesus, who died, yes, who was raised,
who is at the right hand of God, who indeed intercedes for us. 35 Who
will separate us from the love of Christ? Will hardship, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? 36 As it is
written,
"For your sake we are being killed all day long;
we are accounted as sheep to be slaughtered."
37 No, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him
who loved us. 38 For I am convinced that neither death, nor life, nor
angels, nor rulers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers,
39 nor height, nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able
to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.
[Romans 9]
The certainty of God's purposes toward Israel
1 I am speaking the truth in Christ — I am not lying; my conscience
confirms it by the Holy Spirit — 2 I have great sorrow and unceasing
anguish in my heart. 3 For I could wish that I myself were accursed and
cut off from Christ for the sake of my own people, my kindred
according to the flesh. 4 They are Israelites, and to them belong the
adoption, the glory, the covenants, the giving of the law, the worship,
and the promises; 5 to them belong the patriarchs, and from them,
according to the flesh, comes the Messiah, who is over all, God blessed
forever. Amen.
God's right to choose
6 It is not as though the word of God had failed. For not all Israelites
truly belong to Israel, 7 and not all of Abraham's children are his true
descendants; but "It is through Isaac that descendants shall be named
for you." 8 This means that it is not the children of the flesh who are
the children of God, but the children of the promise are counted as
descendants. 9 For this is what the promise said, "About this time I will
return and Sarah shall have a son." 10 Nor is that all; something similar
happened to Rebecca when she had conceived children by one
husband, our ancestor Isaac. 11 Even before they had been born or had
done anything good or bad (so that God's purpose of election might

326

ROMANS 327

continue, 12 not by works but by his call) she was told, "The elder shall
serve the younger." 13 As it is written,
"I have loved Jacob,
but I have hated Esau."
14 What then are we to say? Is there injustice on God's part? By no
means! 15 For he says to Moses,
"I will have mercy on whom I have mercy,
and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion."
16 So it depends not on human will or exertion, but on God who shows
mercy. 17 For the scripture says to Pharaoh, "I have raised you up for
the very purpose of showing my power in you, so that my name may
be proclaimed in all the earth." 18 So then he has mercy on whomever
he chooses, and he hardens the heart of whomever he chooses.
19 You will say to me then, "Why then does he still find fault? For who
can resist his will?" 20 But who indeed are you, a human being, to
argue with God? Will what is molded say to the one who molds it,
"Why have you made me like this?" 21 Has the potter no right over the
clay, to make out of the same lump one object for special use and
another for ordinary use? 22 What if God, desiring to show his wrath
and to make known his power, has endured with much patience the
objects of wrath that are made for destruction; 23 and what if he has
done so in order to make known the riches of his glory for the objects
of mercy, which he has prepared beforehand for glory — 24 including
us whom he has called, not from the Jews only but also from the
Gentiles? 25 As indeed he says in Hosea,
"Those who were not my people I will call 'my people,'
and her who was not beloved I will call 'beloved.'"
26 "And in the very place where it was said to them, 'You are not my
people,'
there they shall be called children of the living God."
27 And Isaiah cries out concerning Israel, "Though the number of the
children of Israel were like the sand of the sea, only a remnant of them
will be saved; 28 for the Lord will execute his sentence on the earth
quickly and decisively." 29 And as Isaiah predicted,

327

ROMANS 328

"If the Lord of hosts had not left survivors to us,
we would have fared like Sodom
and been made like Gomorrah."
What went wrong?
30 What then are we to say? Gentiles, who did not strive for
righteousness, have attained it, that is, righteousness through faith; 31
but Israel, who did strive for the righteousness that is based on the law,
did not succeed in fulfilling that law. 32 Why not? Because they did not
strive for it on the basis of faith, but as if it were based on works. They
have stumbled over the stumbling stone, 33 as it is written,
"See, I am laying in Zion a stone that will make people
stumble, a rock that will make them fall,
and whoever believes in him will not be put to shame."
[Romans 10]
1 Brothers and sisters, my heart's desire and prayer to God for them is
that they may be saved. 2 I can testify that they have a zeal for God,
but it is not enlightened. 3 For, being ignorant of the righteousness
that comes from God, and seeking to establish their own, they have
not submitted to God's righteousness. 4 For Christ is the end of the law
so that there may be righteousness for everyone who believes.
5 Moses writes concerning the righteousness that comes from the law,
that "the person who does these things will live by them." 6 But the
righteousness that comes from faith says, "Do not say in your heart,
'Who will ascend into heaven?'" (that is, to bring Christ down) 7 "or
'Who will descend into the abyss?'" (that is, to bring Christ up from the
dead). 8 But what does it say?
"The word is near you,
on your lips and in your heart"
(that is, the word of faith that we proclaim); 9 because if you confess
with your lips that Jesus is Lord and believe in your heart that God
raised him from the dead, you will be saved. 10 For one believes with
the heart and so is justified, and one confesses with the mouth and so
is saved. 11 The scripture says, "No one who believes in him will be put

328

ROMANS 329

to shame." 12 For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek; the
same Lord is Lord of all and is generous to all who call on him. 13 For,
"Everyone who calls on the name of the Lord shall be saved."
14 But how are they to call on one in whom they have not believed?
And how are they to believe in one of whom they have never heard?
And how are they to hear without someone to proclaim him? 15 And
how are they to proclaim him unless they are sent? As it is written,
"How beautiful are the feet of those who bring good news!" 16 But
not all have obeyed the good news; for Isaiah says, "Lord, who has
believed our message?" 17 So faith comes from what is heard, and
what is heard comes through the word of Christ.
18 But I ask, have they not heard? Indeed they have; for
"Their voice has gone out to all the earth,
and their words to the ends of the world."
19 Again I ask, did Israel not understand? First Moses says,
"I will make you jealous of those who are not a nation;
with a foolish nation I will make you angry."
20 Then Isaiah is so bold as to say,
"I have been found by those who did not seek me;
I have shown myself to those who did not ask for me."
21 But of Israel he says, "All day long I have held out my hands to a
disobedient and contrary people."
[Romans 11]
God has preserved a remnant
1 I ask, then, has God rejected his people? By no means! I myself am an
Israelite, a descendant of Abraham, a member of the tribe of Benjamin.
2 God has not rejected his people whom he foreknew. Do you not
know what the scripture says of Elijah, how he pleads with God against
Israel? 3 "Lord, they have killed your prophets, they have demolished
your altars; I alone am left, and they are seeking my life." 4 But what is
the divine reply to him? "I have kept for myself seven thousand who
have not bowed the knee to Baal." 5 So too at the present time there
is a remnant, chosen by grace. 6 But if it is by grace, it is no longer on
the basis of works, otherwise grace would no longer be grace.

329

ROMANS 330

7 What then? Israel failed to obtain what it was seeking. The elect
obtained it, but the rest were hardened, 8 as it is written,
"God gave them a sluggish spirit,
eyes that would not see
and ears that would not hear,
down to this very day."
9 And David says,
"Let their table become a snare and a trap,
a stumbling block and a retribution for them;
10 let their eyes be darkened so that they cannot see,
and keep their backs forever bent."
11 So I ask, have they stumbled so as to fall? By no means! But through
their stumbling salvation has come to the Gentiles, so as to make Israel
jealous. 12 Now if their stumbling means riches for the world, and if
their defeat means riches for Gentiles, how much more will their full
inclusion mean!
A warning to the Gentile Christians of Rome
13 Now I am speaking to you Gentiles. Inasmuch then as I am an apostle
to the Gentiles, I glorify my ministry 14 in order to make my own
people jealous, and thus save some of them. 15 For if their rejection is
the reconciliation of the world, what will their acceptance be but life
from the dead! 16 If the part of the dough offered as first fruits is holy,
then the whole batch is holy; and if the root is holy, then the branches
also are holy.
The metaphor of the olive tree
17 But if some of the branches were broken off, and you, a wild olive
shoot, were grafted in their place to share the rich root of the olive
tree, 18 do not boast over the branches. If you do boast, remember
that it is not you that support the root, but the root that supports you.
19 You will say, "Branches were broken off so that I might be grafted
in." 20 That is true. They were broken off because of their unbelief,
but you stand only through faith. So do not become proud, but stand
in awe. 21 For if God did not spare the natural branches, perhaps he

330

ROMANS 331

will not spare you. 22 Note then the kindness and the severity of God:
severity toward those who have fallen, but God's kindness toward you,
provided you continue in his kindness; otherwise you also will be cut
off. 23 And even those of Israel, if they do not persist in unbelief, will
be grafted in, for God has the power to graft them in again. 24 For if
you have been cut from what is by nature a wild olive tree and grafted,
contrary to nature, into a cultivated olive tree, how much more will
these natural branches be grafted back into their own olive tree.
The hardening of Israel
25 So that you may not claim to be wiser than you are, brothers and
sisters, I want you to understand this mystery: a hardening has come
upon part of Israel, until the full number of the Gentiles has come in.
26 And so all Israel will be saved; as it is written,
"Out of Zion will come the Deliverer;
he will banish ungodliness from Jacob."
27 "And this is my covenant with them,
when I take away their sins."
28 As regards the gospel they are enemies of God for your sake; but as
regards election they are beloved, for the sake of their ancestors; 29 for
the gifts and the calling of God are irrevocable. 30 Just as you were
once disobedient to God but have now received mercy because of their
disobedience, 31 so they have now been disobedient in order that, by
the mercy shown to you, they too may now receive mercy. 32 For God
has imprisoned all in disobedience so that he may be merciful to all.
33 O the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his judgments and how inscrutable his ways!
34 "For who has known the mind of the Lord?
Or who has been his counselor?"
35 "Or who has given a gift to him,
to receive a gift in return?"
36 For from him and through him and to him are all things. To him be
the glory forever. Amen.

331

ROMANS 332

[Romans 12]
Exhortation to holy living
1 I appeal to you therefore, brothers and sisters, by the mercies of God,
to present your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God,
which is your spiritual worship. 2 Do not be conformed to this world,
but be transformed by the renewing of your minds, so that you may
discern what is the will of God — what is good and acceptable and
perfect.
3 For by the grace given to me I say to everyone among you not to
think of yourself more highly than you ought to think, but to think
with sober judgment, each according to the measure of faith that God
has assigned. 4 For as in one body we have many members, and not all
the members have the same function, 5 so we, who are many, are one
body in Christ, and individually we are members one of another. 6 We
have gifts that differ according to the grace given to us: prophecy, in
proportion to faith; 7 ministry, in ministering; the teacher, in teaching;
8 the exhorter, in exhortation; the giver, in generosity; the leader, in
diligence; the compassionate, in cheerfulness.
Goodwill within the community and without
9 Let love be genuine; hate what is evil, hold fast to what is good; 10
love one another with mutual affection; outdo one another in showing
honor. 11 Do not lag in zeal, be ardent in spirit, serve the Lord. 12
Rejoice in hope, be patient in suffering, persevere in prayer. 13
Contribute to the needs of the saints; extend hospitality to strangers.
14 Bless those who persecute you; bless and do not curse them. 15
Rejoice with those who rejoice, weep with those who weep. 16 Live in
harmony with one another; do not be haughty, but associate with the
lowly; do not claim to be wiser than you are. 17 Do not repay anyone
evil for evil, but take thought for what is noble in the sight of all. 18 If
it is possible, so far as it depends on you, live peaceably with all. 19
Beloved, never avenge yourselves, but leave room for the wrath of
God; for it is written, "Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord."
20 No, "if your enemies are hungry, feed them; if they are thirsty, give

332

ROMANS 333

them something to drink; for by doing this you will heap burning coals
on their heads." 21 Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with
good.
[Romans 13]
Subjection to governing authorities
1 Let every person be subject to the governing authorities; for there is
no authority except from God, and those authorities that exist have
been instituted by God. 2 Therefore whoever resists authority resists
what God has appointed, and those who resist will incur judgment. 3
For rulers are not a terror to good conduct, but to bad. Do you wish to
have no fear of the authority? Then do what is good, and you will
receive its approval; 4 for it is God's servant for your good. But if you
do what is wrong, you should be afraid, for the authority does not
bear the sword in vain! It is the servant of God to execute wrath on the
wrongdoer. 5 Therefore one must be subject, not only because of
wrath but also because of conscience. 6 For the same reason you also
pay taxes, for the authorities are God's servants, busy with this very
thing. 7 Pay to all what is due them — taxes to whom taxes are due,
revenue to whom revenue is due, respect to whom respect is due,
honor to whom honor is due.
Other exhortations
8 Owe no one anything, except to love one another; for the one who
loves another has fulfilled the law. 9 The commandments, "You shall
not commit adultery; You shall not murder; You shall not steal; You
shall not covet"; and any other commandment, are summed up in this
word, "Love your neighbor as yourself." 10 Love does no wrong to a
neighbor; therefore, love is the fulfilling of the law.
11 Besides this, you know what time it is, how it is now the moment for
you to wake from sleep. For salvation is nearer to us now than when
we became believers; 12 the night is far gone, the day is near. Let us
then lay aside the works of darkness and put on the armor of light; 13
let us live honorably as in the day, not in reveling and drunkenness, not
in debauchery and licentiousness, not in quarreling and jealousy. 14

333

ROMANS 334

Instead, put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the
flesh, to gratify its desires.
[Romans 14]
Exhortations regarding those who observe Torah; tolerance for others'
observance
1 Welcome those who are weak in faith, but not for the purpose of
quarreling over opinions. 2 Some believe in eating anything, while the
weak eat only vegetables. 3 Those who eat must not despise those who
abstain, and those who abstain must not pass judgment on those who
eat; for God has welcomed them. 4 Who are you to pass judgment on
servants of another? It is before their own lord that they stand or fall.
And they will be upheld, for the Lord is able to make them stand.
5 Some judge one day to be better than another, while others judge all
days to be alike. Let all be fully convinced in their own minds. 6 Those
who observe the day, observe it in honor of the Lord. Also those who
eat, eat in honor of the Lord, since they give thanks to God; while
those who abstain, abstain in honor of the Lord and give thanks to
God.
7 We do not live to ourselves, and we do not die to ourselves. 8 If we
live, we live to the Lord, and if we die, we die to the Lord; so then,
whether we live or whether we die, we are the LORD's. 9 For to this end
Christ died and lived again, so that he might be Lord of both the dead
and the living.
10 Why do you pass judgment on your brother or sister? Or you, why
do you despise your brother or sister? For we will all stand before the
judgment seat of God. 11 For it is written,
"As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me,
and every tongue shall give praise to God."
12 So then, each of us will be accountable to God.

334

ROMANS 335

Freedom is not license to give offense
13 Let us therefore no longer pass judgment on one another, but
resolve instead never to put a stumbling block or hindrance in the way
of another. 14 I know and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus that nothing
is unclean in itself; but it is unclean for anyone who thinks it unclean.
15 If your brother or sister is being injured by what you eat, you are no
longer walking in love. Do not let what you eat cause the ruin of one
for whom Christ died. 16 So do not let your good be spoken of as evil.
17 For the kingdom of God is not food and drink but righteousness and
peace and joy in the Holy Spirit. 18 The one who thus serves Christ is
acceptable to God and has human approval. 19 Let us then pursue what
makes for peace and for mutual upbuilding. 20 Do not, for the sake of
food, destroy the work of God. Everything is indeed clean, but it is
wrong for you to make others fall by what you eat; 21 it is good not to
eat meat or drink wine or do anything that makes your brother or
sister stumble. 22 The faith that you have, have as your own conviction
before God. Blessed are those who have no reason to condemn
themselves because of what they approve. 23 But those who have
doubts are condemned if they eat, because they do not act from faith;
for whatever does not proceed from faith is sin.
[Romans 15]
Christ's example
1 We who are strong ought to put up with the failings of the weak,
and not to please ourselves. 2 Each of us must please our neighbor for
the good purpose of building up the neighbor. 3 For Christ did not
please himself; but, as it is written, "The insults of those who insult you
have fallen on me." 4 For whatever was written in former days was
written for our instruction, so that by steadfastness and by the
encouragement of the scriptures we might have hope. 5 May the God
of steadfastness and encouragement grant you to live in harmony with
one another, in accordance with Christ Jesus, 6 so that together you
may with one voice glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
7 Welcome one another, therefore, just as Christ has welcomed you, for
the glory of God. 8 For I tell you that Christ has become a servant of

335

ROMANS 336

the circumcised on behalf of the truth of God in order that he might
confirm the promises given to the patriarchs, 9 and in order that the
Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy. As it is written,
"Therefore I will confess you among the Gentiles,
and sing praises to your name";
10 and again he says,
"Rejoice, O Gentiles, with his people";
11 and again,
"Praise the Lord, all you Gentiles,
and let all the peoples praise him";
12 and again Isaiah says,
"The root of Jesse shall come,
the one who rises to rule the Gentiles;
in him the Gentiles shall hope."
13 May the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, so
that you may abound in hope by the power of the Holy Spirit.
The letter's argument brought to a close; the broader context of Paul's
apostolate
14 I myself feel confident about you, my brothers and sisters, that you
yourselves are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, and able to
instruct one another. 15 Nevertheless on some points I have written to
you rather boldly by way of reminder, because of the grace given me
by God 16 to be a minister of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles in the priestly
service of the gospel of God, so that the offering of the Gentiles may
be acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit. 17 In Christ Jesus, then, I
have reason to boast of my work for God. 18 For I will not venture to
speak of anything except what Christ has accomplished through me to
win obedience from the Gentiles, by word and deed, 19 by the power
of signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God, so that from
Jerusalem and as far around as Illyricum I have fully proclaimed the
good news of Christ. 20 Thus I make it my ambition to proclaim the
good news, not where Christ has already been named, so that I do not
build on someone else's foundation, 21 but as it is written,
"Those who have never been told of him shall see,
and those who have never heard of him shall understand."

336

ROMANS 337

22 This is the reason that I have so often been hindered from coming to
you. 23 But now, with no further place for me in these regions, I desire,
as I have for many years, to come to you 24 when I go to Spain. For I do
hope to see you on my journey and to be sent on by you, once I have
enjoyed your company for a little while. 25 At present, however, I am
going to Jerusalem in a ministry to the saints; 26 for Macedonia and
Achaia have been pleased to share their resources with the poor
among the saints at Jerusalem. 27 They were pleased to do this, and
indeed they owe it to them; for if the Gentiles have come to share in
their spiritual blessings, they ought also to be of service to them in
material things. 28 So, when I have completed this, and have delivered
to them what has been collected, I will set out by way of you to Spain;
29 and I know that when I come to you, I will come in the fullness of
the blessing of Christ.
Apprehensions regarding Jerusalem
30 I appeal to you, brothers and sisters, by our Lord Jesus Christ and by
the love of the Spirit, to join me in earnest prayer to God on my behalf,
31 that I may be rescued from the unbelievers in Judea, and that my
ministry to Jerusalem may be acceptable to the saints, 32 so that by
God's will I may come to you with joy and be refreshed in your
company. 33 The God of peace be with all of you. Amen.
[Romans 16]
A recommendation and greetings
1 I commend to you our sister Phoebe, a deacon of the church at
Cenchreae, 2 so that you may welcome her in the Lord as is fitting for
the saints, and help her in whatever she may require from you, for she
has been a benefactor of many and of myself as well.
3 Greet Prisca and Aquila, who work with me in Christ Jesus, 4 and who
risked their necks for my life, to whom not only I give thanks, but also
all the churches of the Gentiles. 5 Greet also the church in their house.
Greet my beloved Epaenetus, who was the first convert in Asia for
Christ. 6 Greet Mary, who has worked very hard among you. 7 Greet
Andronicus and Junia, my relatives who were in prison with me; they

337

ROMANS 338

are prominent among the apostles, and they were in Christ before I
was. 8 Greet Ampliatus, my beloved in the Lord. 9 Greet Urbanus, our
co-worker in Christ, and my beloved Stachys. 10 Greet Apelles, who is
approved in Christ. Greet those who belong to the family of
Aristobulus. 11 Greet my relative Herodion. Greet those in the Lord who
belong to the family of Narcissus. 12 Greet those workers in the Lord,
Tryphaena and Tryphosa. Greet the beloved Persis, who has worked
hard in the Lord. 13 Greet Rufus, chosen in the Lord; and greet his
mother — a mother to me also. 14 Greet Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes,
Patrobas, Hermas, and the brothers and sisters who are with them. 15
Greet Philologus, Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and all the
saints who are with them. 16 Greet one another with a holy kiss. All the
churches of Christ greet you.
A warning
17 I urge you, brothers and sisters, to keep an eye on those who cause
dissensions and offenses, in opposition to the teaching that you have
learned; avoid them. 18 For such people do not serve our Lord Christ,
but their own appetites, and by smooth talk and flattery they deceive
the hearts of the simple-minded. 19 For while your obedience is known
to all, so that I rejoice over you, I want you to be wise in what is good
and guileless in what is evil. 20 The God of peace will shortly crush
Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
21 Timothy, my co-worker, greets you; so do Lucius and Jason and
Sosipater, my relatives.
22 I Tertius, the writer of this letter, greet you in the Lord.
23 Gaius, who is host to me and to the whole church, greets you.
Erastus, the city treasurer, and our brother Quartus, greet you.

338

ROMANS 339

A concluding blessing
25 Now to God who is able to strengthen you according to my gospel
and the proclamation of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the
mystery that was kept secret for long ages 26 but is now disclosed, and
through the prophetic writings is made known to all the Gentiles,
according to the command of the eternal God, to bring about the
obedience of faith — 27 to the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, to
whom be the glory forever! Amen.

339

1 CORINTHIANS 340

1 CORINTHIANS
Introduction
First Corinthians offers a fascinating window onto the struggles of one
community of the movement that developed into Christianity. Paul's
attempts to persuade them to see and do things his way reveals just
how difficult it was for people rooted in the Hellenistic culture of a
large metropolis such as Corinth to assimilate Paul's gospel of Christ
and its implications for personal and community life and for their
relations with the larger Roman imperial society.
The city of Corinth had been punitively destroyed by the Romans in 146
BCE, but then rebuilt in 44 BCE as a colony to which the Roman
patricians sent the "dregs" of the surplus population from Rom itself,
such as recently manumitted slaves and displaced peasants. Corinth
quickly developed into a busy hub of east-west trade in the empire and
the center of Roman imperial culture in Greece. Except for Antioch in
Syria, where Paul was based at the very beginning of his mission to
various people of the eastern Mediterranean, Corinth was the first
major urban center to which Paul brought his mission. For eighteen
months, with several coworkers such as Timothy and Silvanus, Prisca
(Priscilla) and her husband Aquila, and Phoebe, leader of the
community at nearby Cenchreae, he organized and taught in several
house-assemblies of Corinthians who came together periodically as a
"whole assembly" (church) to celebrate the LORD's Supper. After he
moved across the Aegean Sea to work in the city of Ephesus, another
missionary, Apollos, an eloquent Hellenistic Jew from Alexandria in
Egypt, also taught in the community at Corinth.
In dictating 1 Corinthians (from Ephesus, 16.8), Paul was responding
both to a letter from the Corinthians asking questions about several
issues (see 7.1; 8.1; 12.1) and to news he had received through "Chloe's
people" of some serious conflicts in the Corinthian community. The
340

1 CORINTHIANS 341

letter begins with the usual address, greeting, and opening
thanksgiving (1.1-9) and ends with the standard closing exhortation,
greetings, and grace (16.13-24). The body of the letter consists of a
series of arguments on key issues over which the Corinthian community
has come into conflict: divisions within the community connected with
devotion to wisdom (1.10-4.21); how to deal with a man living with his
stepmother (ch 5); on not taking disputes to the official courts (ch 6);
on marriage and sexual relations (6.12-7.40); on eating food sacrificed
to idols (8.1-11.1); on hair arrangement when prophesying (11.2-16); on
procedure at celebration of the LORD's Supper (11.17-34); on the use of
spiritual gifts, particularly "tongues" (chs 12-14); on the resurrection of
the dead (ch 15); and finally on the collection for Jerusalem and Paul's
travel plans (16.1-12).
The language Paul uses and the issues he deals with in 1 Corinthians are
very different from those in his other letters. That suggests that the
views he addresses in 1 Corinthians were distinctive to the Corinthians
among the various communities Paul founded (and perhaps had
something to do with Apollos's ministry in Corinth after Paul had gone
to Ephesus). Indeed, it appears from the way Paul uses some of these
distinctive terms that some of the Corinthians understood themselves
as "spiritual" and "mature," as opposed to merely "unspiritual" or
"physical" and "infants" (2.6, 14-15; 3.1; 15.44, 46) and as "wise,"
"powerful," "of noble birth," "rich," and "kings," as opposed to
"fools," "weak," etc. (1.26; 4.8), apparently because of their possession
of "wisdom" as the agent or substance of salvation, a religious selfunderstanding known from contemporary Jewish communities in
Alexandria, where Apollos came from. Throughout 1 Corinthians Paul
appears to be responding to what certain Corinthians were thinking
and doing, and at several points in his major arguments he even uses
their language and slogans.
Paul's arguments in 1 Corinthians were not immediately effective, as is
evident from the continuing conflicts he had with the Corinthians in
various sections of 2 Corinthians (see Introduction to 2 Corinthians).
Paul's arguments in 1 Corinthians, however, contain some of the
earliest traditions of believers in Christ, such as the words of institution
for the LORD's Supper (11.23-26) and the basic creed of Christ's
HT

341

TH

1 CORINTHIANS 342

crucifixion and resurrection (15.3-5). First Corinthians also contains
Paul's most insistent emphasis on the cross of Christ (1.18-2.9), and his
most extensive discussion of the resurrection of the dead (ch 15).
Moreover, Paul's use of the Corinthians' language in attempting to
persuade them to his viewpoint resulted in formulations that provided
key bases for subsequent Christian belief and practices. In 1 Corinthians
are the only statements among Paul's genuine letters in which Christ
appears to be a preexistent figure (8.6; 10.4). Only in 1 Corinthians does
Paul deal with issues such as sex and marriage and spiritual gifts such as
glossolalia (speaking in "tongues"). Given the ways that subsequent
generations of Christians have understood them, Paul's formulations in
ch 7 in particular became a basis for Christian sexual asceticism and one
of the texts used to legitimate the practice of slavery. Passages in 1
Corinthians (11.2-17; 14.34-36), moreover, became some of the principal
bases on which women were subordinated in the patriarchal family
and church. And it is in 1 Corinthians that Paul composes the famous
"hymn to love" as part of his argument for solidarity of the community
as the "body of Christ" (ch 13 as part of the argument in chs 12-14), and
his almost ecstatic vision of the dramatic parousia, the coming of Christ
and the resurrection of believers, "at the last trumpet" (15.51-55).

[1 Corinthians 1]
Salutation
1 Paul, called to be an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and
our brother Sosthenes,
2 To the church of God that is in Corinth, to those who are sanctified in
Christ Jesus, called to be saints, together with all those who in every
place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both their Lord and
ours:
3 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ.

342

1 CORINTHIANS 343

Thanksgiving
4 I give thanks to my God always for you because of the grace of God
that has been given you in Christ Jesus, 5 for in every way you have
been enriched in him, in speech and knowledge of every kind — 6 just
as the testimony of Christ has been strengthened among you — 7 so
that you are not lacking in any spiritual gift as you wait for the
revealing of our Lord Jesus Christ. 8 He will also strengthen you to the
end, so that you may be blameless on the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
9 God is faithful; by him you were called into the fellowship of his Son,
Jesus Christ our Lord.
Paul's first major argument, for unity
10 Now I appeal to you, brothers and sisters, by the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that all of you be in agreement and that there be no
divisions among you, but that you be united in the same mind and the
same purpose. 11 For it has been reported to me by Chloe's people that
there are quarrels among you, my brothers and sisters. 12 What I mean
is that each of you says, "I belong to Paul," or "I belong to Apollos," or
"I belong to Cephas," or "I belong to Christ." 13 Has Christ been
divided? Was Paul crucified for you? Or were you baptized in the name
of Paul? 14 I thank God that I baptized none of you except Crispus and
Gaius, 15 so that no one can say that you were baptized in my name. 16
(I did baptize also the household of Stephanas; beyond that, I do not
know whether I baptized anyone else.) 17 For Christ did not send me to
baptize but to proclaim the gospel, and not with eloquent wisdom, so
that the cross of Christ might not be emptied of its power.
The contrast of Christ crucified with "heavenly" wisdom
18 For the message about the cross is foolishness to those who are
perishing, but to us who are being saved it is the power of God. 19 For
it is written,
"I will destroy the wisdom of the wise,
and the discernment of the discerning I will thwart."
20 Where is the one who is wise? Where is the scribe? Where is the
debater of this age? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of the

343

1 CORINTHIANS 344

world? 21 For since, in the wisdom of God, the world did not know God
through wisdom, God decided, through the foolishness of our
proclamation, to save those who believe. 22 For Jews demand signs and
Greeks desire wisdom, 23 but we proclaim Christ crucified, a stumbling
block to Jews and foolishness to Gentiles, 24 but to those who are the
called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom
of God. 25 For God's foolishness is wiser than human wisdom, and
God's weakness is stronger than human strength.
26 Consider your own call, brothers and sisters: not many of you were
wise by human standards, not many were powerful, not many were of
noble birth. 27 But God chose what is foolish in the world to shame the
wise; God chose what is weak in the world to shame the strong; 28 God
chose what is low and despised in the world, things that are not, to
reduce to nothing things that are, 29 so that no one might boast in the
presence of God. 30 He is the source of your life in Christ Jesus, who
became for us wisdom from God, and righteousness and sanctification
and redemption, 31 in order that, as it is written, "Let the one who
boasts, boast in the Lord."
[1 Corinthians 2]
1 When I came to you, brothers and sisters, I did not come proclaiming
the mystery of God to you in lofty words or wisdom. 2 For I decided to
know nothing among you except Jesus Christ, and him crucified. 3 And
I came to you in weakness and in fear and in much trembling. 4 My
speech and my proclamation were not with plausible words of wisdom,
but with a demonstration of the Spirit and of power, 5 so that your
faith might rest not on human wisdom but on the power of God.
Spiritual wisdom is not for infants
6 Yet among the mature we do speak wisdom, though it is not a
wisdom of this age or of the rulers of this age, who are doomed to
perish. 7 But we speak God's wisdom, secret and hidden, which God
decreed before the ages for our glory. 8 None of the rulers of this age
understood this; for if they had, they would not have crucified the Lord
of glory. 9 But, as it is written,

344

1 CORINTHIANS 345

"What no eye has seen, nor ear heard,
nor the human heart conceived,
what God has prepared for those who love him" —
10 these things God has revealed to us through the Spirit; for the Spirit
searches everything, even the depths of God. 11 For what human being
knows what is truly human except the human spirit that is within? So
also no one comprehends what is truly God's except the Spirit of God.
12 Now we have received not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit that
is from God, so that we may understand the gifts bestowed on us by
God. 13 And we speak of these things in words not taught by human
wisdom but taught by the Spirit, interpreting spiritual things to those
who are spiritual.
14 Those who are unspiritual do not receive the gifts of God's Spirit, for
they are foolishness to them, and they are unable to understand them
because they are spiritually discerned. 15 Those who are spiritual
discern all things, and they are themselves subject to no one else's
scrutiny.
16 "For who has known the mind of the Lord
so as to instruct him?"
But we have the mind of Christ.
[1 Corinthians 3]
1 And so, brothers and sisters, I could not speak to you as spiritual
people, but rather as people of the flesh, as infants in Christ. 2 I fed
you with milk, not solid food, for you were not ready for solid food.
Even now you are still not ready, 3 for you are still of the flesh. For as
long as there is jealousy and quarreling among you, are you not of the
flesh, and behaving according to human inclinations? 4 For when one
says, "I belong to Paul," and another, "I belong to Apollos," are you
not merely human?
Warnings about Apollos
5 What then is Apollos? What is Paul? Servants through whom you
came to believe, as the Lord assigned to each. 6 I planted, Apollos
watered, but God gave the growth. 7 So neither the one who plants

345

1 CORINTHIANS 346

nor the one who waters is anything, but only God who gives the
growth. 8 The one who plants and the one who waters have a
common purpose, and each will receive wages according to the labor
of each. 9 For we are God's servants, working together; you are God's
field, God's building.
10 According to the grace of God given to me, like a skilled master
builder I laid a foundation, and someone else is building on it. Each
builder must choose with care how to build on it. 11 For no one can lay
any foundation other than the one that has been laid; that foundation
is Jesus Christ. 12 Now if anyone builds on the foundation with gold,
silver, precious stones, wood, hay, straw — 13 the work of each builder
will become visible, for the Day will disclose it, because it will be
revealed with fire, and the fire will test what sort of work each has
done. 14 If what has been built on the foundation survives, the builder
will receive a reward. 15 If the work is burned up, the builder will suffer
loss; the builder will be saved, but only as through fire.
16 Do you not know that you are God's temple and that God's Spirit
dwells in you? 17 If anyone destroys God's temple, God will destroy that
person. For God's temple is holy, and you are that temple.
18 Do not deceive yourselves. If you think that you are wise in this age,
you should become fools so that you may become wise. 19 For the
wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. For it is written,
"He catches the wise in their craftiness,"
20 and again,
"The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise,
that they are futile."
21 So let no one boast about human leaders. For all things are yours, 22
whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas or the world or life or death or the
present or the future — all belong to you, 23 and you belong to Christ,
and Christ belongs to God.

346

1 CORINTHIANS 347

[1 Corinthians 4]
Paul's defense
1 Think of us in this way, as servants of Christ and stewards of God's
mysteries. 2 Moreover, it is required of stewards that they be found
trustworthy. 3 But with me it is a very small thing that I should be
judged by you or by any human court. I do not even judge myself. 4 I
am not aware of anything against myself, but I am not thereby
acquitted. It is the Lord who judges me. 5 Therefore do not pronounce
judgment before the time, before the Lord comes, who will bring to
light the things now hidden in darkness and will disclose the purposes
of the heart. Then each one will receive commendation from God.
6 I have applied all this to Apollos and myself for your benefit, brothers
and sisters, so that you may learn through us the meaning of the
saying, "Nothing beyond what is written," so that none of you will be
puffed up in favor of one against another. 7 For who sees anything
different in you? What do you have that you did not receive? And if
you received it, why do you boast as if it were not a gift?
8 Already you have all you want! Already you have become rich! Quite
apart from us you have become kings! Indeed, I wish that you had
become kings, so that we might be kings with you! 9 For I think that
God has exhibited us apostles as last of all, as though sentenced to
death, because we have become a spectacle to the world, to angels
and to mortals. 10 We are fools for the sake of Christ, but you are wise
in Christ. We are weak, but you are strong. You are held in honor, but
we in disrepute. 11 To the present hour we are hungry and thirsty, we
are poorly clothed and beaten and homeless, 12 and we grow weary
from the work of our own hands. When reviled, we bless; when
persecuted, we endure; 13 when slandered, we speak kindly. We have
become like the rubbish of the world, the dregs of all things, to this
very day.
14 I am not writing this to make you ashamed, but to admonish you as
my beloved children. 15 For though you might have ten thousand
guardians in Christ, you do not have many fathers. Indeed, in Christ
Jesus I became your father through the gospel. 16 I appeal to you, then,

347

1 CORINTHIANS 348

be imitators of me. 17 For this reason I sent you Timothy, who is my
beloved and faithful child in the Lord, to remind you of my ways in
Christ Jesus, as I teach them everywhere in every church. 18 But some of
you, thinking that I am not coming to you, have become arrogant. 19
But I will come to you soon, if the Lord wills, and I will find out not the
talk of these arrogant people but their power. 20 For the kingdom of
God depends not on talk but on power. 21 What would you prefer? Am
I to come to you with a stick, or with love in a spirit of gentleness?
[1 Corinthians 5]
The need for community discipline
1 It is actually reported that there is sexual immorality among you, and
of a kind that is not found even among pagans; for a man is living with
his father's wife. 2 And you are arrogant! Should you not rather have
mourned, so that he who has done this would have been removed
from among you?
3 For though absent in body, I am present in spirit; and as if present I
have already pronounced judgment 4 in the name of the Lord Jesus on
the man who has done such a thing. When you are assembled, and my
spirit is present with the power of our Lord Jesus, 5 you are to hand
this man over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, so that his spirit
may be saved in the day of the Lord.
6 Your boasting is not a good thing. Do you not know that a little
yeast leavens the whole batch of dough? 7 Clean out the old yeast so
that you may be a new batch, as you really are unleavened. For our
paschal lamb, Christ, has been sacrificed. 8 Therefore, let us celebrate
the festival, not with the old yeast, the yeast of malice and evil, but
with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
9 I wrote to you in my letter not to associate with sexually immoral
persons — 10 not at all meaning the immoral of this world, or the
greedy and robbers, or idolaters, since you would then need to go out
of the world. 11 But now I am writing to you not to associate with
anyone who bears the name of brother or sister who is sexually
immoral or greedy, or is an idolater, reviler, drunkard, or robber. Do

348

1 CORINTHIANS 349

not even eat with such a one. 12 For what have I to do with judging
those outside? Is it not those who are inside that you are to judge? 13
God will judge those outside. "Drive out the wicked person from
among you."
[1 Corinthians 6]
Lawsuits
1 When any of you has a grievance against another, do you dare to
take it to court before the unrighteous, instead of taking it before the
saints? 2 Do you not know that the saints will judge the world? And if
the world is to be judged by you, are you incompetent to try trivial
cases? 3 Do you not know that we are to judge angels — to say
nothing of ordinary matters? 4 If you have ordinary cases, then, do you
appoint as judges those who have no standing in the church? 5 I say
this to your shame. Can it be that there is no one among you wise
enough to decide between one believer and another, 6 but a believer
goes to court against a believer — and before unbelievers at that?
7 In fact, to have lawsuits at all with one another is already a defeat for
you. Why not rather be wronged? Why not rather be defrauded? 8 But
you yourselves wrong and defraud — and believers at that.
9 Do you not know that wrongdoers will not inherit the kingdom of
God? Do not be deceived! Fornicators, idolaters, adulterers, male
prostitutes, sodomites, 10 thieves, the greedy, drunkards, revilers,
robbers — none of these will inherit the kingdom of God. 11 And this is
what some of you used to be. But you were washed, you were
sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and
in the Spirit of our God.
Sexual sins
12 "All things are lawful for me," but not all things are beneficial. "All
things are lawful for me," but I will not be dominated by anything. 13
"Food is meant for the stomach and the stomach for food," and God
will destroy both one and the other. The body is meant not for
fornication but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body. 14 And God

349

1 CORINTHIANS 350

raised the Lord and will also raise us by his power. 15 Do you not know
that your bodies are members of Christ? Should I therefore take the
members of Christ and make them members of a prostitute? Never! 16
Do you not know that whoever is united to a prostitute becomes one
body with her? For it is said, "The two shall be one flesh." 17 But
anyone united to the Lord becomes one spirit with him. 18 Shun
fornication! Every sin that a person commits is outside the body; but
the fornicator sins against the body itself. 19 Or do you not know that
your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit within you, which you have
from God, and that you are not your own? 20 For you were bought
with a price; therefore glorify God in your body.
[1 Corinthians 7]
Discussion of marriage and sexual relations
1 Now concerning the matters about which you wrote: "It is well for a
man not to touch a woman." 2 But because of cases of sexual
immorality, each man should have his own wife and each woman her
own husband. 3 The husband should give to his wife her conjugal
rights, and likewise the wife to her husband. 4 For the wife does not
have authority over her own body, but the husband does; likewise the
husband does not have authority over his own body, but the wife does.
5 Do not deprive one another except perhaps by agreement for a set
time, to devote yourselves to prayer, and then come together again, so
that Satan may not tempt you because of your lack of self-control. 6
This I say by way of concession, not of command. 7 I wish that all were
as I myself am. But each has a particular gift from God, one having one
kind and another a different kind.
8 To the unmarried and the widows I say that it is well for them to
remain unmarried as I am. 9 But if they are not practicing self-control,
they should marry. For it is better to marry than to be aflame with
passion.
10 To the married I give this command — not I but the Lord — that the
wife should not separate from her husband 11 (but if she does separate,
let her remain unmarried or else be reconciled to her husband), and

350

1 CORINTHIANS 351

that the husband should not divorce his wife.
12 To the rest I say — I and not the Lord — that if any believer has a
wife who is an unbeliever, and she consents to live with him, he should
not divorce her. 13 And if any woman has a husband who is an
unbeliever, and he consents to live with her, she should not divorce
him. 14 For the unbelieving husband is made holy through his wife, and
the unbelieving wife is made holy through her husband. Otherwise,
your children would be unclean, but as it is, they are holy. 15 But if the
unbelieving partner separates, let it be so; in such a case the brother or
sister is not bound. It is to peace that God has called you. 16 Wife, for
all you know, you might save your husband. Husband, for all you
know, you might save your wife.
17 However that may be, let each of you lead the life that the Lord has
assigned, to which God called you. This is my rule in all the churches. 18
Was anyone at the time of his call already circumcised? Let him not
seek to remove the marks of circumcision. Was anyone at the time of
his call uncircumcised? Let him not seek circumcision. 19 Circumcision is
nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing; but obeying the
commandments of God is everything. 20 Let each of you remain in the
condition in which you were called.
21 Were you a slave when called? Do not be concerned about it. Even if
you can gain your freedom, make use of your present condition now
more than ever. 22 For whoever was called in the Lord as a slave is a
freed person belonging to the Lord, just as whoever was free when
called is a slave of Christ. 23 You were bought with a price; do not
become slaves of human masters. 24 In whatever condition you were
called, brothers and sisters, there remain with God.
25 Now concerning virgins, I have no command of the Lord, but I give
my opinion as one who by the LORD's mercy is trustworthy. 26 I think
that, in view of the impending crisis, it is well for you to remain as you
are. 27 Are you bound to a wife? Do not seek to be free. Are you free
from a wife? Do not seek a wife. 28 But if you marry, you do not sin,
and if a virgin marries, she does not sin. Yet those who marry will
experience distress in this life, and I would spare you that. 29 I mean,

351

1 CORINTHIANS 352

brothers and sisters, the appointed time has grown short; from now
on, let even those who have wives be as though they had none, 30 and
those who mourn as though they were not mourning, and those who
rejoice as though they were not rejoicing, and those who buy as
though they had no possessions, 31 and those who deal with the world
as though they had no dealings with it. For the present form of this
world is passing away.
32 I want you to be free from anxieties. The unmarried man is anxious
about the affairs of the Lord, how to please the Lord; 33 but the
married man is anxious about the affairs of the world, how to please
his wife, 34 and his interests are divided. And the unmarried woman
and the virgin are anxious about the affairs of the Lord, so that they
may be holy in body and spirit; but the married woman is anxious
about the affairs of the world, how to please her husband. 35 I say this
for your own benefit, not to put any restraint upon you, but to
promote good order and unhindered devotion to the Lord.
36 If anyone thinks that he is not behaving properly toward his fiancée,
if his passions are strong, and so it has to be, let him marry as he
wishes; it is no sin. Let them marry. 37 But if someone stands firm in his
resolve, being under no necessity but having his own desire under
control, and has determined in his own mind to keep her as his fiancée,
he will do well. 38 So then, he who marries his fiancée does well; and
he who refrains from marriage will do better.
39 A wife is bound as long as her husband lives. But if the husband
dies, she is free to marry anyone she wishes, only in the Lord. 40 But in
my judgment she is more blessed if she remains as she is. And I think
that I too have the Spirit of God.
[1 Corinthians 8]
Argument concerning food offered to idols
1 Now concerning food sacrificed to idols: we know that "all of us
possess knowledge." Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up. 2 Anyone
who claims to know something does not yet have the necessary
knowledge; 3 but anyone who loves God is known by him.

352

1 CORINTHIANS 353

4 Hence, as to the eating of food offered to idols, we know that "no
idol in the world really exists," and that "there is no God but one." 5
Indeed, even though there may be so-called gods in heaven or on earth
— as in fact there are many gods and many lords — 6 yet for us there is
one God, the Father, from whom are all things and for whom we exist,
and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are all things and through
whom we exist.
7 It is not everyone, however, who has this knowledge. Since some
have become so accustomed to idols until now, they still think of the
food they eat as food offered to an idol; and their conscience, being
weak, is defiled. 8 "Food will not bring us close to God." We are no
worse off if we do not eat, and no better off if we do. 9 But take care
that this liberty of yours does not somehow become a stumbling block
to the weak. 10 For if others see you, who possess knowledge, eating in
the temple of an idol, might they not, since their conscience is weak,
be encouraged to the point of eating food sacrificed to idols? 11 So by
your knowledge those weak believers for whom Christ died are
destroyed. 12 But when you thus sin against members of your family,
and wound their conscience when it is weak, you sin against Christ. 13
Therefore, if food is a cause of their falling, I will never eat meat, so
that I may not cause one of them to fall.
[1 Corinthians 9]
Paul's rights and his freedom not to exercise them
1 Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord?
Are you not my work in the Lord? 2 If I am not an apostle to others, at
least I am to you; for you are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord.
3 This is my defense to those who would examine me. 4 Do we not
have the right to our food and drink? 5 Do we not have the right to be
accompanied by a believing wife, as do the other apostles and the
brothers of the Lord and Cephas? 6 Or is it only Barnabas and I who
have no right to refrain from working for a living? 7 Who at any time
pays the expenses for doing military service? Who plants a vineyard
and does not eat any of its fruit? Or who tends a flock and does not
get any of its milk?

353

1 CORINTHIANS 354

8 Do I say this on human authority? Does not the law also say the
same? 9 For it is written in the law of Moses, "You shall not muzzle an
ox while it is treading out the grain." Is it for oxen that God is
concerned? 10 Or does he not speak entirely for our sake? It was
indeed written for our sake, for whoever plows should plow in hope
and whoever threshes should thresh in hope of a share in the crop. 11 If
we have sown spiritual good among you, is it too much if we reap your
material benefits? 12 If others share this rightful claim on you, do not
we still more?
Nevertheless, we have not made use of this right, but we endure
anything rather than put an obstacle in the way of the gospel of Christ.
13 Do you not know that those who are employed in the temple service
get their food from the temple, and those who serve at the altar share
in what is sacrificed on the altar? 14 In the same way, the Lord
commanded that those who proclaim the gospel should get their living
by the gospel.
15 But I have made no use of any of these rights, nor am I writing this
so that they may be applied in my case. Indeed, I would rather die than
that — no one will deprive me of my ground for boasting! 16 If I
proclaim the gospel, this gives me no ground for boasting, for an
obligation is laid on me, and woe to me if I do not proclaim the gospel!
17 For if I do this of my own will, I have a reward; but if not of my own
will, I am entrusted with a commission. 18 What then is my reward?
Just this: that in my proclamation I may make the gospel free of
charge, so as not to make full use of my rights in the gospel.
19 For though I am free with respect to all, I have made myself a slave
to all, so that I might win more of them. 20 To the Jews I became as a
Jew, in order to win Jews. To those under the law I became as one
under the law (though I myself am not under the law) so that I might
win those under the law. 21 To those outside the law I became as one
outside the law (though I am not free from God's law but am under
Christ's law) so that I might win those outside the law. 22 To the weak I
became weak, so that I might win the weak. I have become all things
to all people, that I might by all means save some. 23 I do it all for the
sake of the gospel, so that I may share in its blessings.

354

1 CORINTHIANS 355

24 Do you not know that in a race the runners all compete, but only
one receives the prize? Run in such a way that you may win it. 25
Athletes exercise self-control in all things; they do it to receive a
perishable wreath, but we an imperishable one. 26 So I do not run
aimlessly, nor do I box as though beating the air; 27 but I punish my
body and enslave it, so that after proclaiming to others I myself should
not be disqualified.
[1 Corinthians 10]
Warning that the Corinthians are risking God's wrath
1 I do not want you to be unaware, brothers and sisters, that our
ancestors were all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea, 2
and all were baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea, 3 and all
ate the same spiritual food, 4 and all drank the same spiritual drink.
For they drank from the spiritual rock that followed them, and the rock
was Christ. 5 Nevertheless, God was not pleased with most of them,
and they were struck down in the wilderness.
6 Now these things occurred as examples for us, so that we might not
desire evil as they did. 7 Do not become idolaters as some of them did;
as it is written, "The people sat down to eat and drink, and they rose
up to play." 8 We must not indulge in sexual immorality as some of
them did, and twenty-three thousand fell in a single day. 9 We must
not put Christ to the test, as some of them did, and were destroyed by
serpents. 10 And do not complain as some of them did, and were
destroyed by the destroyer. 11 These things happened to them to serve
as an example, and they were written down to instruct us, on whom
the ends of the ages have come. 12 So if you think you are standing,
watch out that you do not fall. 13 No testing has overtaken you that is
not common to everyone. God is faithful, and he will not let you be
tested beyond your strength, but with the testing he will also provide
the way out so that you may be able to endure it.

355

1 CORINTHIANS 356

Prohibition of eating food offered to idols
14 Therefore, my dear friends, flee from the worship of idols. 15 I speak
as to sensible people; judge for yourselves what I say. 16 The cup of
blessing that we bless, is it not a sharing in the blood of Christ? The
bread that we break, is it not a sharing in the body of Christ? 17
Because there is one bread, we who are many are one body, for we all
partake of the one bread. 18 Consider the people of Israel; are not
those who eat the sacrifices partners in the altar? 19 What do I imply
then? That food sacrificed to idols is anything, or that an idol is
anything? 20 No, I imply that what pagans sacrifice, they sacrifice to
demons and not to God. I do not want you to be partners with
demons. 21 You cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of
demons. You cannot partake of the table of the Lord and the table of
demons. 22 Or are we provoking the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger
than he?
Responsibility to others
23 "All things are lawful," but not all things are beneficial. "All things
are lawful," but not all things build up. 24 Do not seek your own
advantage, but that of the other. 25 Eat whatever is sold in the meat
market without raising any question on the ground of conscience, 26
for "the earth and its fullness are the LORD's." 27 If an unbeliever
invites you to a meal and you are disposed to go, eat whatever is set
before you without raising any question on the ground of conscience.
28 But if someone says to you, "This has been offered in sacrifice,"
then do not eat it, out of consideration for the one who informed you,
and for the sake of conscience — 29 I mean the other's conscience, not
your own. For why should my liberty be subject to the judgment of
someone else's conscience? 30 If I partake with thankfulness, why
should I be denounced because of that for which I give thanks?
31 So, whether you eat or drink, or whatever you do, do everything for
the glory of God. 32 Give no offense to Jews or to Greeks or to the
church of God, 33 just as I try to please everyone in everything I do, not
seeking my own advantage, but that of many, so that they may be
saved. [1 Corinthians 11] 1 Be imitators of me, as I am of Christ.

356

1 CORINTHIANS 357

[1 Corinthians 11]
Argument concerning hairstyles
2 I commend you because you remember me in everything and
maintain the traditions just as I handed them on to you. 3 But I want
you to understand that Christ is the head of every man, and the
husband is the head of his wife, and God is the head of Christ. 4 Any
man who prays or prophesies with something on his head disgraces his
head, 5 but any woman who prays or prophesies with her head
unveiled disgraces her head — it is one and the same thing as having
her head shaved. 6 For if a woman will not veil herself, then she should
cut off her hair; but if it is disgraceful for a woman to have her hair cut
off or to be shaved, she should wear a veil. 7 For a man ought not to
have his head veiled, since he is the image and reflection of God; but
woman is the reflection of man. 8 Indeed, man was not made from
woman, but woman from man. 9 Neither was man created for the sake
of woman, but woman for the sake of man. 10 For this reason a
woman ought to have a symbol of authority on her head, because of
the angels. 11 Nevertheless, in the Lord woman is not independent of
man or man independent of woman. 12 For just as woman came from
man, so man comes through woman; but all things come from God. 13
Judge for yourselves: is it proper for a woman to pray to God with her
head unveiled? 14 Does not nature itself teach you that if a man wears
long hair, it is degrading to him, 15 but if a woman has long hair, it is
her glory? For her hair is given to her for a covering. 16 But if anyone is
disposed to be contentious — we have no such custom, nor do the
churches of God.
17 Now in the following instructions I do not commend you, because
when you come together it is not for the better but for the worse. 18
For, to begin with, when you come together as a church, I hear that
there are divisions among you; and to some extent I believe it. 19
Indeed, there have to be factions among you, for only so will it become
clear who among you are genuine. 20 When you come together, it is
not really to eat the LORD's supper. 21 For when the time comes to eat,
each of you goes ahead with your own supper, and one goes hungry
and another becomes drunk. 22 What! Do you not have homes to eat
and drink in? Or do you show contempt for the church of God and

357

1 CORINTHIANS 358

humiliate those who have nothing? What should I say to you? Should I
commend you? In this matter I do not commend you!
23 For I received from the Lord what I also handed on to you, that the
Lord Jesus on the night when he was betrayed took a loaf of bread, 24
and when he had given thanks, he broke it and said, "This is my body
that is for you. Do this in remembrance of me." 25 In the same way he
took the cup also, after supper, saying, "This cup is the new covenant
in my blood. Do this, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of me."
26 For as often as you eat this bread and drink the cup, you proclaim
the LORD's death until he comes.
27 Whoever, therefore, eats the bread or drinks the cup of the Lord in
an unworthy manner will be answerable for the body and blood of the
Lord. 28 Examine yourselves, and only then eat of the bread and drink
of the cup. 29 For all who eat and drink without discerning the body,
eat and drink judgment against themselves. 30 For this reason many of
you are weak and ill, and some have died. 31 But if we judged
ourselves, we would not be judged. 32 But when we are judged by the
Lord, we are disciplined so that we may not be condemned along with
the world.
33 So then, my brothers and sisters, when you come together to eat,
wait for one another. 34 If you are hungry, eat at home, so that when
you come together, it will not be for your condemnation. About the
other things I will give instructions when I come.

[1 Corinthians 12]
Discrimination among spiritual gifts
1 Now concerning spiritual gifts, brothers and sisters, I do not want you
to be uninformed. 2 You know that when you were pagans, you were
enticed and led astray to idols that could not speak. 3 Therefore I want
you to understand that no one speaking by the Spirit of God ever says
"Let Jesus be cursed!" and no one can say "Jesus is Lord" except by the
Holy Spirit.

358

1 CORINTHIANS 359

Variety in the community
4 Now there are varieties of gifts, but the same Spirit; 5 and there are
varieties of services, but the same Lord; 6 and there are varieties of
activities, but it is the same God who activates all of them in everyone.
7 To each is given the manifestation of the Spirit for the common
good. 8 To one is given through the Spirit the utterance of wisdom,
and to another the utterance of knowledge according to the same
Spirit, 9 to another faith by the same Spirit, to another gifts of healing
by the one Spirit, 10 to another the working of miracles, to another
prophecy, to another the discernment of spirits, to another various
kinds of tongues, to another the interpretation of tongues. 11 All these
are activated by one and the same Spirit, who allots to each one
individually just as the Spirit chooses.
12 For just as the body is one and has many members, and all the
members of the body, though many, are one body, so it is with Christ.
13 For in the one Spirit we were all baptized into one body — Jews or
Greeks, slaves or free — and we were all made to drink of one Spirit.
14 Indeed, the body does not consist of one member but of many. 15 If
the foot would say, "Because I am not a hand, I do not belong to the
body," that would not make it any less a part of the body. 16 And if the
ear would say, "Because I am not an eye, I do not belong to the body,"
that would not make it any less a part of the body. 17 If the whole
body were an eye, where would the hearing be? If the whole body
were hearing, where would the sense of smell be? 18 But as it is, God
arranged the members in the body, each one of them, as he chose. 19 If
all were a single member, where would the body be? 20 As it is, there
are many members, yet one body. 21 The eye cannot say to the hand, "I
have no need of you," nor again the head to the feet, "I have no need
of you." 22 On the contrary, the members of the body that seem to be
weaker are indispensable, 23 and those members of the body that we
think less honorable we clothe with greater honor, and our less
respectable members are treated with greater respect; 24 whereas our
more respectable members do not need this. But God has so arranged
the body, giving the greater honor to the inferior member, 25 that
there may be no dissension within the body, but the members may

359

1 CORINTHIANS 360

have the same care for one another. 26 If one member suffers, all
suffer together with it; if one member is honored, all rejoice together
with it.
27 Now you are the body of Christ and individually members of it. 28
And God has appointed in the church first apostles, second prophets,
third teachers; then deeds of power, then gifts of healing, forms of
assistance, forms of leadership, various kinds of tongues. 29 Are all
apostles? Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Do all work miracles? 30
Do all possess gifts of healing? Do all speak in tongues? Do all
interpret? 31 But strive for the greater gifts. And I will show you a still
more excellent way.
[1 Corinthians 13]
Praising love
1 If I speak in the tongues of mortals and of angels, but do not have
love, I am a noisy gong or a clanging cymbal. 2 And if I have prophetic
powers, and understand all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I have
all faith, so as to remove mountains, but do not have love, I am
nothing. 3 If I give away all my possessions, and if I hand over my body
so that I may boast, but do not have love, I gain nothing.
4 Love is patient; love is kind; love is not envious or boastful or
arrogant 5 or rude. It does not insist on its own way; it is not irritable
or resentful; 6 it does not rejoice in wrongdoing, but rejoices in the
truth. 7 It bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures
all things.
8 Love never ends. But as for prophecies, they will come to an end; as
for tongues, they will cease; as for knowledge, it will come to an end. 9
For we know only in part, and we prophesy only in part; 10 but when
the complete comes, the partial will come to an end. 11 When I was a
child, I spoke like a child, I thought like a child, I reasoned like a child;
when I became an adult, I put an end to childish ways. 12 For now we
see in a mirror, dimly, but then we will see face to face. Now I know
only in part; then I will know fully, even as I have been fully known. 13

360

1 CORINTHIANS 361

And now faith, hope, and love abide, these three; and the greatest of
these is love.
[1 Corinthians 14]
Advocating prophecy
1 Pursue love and strive for the spiritual gifts, and especially that you
may prophesy. 2 For those who speak in a tongue do not speak to
other people but to God; for nobody understands them, since they are
speaking mysteries in the Spirit. 3 On the other hand, those who
prophesy speak to other people for their upbuilding and
encouragement and consolation. 4 Those who speak in a tongue build
up themselves, but those who prophesy build up the church. 5 Now I
would like all of you to speak in tongues, but even more to prophesy.
One who prophesies is greater than one who speaks in tongues, unless
someone interprets, so that the church may be built up.
6 Now, brothers and sisters, if I come to you speaking in tongues, how
will I benefit you unless I speak to you in some revelation or
knowledge or prophecy or teaching? 7 It is the same way with lifeless
instruments that produce sound, such as the flute or the harp. If they
do not give distinct notes, how will anyone know what is being
played? 8 And if the bugle gives an indistinct sound, who will get
ready for battle? 9 So with yourselves; if in a tongue you utter speech
that is not intelligible, how will anyone know what is being said? For
you will be speaking into the air. 10 There are doubtless many different
kinds of sounds in the world, and nothing is without sound. 11 If then I
do not know the meaning of a sound, I will be a foreigner to the
speaker and the speaker a foreigner to me. 12 So with yourselves; since
you are eager for spiritual gifts, strive to excel in them for building up
the church.
13 Therefore, one who speaks in a tongue should pray for the power to
interpret. 14 For if I pray in a tongue, my spirit prays but my mind is
unproductive. 15 What should I do then? I will pray with the spirit, but I
will pray with the mind also; I will sing praise with the spirit, but I will
sing praise with the mind also. 16 Otherwise, if you say a blessing with
the spirit, how can anyone in the position of an outsider say the

361

1 CORINTHIANS 362

"Amen" to your thanksgiving, since the outsider does not know what
you are saying? 17 For you may give thanks well enough, but the other
person is not built up. 18 I thank God that I speak in tongues more than
all of you; 19 nevertheless, in church I would rather speak five words
with my mind, in order to instruct others also, than ten thousand
words in a tongue.
20 Brothers and sisters, do not be children in your thinking; rather, be
infants in evil, but in thinking be adults. 21 In the law it is written,
"By people of strange tongues
and by the lips of foreigners
I will speak to this people;
yet even then they will not listen to me,"
says the Lord. 22 Tongues, then, are a sign not for believers but for
unbelievers, while prophecy is not for unbelievers but for believers. 23
If, therefore, the whole church comes together and all speak in
tongues, and outsiders or unbelievers enter, will they not say that you
are out of your mind? 24 But if all prophesy, an unbeliever or outsider
who enters is reproved by all and called to account by all. 25 After the
secrets of the unbeliever's heart are disclosed, that person will bow
down before God and worship him, declaring, "God is really among
you."
26 What should be done then, my friends? When you come together,
each one has a hymn, a lesson, a revelation, a tongue, or an
interpretation. Let all things be done for building up. 27 If anyone
speaks in a tongue, let there be only two or at most three, and each in
turn; and let one interpret. 28 But if there is no one to interpret, let
them be silent in church and speak to themselves and to God. 29 Let
two or three prophets speak, and let the others weigh what is said. 30
If a revelation is made to someone else sitting nearby, let the first
person be silent. 31 For you can all prophesy one by one, so that all may
learn and all be encouraged. 32 And the spirits of prophets are subject
to the prophets, 33 for God is a God not of disorder but of peace.
(As in all the churches of the saints, 34 women should be silent in the
churches. For they are not permitted to speak, but should be
subordinate, as the law also says. 35 If there is anything they desire to

362

1 CORINTHIANS 363

know, let them ask their husbands at home. For it is shameful for a
woman to speak in church. 36 Or did the word of God originate with
you? Or are you the only ones it has reached?)
37 Anyone who claims to be a prophet, or to have spiritual powers,
must acknowledge that what I am writing to you is a command of the
Lord. 38 Anyone who does not recognize this is not to be recognized.
39 So, my friends, be eager to prophesy, and do not forbid speaking in
tongues; 40 but all things should be done decently and in order.
[1 Corinthians 15]
Arguments for the resurrection; the proclamation of Christ's death and
resurrection
1 Now I would remind you, brothers and sisters, of the good news that I
proclaimed to you, which you in turn received, in which also you stand,
2 through which also you are being saved, if you hold firmly to the
message that I proclaimed to you — unless you have come to believe in
vain.
3 For I handed on to you as of first importance what I in turn had
received: that Christ died for our sins in accordance with the scriptures,
4 and that he was buried, and that he was raised on the third day in
accordance with the scriptures, 5 and that he appeared to Cephas, then
to the twelve. 6 Then he appeared to more than five hundred brothers
and sisters at one time, most of whom are still alive, though some have
died. 7 Then he appeared to James, then to all the apostles. 8 Last of
all, as to one untimely born, he appeared also to me. 9 For I am the
least of the apostles, unfit to be called an apostle, because I persecuted
the church of God. 10 But by the grace of God I am what I am, and his
grace toward me has not been in vain. On the contrary, I worked
harder than any of them — though it was not I, but the grace of God
that is with me. 11 Whether then it was I or they, so we proclaim and so
you have come to believe.

363

1 CORINTHIANS 364

The reality of the resurrection of the dead
12 Now if Christ is proclaimed as raised from the dead, how can some
of you say there is no resurrection of the dead? 13 If there is no
resurrection of the dead, then Christ has not been raised; 14 and if
Christ has not been raised, then our proclamation has been in vain and
your faith has been in vain. 15 We are even found to be
misrepresenting God, because we testified of God that he raised Christ
— whom he did not raise if it is true that the dead are not raised. 16
For if the dead are not raised, then Christ has not been raised. 17 If
Christ has not been raised, your faith is futile and you are still in your
sins. 18 Then those also who have died in Christ have perished. 19 If for
this life only we have hoped in Christ, we are of all people most to be
pitied.
20 But in fact Christ has been raised from the dead, the first fruits of
those who have died. 21 For since death came through a human being,
the resurrection of the dead has also come through a human being; 22
for as all die in Adam, so all will be made alive in Christ. 23 But each in
his own order: Christ the first fruits, then at his coming those who
belong to Christ. 24 Then comes the end, when he hands over the
kingdom to God the Father, after he has destroyed every ruler and
every authority and power. 25 For he must reign until he has put all his
enemies under his feet. 26 The last enemy to be destroyed is death. 27
For "God has put all things in subjection under his feet." But when it
says, "All things are put in subjection," it is plain that this does not
include the one who put all things in subjection under him. 28 When
all things are subjected to him, then the Son himself will also be
subjected to the one who put all things in subjection under him, so
that God may be all in all.
29 Otherwise, what will those people do who receive baptism on
behalf of the dead? If the dead are not raised at all, why are people
baptized on their behalf?
30 And why are we putting ourselves in danger every hour? 31 I die
every day! That is as certain, brothers and sisters, as my boasting of you
— a boast that I make in Christ Jesus our Lord. 32 If with merely human

364

1 CORINTHIANS 365

hopes I fought with wild animals at Ephesus, what would I have gained
by it? If the dead are not raised,
"Let us eat and drink,
for tomorrow we die."
33 Do not be deceived:
"Bad company ruins good morals."
34 Come to a sober and right mind, and sin no more; for some people
have no knowledge of God. I say this to your shame.
With what kind of body?
35 But someone will ask, "How are the dead raised? With what kind of
body do they come?" 36 Fool! What you sow does not come to life
unless it dies. 37 And as for what you sow, you do not sow the body
that is to be, but a bare seed, perhaps of wheat or of some other grain.
38 But God gives it a body as he has chosen, and to each kind of seed
its own body. 39 Not all flesh is alike, but there is one flesh for human
beings, another for animals, another for birds, and another for fish. 40
There are both heavenly bodies and earthly bodies, but the glory of
the heavenly is one thing, and that of the earthly is another. 41 There is
one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another
glory of the stars; indeed, star differs from star in glory.
42 So it is with the resurrection of the dead. What is sown is perishable,
what is raised is imperishable. 43 It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in
glory. It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power. 44 It is sown a
physical body, it is raised a spiritual body. If there is a physical body,
there is also a spiritual body. 45 Thus it is written, "The first man,
Adam, became a living being"; the last Adam became a life-giving
spirit. 46 But it is not the spiritual that is first, but the physical, and
then the spiritual. 47 The first man was from the earth, a man of dust;
the second man is from heaven. 48 As was the man of dust, so are
those who are of the dust; and as is the man of heaven, so are those
who are of heaven. 49 Just as we have borne the image of the man of
dust, we will also bear the image of the man of heaven.

365

1 CORINTHIANS 366

50 What I am saying, brothers and sisters, is this: flesh and blood
cannot inherit the kingdom of God, nor does the perishable inherit the
imperishable. 51 Listen, I will tell you a mystery! We will not all die, but
we will all be changed, 52 in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at
the last trumpet. For the trumpet will sound, and the dead will be
raised imperishable, and we will be changed. 53 For this perishable
body must put on imperishability, and this mortal body must put on
immortality. 54 When this perishable body puts on imperishability, and
this mortal body puts on immortality, then the saying that is written
will be fulfilled:
"Death has been swallowed up in victory."
55 "Where, O death, is your victory?
Where, O death, is your sting?"
56 The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law. 57 But
thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ.
58 Therefore, my beloved, be steadfast, immovable, always excelling in
the work of the Lord, because you know that in the Lord your labor is
not in vain.
[1 Corinthians 16]
The collection, travel plans, and Apollos
1 Now concerning the collection for the saints: you should follow the
directions I gave to the churches of Galatia. 2 On the first day of every
week, each of you is to put aside and save whatever extra you earn, so
that collections need not be taken when I come. 3 And when I arrive, I
will send any whom you approve with letters to take your gift to
Jerusalem. 4 If it seems advisable that I should go also, they will
accompany me.
5 I will visit you after passing through Macedonia — for I intend to pass
through Macedonia — 6 and perhaps I will stay with you or even spend
the winter, so that you may send me on my way, wherever I go. 7 I do
not want to see you now just in passing, for I hope to spend some time
with you, if the Lord permits. 8 But I will stay in Ephesus until

366

1 CORINTHIANS 367

Pentecost, 9 for a wide door for effective work has opened to me, and
there are many adversaries.
10 If Timothy comes, see that he has nothing to fear among you, for he
is doing the work of the Lord just as I am; 11 therefore let no one
despise him. Send him on his way in peace, so that he may come to me;
for I am expecting him with the brothers.
12 Now concerning our brother Apollos, I strongly urged him to visit
you with the other brothers, but he was not at all willing to come now.
He will come when he has the opportunity.
Conclusion
13 Keep alert, stand firm in your faith, be courageous, be strong. 14 Let
all that you do be done in love.
15 Now, brothers and sisters, you know that members of the household
of Stephanas were the first converts in Achaia, and they have devoted
themselves to the service of the saints; 16 I urge you to put yourselves
at the service of such people, and of everyone who works and toils
with them. 17 I rejoice at the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and
Achaicus, because they have made up for your absence; 18 for they
refreshed my spirit as well as yours. So give recognition to such
persons.
19 The churches of Asia send greetings. Aquila and Prisca, together
with the church in their house, greet you warmly in the Lord. 20 All the
brothers and sisters send greetings. Greet one another with a holy kiss.
21 I, Paul, write this greeting with my own hand. 22 Let anyone be
accursed who has no love for the Lord. Our Lord, come! 23 The grace of
the Lord Jesus be with you. 24 My love be with all of you in Christ
Jesus.

367

2 CORINTHIANS 368

2 CORINTHIANS
Introduction
First and Second Corinthians are not the only letters Paul wrote to
Corinth, and an examination of the sequence of events behind these
letters gives an indication of the tensions in the relationship between
Paul and the Corinthian church. Although the exact events cannot all
be recovered from the materials in the New Testament, they can
reasonably be reconstructed as follows.
After Paul founded the church at Corinth (2 Cor 1.19; see also Acts 18.17, esp. v. 5), the congregation wrote to him at least once (1 Cor 7.1), and
Paul also wrote them a letter, now lost, which is mentioned in 1 Cor
5.9. Then Paul wrote 1 Corinthians while he was in Ephesus (1 Cor 16.8).
Timothy had worked with Paul in Corinth (Acts 18.5), and at some time
after that, Paul sent Timothy to Corinth as his personal emissary (1 Cor
4.17; 16.10-11), but Timothy returned with news that a group of JewishChristian missionaries had arrived at Corinth and might be
undermining Paul's teaching and his apostolic authority. Paul refers to
these missionaries ironically as "super-apostles" (2 Cor 11.5; 12.11), "false
apostles" (11.13) and even "Satan's ministers" (11.15). This challenge to
his missionary activity prompted Paul to visit Corinth a second time.
The result was unfortunate: Evidently a member of the congregation
offended him grievously (2.5-6); he later called this the "painful visit"
(2.1; 7.2). After his bitter departure, Paul wrote what he called the
"letter of tears" (2.4; 7.8), a letter that is now lost. Either despite or
because of its severity, this letter evidently succeeded in persuading the
majority of the church to Paul's position, as Titus reported when he
met Paul in Macedonia (7.6-7). Paul, much relieved at the resolution of
the conflict, wrote a conciliatory letter than may include 1.1-2.13; 7.5-16,
and probably other parts, now lost. In addition, Paul sent two letters
on the collection for the poor in the Jerusalem church (chs 8-9). Paul's
confidence in the resolution was premature, however, for he later had
368

2 CORINTHIANS 369

to write a bitter polemical letter directed against the "super-apostles"
(chs 10-13).
Thus, 2 Corinthians as it now stands seems to be a composite of
fragments from different letters, though their precise extent and
relative chronology are open to question. For example, in 2.13 the
narrative at this point drops Paul's anxious wait for Titus and resumes
in 7.5; in 6.14-7.1 an abrupt interruption of Paul's appeal in the present
context, since 7.2-4 more naturally follows 6.11-13. This passage contains
many words (e.g., "mismatched" and "partnership") used nowhere else
by Paul; the stark dualism is also uncharacteristic of him. Some scholars
hold that chapters 8 and 9 are two separate letters to two different
regions in Achaia. Chapter 9 starts the appeal for the collection afresh
as if ch 8 had not preceded it. In 9.2, Macedonia, in contrast to 8.1, now
has to listen to Paul's boasting of the achievements of the Achaian
churches (see also v. 4) in contrast to the unfinished state of the
Corinthian collection (8.10-11). Finally, the ironic and polemical tone of
chs 10-13 contrasts sharply with that of the preceding chapters. Paul no
longer refers to his opponents indirectly (see 2.17; 5.12), but pointedly.
For these reasons, many take chs 10-13 to be a fragment of another
letter.
This disjointed character underscores the difficulty of reading the letter
as a coherent whole. After a standard salutation (1.1-2), Paul moves to a
characteristic blessing of God and a thanksgiving for consoling his
afflictions (1.3-7) and delivering him (1.8-11). He then dwells on his
relationship with the Corinthians (1.12-2.13), but after a conciliatory
passage and before he finishes recounting his travel plans (2.5-13) he
enters into an argumentative discourse (2.14-5.21) that ends in an
anxious appeal for reconciliation (6.1-13; 7.2-4 [6.14-7.1 appears to be
parenthetical]). Thereafter the travelogue resumes, as does the earlier
conciliatory theme, and Paul concludes by expressing his complete
confidence in the Corinthians (7.5-16). Two chapters (8 and 9) on the
collection for the poor in the Jerusalem church (1 Cor 16.1-4; see also
Gal 2.10) may be two separate letters, one to Corinth and on to Achaia
(compare 8.1 to 9.2). Finally a highly charged polemical letter (10.113.10) ends with a farewell and Paul's fullest benediction (13.11-13).

369

2 CORINTHIANS 370

Certain motifs run through the letter. The paradoxical relationship
between affliction and consolation, first raised in 1.3-11, is the backbone
of the arguments in 4.7-10; 4.16-5.10; and 12.7-10. The twin themes of
boasting and confidence intimated in 1-12-14 stand in the background
in 3.4-18; 8.1-7, 24; 9.1-5; and all of chs 10-13.

[2 Corinthians 1]
Salutation
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our
brother,
To the church of God that is in Corinth, including all the saints
throughout Achaia:
2 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ.
Paul blesses God for rescuing him and consoling his afflictions
3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
mercies and the God of all consolation, 4 who consoles us in all our
affliction, so that we may be able to console those who are in any
affliction with the consolation with which we ourselves are consoled by
God. 5 For just as the sufferings of Christ are abundant for us, so also
our consolation is abundant through Christ. 6 If we are being afflicted,
it is for your consolation and salvation; if we are being consoled, it is
for your consolation, which you experience when you patiently endure
the same sufferings that we are also suffering. 7 Our hope for you is
unshaken; for we know that as you share in our sufferings, so also you
share in our consolation.
God delivers Paul
8 We do not want you to be unaware, brothers and sisters, of the
affliction we experienced in Asia; for we were so utterly, unbearably
crushed that we despaired of life itself. 9 Indeed, we felt that we had

370

2 CORINTHIANS 371

received the sentence of death so that we would rely not on ourselves
but on God who raises the dead. 10 He who rescued us from so deadly
a peril will continue to rescue us; on him we have set our hope that he
will rescue us again, 11 as you also join in helping us by your prayers, so
that many will give thanks on our behalf for the blessing granted us
through the prayers of many.
Paul stresses his bond with the Corinthians
12 Indeed, this is our boast, the testimony of our conscience: we have
behaved in the world with frankness and godly sincerity, not by earthly
wisdom but by the grace of God — and all the more toward you. 13 For
we write you nothing other than what you can read and also
understand; I hope you will understand until the end — 14 as you have
already understood us in part — that on the day of the Lord Jesus we
are your boast even as you are our boast.
Paul remembers the Corinthians as he travels to Macedonia
15 Since I was sure of this, I wanted to come to you first, so that you
might have a double favor; 16 I wanted to visit you on my way to
Macedonia, and to come back to you from Macedonia and have you
send me on to Judea. 17 Was I vacillating when I wanted to do this? Do
I make my plans according to ordinary human standards, ready to say
"Yes, yes" and "No, no" at the same time? 18 As surely as God is
faithful, our word to you has not been "Yes and No." 19 For the Son of
God, Jesus Christ, whom we proclaimed among you, Silvanus and
Timothy and I, was not "Yes and No"; but in him it is always "Yes." 20
For in him every one of God's promises is a "Yes." For this reason it is
through him that we say the "Amen," to the glory of God. 21 But it is
God who establishes us with you in Christ and has anointed us, 22 by
putting his seal on us and giving us his Spirit in our hearts as a first
installment.
23 But I call on God as witness against me: it was to spare you that I did
not come again to Corinth. 24 I do not mean to imply that we lord it
over your faith; rather, we are workers with you for your joy, because
you stand firm in the faith. [2 Corinthians 2] 1 So I made up my mind

371

2 CORINTHIANS 372

not to make you another painful visit. 2 For if I cause you pain, who is
there to make me glad but the one whom I have pained? 3 And I wrote
as I did, so that when I came, I might not suffer pain from those who
should have made me rejoice; for I am confident about all of you, that
my joy would be the joy of all of you. 4 For I wrote you out of much
distress and anguish of heart and with many tears, not to cause you
pain, but to let you know the abundant love that I have for you.
5 But if anyone has caused pain, he has caused it not to me, but to
some extent — not to exaggerate it — to all of you. 6 This punishment
by the majority is enough for such a person; 7 so now instead you
should forgive and console him, so that he may not be overwhelmed
by excessive sorrow. 8 So I urge you to reaffirm your love for him. 9 I
wrote for this reason: to test you and to know whether you are
obedient in everything. 10 Anyone whom you forgive, I also forgive.
What I have forgiven, if I have forgiven anything, has been for your
sake in the presence of Christ. 11 And we do this so that we may not be
outwitted by Satan; for we are not ignorant of his designs.
12 When I came to Troas to proclaim the good news of Christ, a door
was opened for me in the Lord; 13 but my mind could not rest because I
did not find my brother Titus there. So I said farewell to them and
went on to Macedonia.
Real character of Paul's ministry; the ministry of glory; God equips
competent ministers
14 But thanks be to God, who in Christ always leads us in triumphal
procession, and through us spreads in every place the fragrance that
comes from knowing him. 15 For we are the aroma of Christ to God
among those who are being saved and among those who are
perishing; 16 to the one a fragrance from death to death, to the other
a fragrance from life to life. Who is sufficient for these things? 17 For
we are not peddlers of God's word like so many; but in Christ we speak
as persons of sincerity, as persons sent from God and standing in his
presence.

372

2 CORINTHIANS 373

[2 Corinthians 3]
Ministers of the new covenant of Spirit
1 Are we beginning to commend ourselves again? Surely we do not
need, as some do, letters of recommendation to you or from you, do
we? 2 You yourselves are our letter, written on our hearts, to be
known and read by all; 3 and you show that you are a letter of Christ,
prepared by us, written not with ink but with the Spirit of the living
God, not on tablets of stone but on tablets of human hearts.
4 Such is the confidence that we have through Christ toward God. 5
Not that we are competent of ourselves to claim anything as coming
from us; our competence is from God, 6 who has made us competent
to be ministers of a new covenant, not of letter but of spirit; for the
letter kills, but the Spirit gives life.
7 Now if the ministry of death, chiseled in letters on stone tablets,
came in glory so that the people of Israel could not gaze at Moses' face
because of the glory of his face, a glory now set aside, 8 how much
more will the ministry of the Spirit come in glory? 9 For if there was
glory in the ministry of condemnation, much more does the ministry of
justification abound in glory! 10 Indeed, what once had glory has lost
its glory because of the greater glory; 11 for if what was set aside came
through glory, much more has the permanent come in glory!
12 Since, then, we have such a hope, we act with great boldness, 13 not
like Moses, who put a veil over his face to keep the people of Israel
from gazing at the end of the glory that was being set aside. 14 But
their minds were hardened. Indeed, to this very day, when they hear
the reading of the old covenant, that same veil is still there, since only
in Christ is it set aside. 15 Indeed, to this very day whenever Moses is
read, a veil lies over their minds; 16 but when one turns to the Lord, the
veil is removed. 17 Now the Lord is the Spirit, and where the Spirit of
the Lord is, there is freedom. 18 And all of us, with unveiled faces,
seeing the glory of the Lord as though reflected in a mirror, are being
transformed into the same image from one degree of glory to another;
for this comes from the Lord, the Spirit.

373

2 CORINTHIANS 374

[2 Corinthians 4]
Climax of Paul's self-defense
1 Therefore, since it is by God's mercy that we are engaged in this
ministry, we do not lose heart. 2 We have renounced the shameful
things that one hides; we refuse to practice cunning or to falsify God's
word; but by the open statement of the truth we commend ourselves
to the conscience of everyone in the sight of God. 3 And even if our
gospel is veiled, it is veiled to those who are perishing. 4 In their case
the god of this world has blinded the minds of the unbelievers, to keep
them from seeing the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who is
the image of God. 5 For we do not proclaim ourselves; we proclaim
Jesus Christ as Lord and ourselves as your slaves for Jesus' sake. 6 For it
is the God who said, "Let light shine out of darkness," who has shone
in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ.
Ministry of hardship
7 But we have this treasure in clay jars, so that it may be made clear
that this extraordinary power belongs to God and does not come from
us. 8 We are afflicted in every way, but not crushed; perplexed, but not
driven to despair; 9 persecuted, but not forsaken; struck down, but not
destroyed; 10 always carrying in the body the death of Jesus, so that
the life of Jesus may also be made visible in our bodies. 11 For while we
live, we are always being given up to death for Jesus' sake, so that the
life of Jesus may be made visible in our mortal flesh. 12 So death is at
work in us, but life in you.
13 But just as we have the same spirit of faith that is in accordance with
scripture — "I believed, and so I spoke" — we also believe, and so we
speak, 14 because we know that the one who raised the Lord Jesus will
raise us also with Jesus, and will bring us with you into his presence. 15
Yes, everything is for your sake, so that grace, as it extends to more
and more people, may increase thanksgiving, to the glory of God.

374

2 CORINTHIANS 375

16 So we do not lose heart. Even though our outer nature is wasting
away, our inner nature is being renewed day by day. 17 For this slight
momentary affliction is preparing us for an eternal weight of glory
beyond all measure, 18 because we look not at what can be seen but at
what cannot be seen; for what can be seen is temporary, but what
cannot be seen is eternal.
[2 Corinthians 5]
1 For we know that if the earthly tent we live in is destroyed, we have a
building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens. 2 For in this tent we groan, longing to be clothed with our
heavenly dwelling — 3 if indeed, when we have taken it off we will not
be found naked. 4 For while we are still in this tent, we groan under
our burden, because we wish not to be unclothed but to be further
clothed, so that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life. 5 He who
has prepared us for this very thing is God, who has given us the Spirit
as a guarantee.
6 So we are always confident; even though we know that while we are
at home in the body we are away from the Lord — 7 for we walk by
faith, not by sight. 8 Yes, we do have confidence, and we would rather
be away from the body and at home with the Lord. 9 So whether we
are at home or away, we make it our aim to please him. 10 For all of us
must appear before the judgment seat of Christ, so that each may
receive recompense for what has been done in the body, whether
good or evil.
Ministry of reconciliation
11 Therefore, knowing the fear of the Lord, we try to persuade others;
but we ourselves are well known to God, and I hope that we are also
well known to your consciences. 12 We are not commending ourselves
to you again, but giving you an opportunity to boast about us, so that
you may be able to answer those who boast in outward appearance
and not in the heart. 13 For if we are beside ourselves, it is for God; if
we are in our right mind, it is for you. 14 For the love of Christ urges us
on, because we are convinced that one has died for all; therefore all

375

2 CORINTHIANS 376

have died. 15 And he died for all, so that those who live might live no
longer for themselves, but for him who died and was raised for them.
16 From now on, therefore, we regard no one from a human point of
view; even though we once knew Christ from a human point of view,
we know him no longer in that way. 17 So if anyone is in Christ, there is
a new creation: everything old has passed away; see, everything has
become new! 18 All this is from God, who reconciled us to himself
through Christ, and has given us the ministry of reconciliation; 19 that
is, in Christ God was reconciling the world to himself, not counting
their trespasses against them, and entrusting the message of
reconciliation to us. 20 So we are ambassadors for Christ, since God is
making his appeal through us; we entreat you on behalf of Christ, be
reconciled to God. 21 For our sake he made him to be sin who knew no
sin, so that in him we might become the righteousness of God.
[2 Corinthians 6]
Summary of defense
1 As we work together with him, we urge you also not to accept the
grace of God in vain. 2 For he says,
"At an acceptable time I have listened to you,
and on a day of salvation I have helped you."
See, now is the acceptable time; see, now is the day of salvation! 3 We
are putting no obstacle in anyone's way, so that no fault may be found
with our ministry, 4 but as servants of God we have commended
ourselves in every way: through great endurance, in afflictions,
hardships, calamities, 5 beatings, imprisonments, riots, labors, sleepless
nights, hunger; 6 by purity, knowledge, patience, kindness, holiness of
spirit, genuine love, 7 truthful speech, and the power of God; with the
weapons of righteousness for the right hand and for the left; 8 in
honor and dishonor, in ill repute and good repute. We are treated as
impostors, and yet are true; 9 as unknown, and yet are well known; as
dying, and see — we are alive; as punished, and yet not killed; 10 as
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as
having nothing, and yet possessing everything.

376

2 CORINTHIANS 377

Final appeal to the Corinthians
11 We have spoken frankly to you Corinthians; our heart is wide open
to you. 12 There is no restriction in our affections, but only in yours. 13
In return — I speak as to children — open wide your hearts also.
14 Do not be mismatched with unbelievers. For what partnership is
there between righteousness and lawlessness? Or what fellowship is
there between light and darkness? 15 What agreement does Christ
have with Beliar? Or what does a believer share with an unbeliever? 16
What agreement has the temple of God with idols? For we are the
temple of the living God; as God said,
"I will live in them and walk among them,
and I will be their God,
and they shall be my people.
17 Therefore come out from them,
and be separate from them, says the Lord,
and touch nothing unclean;
then I will welcome you,
18 and I will be your father,
and you shall be my sons and daughters,
says the Lord Almighty."
[2 Corinthians 7]
1 Since we have these promises, beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from
every defilement of body and of spirit, making holiness perfect in the
fear of God.
2 Make room in your hearts for us; we have wronged no one, we have
corrupted no one, we have taken advantage of no one. 3 I do not say
this to condemn you, for I said before that you are in our hearts, to die
together and to live together. 4 I often boast about you; I have great
pride in you; I am filled with consolation; I am overjoyed in all our
affliction.

377

2 CORINTHIANS 378

Resumption of the travelogue
5 For even when we came into Macedonia, our bodies had no rest, but
we were afflicted in every way — disputes without and fears within. 6
But God, who consoles the downcast, consoled us by the arrival of
Titus, 7 and not only by his coming, but also by the consolation with
which he was consoled about you, as he told us of your longing, your
mourning, your zeal for me, so that I rejoiced still more. 8 For even if I
made you sorry with my letter, I do not regret it (though I did regret it,
for I see that I grieved you with that letter, though only briefly). 9 Now
I rejoice, not because you were grieved, but because your grief led to
repentance; for you felt a godly grief, so that you were not harmed in
any way by us. 10 For godly grief produces a repentance that leads to
salvation and brings no regret, but worldly grief produces death. 11 For
see what earnestness this godly grief has produced in you, what
eagerness to clear yourselves, what indignation, what alarm, what
longing, what zeal, what punishment! At every point you have proved
yourselves guiltless in the matter. 12 So although I wrote to you, it was
not on account of the one who did the wrong, nor on account of the
one who was wronged, but in order that your zeal for us might be
made known to you before God. 13 In this we find comfort.
In addition to our own consolation, we rejoiced still more at the joy of
Titus, because his mind has been set at rest by all of you. 14 For if I have
been somewhat boastful about you to him, I was not disgraced; but
just as everything we said to you was true, so our boasting to Titus has
proved true as well. 15 And his heart goes out all the more to you, as
he remembers the obedience of all of you, and how you welcomed him
with fear and trembling. 16 I rejoice, because I have complete
confidence in you.
[2 Corinthians 8]
The collection for the Jerusalem church; letter of appeal to the
Corinthians for the collection
1 We want you to know, brothers and sisters, about the grace of God
that has been granted to the churches of Macedonia; 2 for during a
severe ordeal of affliction, their abundant joy and their extreme

378

2 CORINTHIANS 379

poverty have overflowed in a wealth of generosity on their part. 3 For,
as I can testify, they voluntarily gave according to their means, and
even beyond their means, 4 begging us earnestly for the privilege of
sharing in this ministry to the saints — 5 and this, not merely as we
expected; they gave themselves first to the Lord and, by the will of
God, to us, 6 so that we might urge Titus that, as he had already made
a beginning, so he should also complete this generous undertaking
among you. 7 Now as you excel in everything — in faith, in speech, in
knowledge, in utmost eagerness, and in our love for you — so we want
you to excel also in this generous undertaking.
8 I do not say this as a command, but I am testing the genuineness of
your love against the earnestness of others. 9 For you know the
generous act of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for
your sakes he became poor, so that by his poverty you might become
rich. 10 And in this matter I am giving my advice: it is appropriate for
you who began last year not only to do something but even to desire
to do something — 11 now finish doing it, so that your eagerness may
be matched by completing it according to your means. 12 For if the
eagerness is there, the gift is acceptable according to what one has —
not according to what one does not have. 13 I do not mean that there
should be relief for others and pressure on you, but it is a question of a
fair balance between 14 your present abundance and their need, so
that their abundance may be for your need, in order that there may be
a fair balance. 15 As it is written,
"The one who had much did not have too much,
and the one who had little did not have too little."
16 But thanks be to God who put in the heart of Titus the same
eagerness for you that I myself have. 17 For he not only accepted our
appeal, but since he is more eager than ever, he is going to you of his
own accord. 18 With him we are sending the brother who is famous
among all the churches for his proclaiming the good news; 19 and not
only that, but he has also been appointed by the churches to travel
with us while we are administering this generous undertaking for the
glory of the Lord himself and to show our goodwill. 20 We intend that
no one should blame us about this generous gift that we are
administering, 21 for we intend to do what is right not only in the

379

2 CORINTHIANS 380

LORD's sight but also in the sight of others. 22 And with them we are
sending our brother whom we have often tested and found eager in
many matters, but who is now more eager than ever because of his
great confidence in you. 23 As for Titus, he is my partner and co-worker
in your service; as for our brothers, they are messengers of the
churches, the glory of Christ. 24 Therefore openly before the churches,
show them the proof of your love and of our reason for boasting
about you.
[2 Corinthians 9]
A second letter of appeal for the collection
1 Now it is not necessary for me to write you about the ministry to the
saints, 2 for I know your eagerness, which is the subject of my boasting
about you to the people of Macedonia, saying that Achaia has been
ready since last year; and your zeal has stirred up most of them. 3 But I
am sending the brothers in order that our boasting about you may not
prove to have been empty in this case, so that you may be ready, as I
said you would be; 4 otherwise, if some Macedonians come with me
and find that you are not ready, we would be humiliated — to say
nothing of you — in this undertaking. 5 So I thought it necessary to
urge the brothers to go on ahead to you, and arrange in advance for
this bountiful gift that you have promised, so that it may be ready as a
voluntary gift and not as an extortion.
6 The point is this: the one who sows sparingly will also reap sparingly,
and the one who sows bountifully will also reap bountifully. 7 Each of
you must give as you have made up your mind, not reluctantly or
under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver. 8 And God is able to
provide you with every blessing in abundance, so that by always having
enough of everything, you may share abundantly in every good work.
9 As it is written,
"He scatters abroad, he gives to the poor;
his righteousness endures forever."
10 He who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food will supply
and multiply your seed for sowing and increase the harvest of your
righteousness. 11 You will be enriched in every way for your great

380

2 CORINTHIANS 381

generosity, which will produce thanksgiving to God through us; 12 for
the rendering of this ministry not only supplies the needs of the saints
but also overflows with many thanksgivings to God. 13 Through the
testing of this ministry you glorify God by your obedience to the
confession of the gospel of Christ and by the generosity of your sharing
with them and with all others, 14 while they long for you and pray for
you because of the surpassing grace of God that he has given you. 15
Thanks be to God for his indescribable gift!
[2 Corinthians 10]
Defense of apostolic authority; Paul attacks his opponents
1 I myself, Paul, appeal to you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ
— I who am humble when face to face with you, but bold toward you
when I am away! — 2 I ask that when I am present I need not show
boldness by daring to oppose those who think we are acting according
to human standards. 3 Indeed, we live as human beings, but we do not
wage war according to human standards; 4 for the weapons of our
warfare are not merely human, but they have divine power to destroy
strongholds. We destroy arguments 5 and every proud obstacle raised
up against the knowledge of God, and we take every thought captive
to obey Christ. 6 We are ready to punish every disobedience when your
obedience is complete.
7 Look at what is before your eyes. If you are confident that you
belong to Christ, remind yourself of this, that just as you belong to
Christ, so also do we. 8 Now, even if I boast a little too much of our
authority, which the Lord gave for building you up and not for tearing
you down, I will not be ashamed of it. 9 I do not want to seem as
though I am trying to frighten you with my letters. 10 For they say, "His
letters are weighty and strong, but his bodily presence is weak, and his
speech contemptible." 11 Let such people understand that what we say
by letter when absent, we will also do when present.
12 We do not dare to classify or compare ourselves with some of those
who commend themselves. But when they measure themselves by one
another, and compare themselves with one another, they do not show
good sense. 13 We, however, will not boast beyond limits, but will keep

381

2 CORINTHIANS 382

within the field that God has assigned to us, to reach out even as far as
you. 14 For we were not overstepping our limits when we reached you;
we were the first to come all the way to you with the good news of
Christ. 15 We do not boast beyond limits, that is, in the labors of others;
but our hope is that, as your faith increases, our sphere of action
among you may be greatly enlarged, 16 so that we may proclaim the
good news in lands beyond you, without boasting of work already
done in someone else's sphere of action. 17 "Let the one who boasts,
boast in the Lord." 18 For it is not those who commend themselves that
are approved, but those whom the Lord commends.
[2 Corinthians 11]
A fool's speech; appeal to the Corinthians as a fool
1 I wish you would bear with me in a little foolishness. Do bear with
me! 2 I feel a divine jealousy for you, for I promised you in marriage to
one husband, to present you as a chaste virgin to Christ. 3 But I am
afraid that as the serpent deceived Eve by its cunning, your thoughts
will be led astray from a sincere and pure devotion to Christ. 4 For if
someone comes and proclaims another Jesus than the one we
proclaimed, or if you receive a different spirit from the one you
received, or a different gospel from the one you accepted, you submit
to it readily enough. 5 I think that I am not in the least inferior to these
super-apostles. 6 I may be untrained in speech, but not in knowledge;
certainly in every way and in all things we have made this evident to
you.
7 Did I commit a sin by humbling myself so that you might be exalted,
because I proclaimed God's good news to you free of charge? 8 I
robbed other churches by accepting support from them in order to
serve you. 9 And when I was with you and was in need, I did not
burden anyone, for my needs were supplied by the friends who came
from Macedonia. So I refrained and will continue to refrain from
burdening you in any way. 10 As the truth of Christ is in me, this boast
of mine will not be silenced in the regions of Achaia. 11 And why?
Because I do not love you? God knows I do!

382

2 CORINTHIANS 383

12 And what I do I will also continue to do, in order to deny an
opportunity to those who want an opportunity to be recognized as our
equals in what they boast about. 13 For such boasters are false apostles,
deceitful workers, disguising themselves as apostles of Christ. 14 And
no wonder! Even Satan disguises himself as an angel of light. 15 So it is
not strange if his ministers also disguise themselves as ministers of
righteousness. Their end will match their deeds.
Paul compares himself to the false apostles
16 I repeat, let no one think that I am a fool; but if you do, then accept
me as a fool, so that I too may boast a little. 17 What I am saying in
regard to this boastful confidence, I am saying not with the LORD's
authority, but as a fool; 18 since many boast according to human
standards, I will also boast. 19 For you gladly put up with fools, being
wise yourselves! 20 For you put up with it when someone makes slaves
of you, or preys upon you, or takes advantage of you, or puts on airs,
or gives you a slap in the face. 21 To my shame, I must say, we were too
weak for that!
But whatever anyone dares to boast of — I am speaking as a fool — I
also dare to boast of that. 22 Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they
Israelites? So am I. Are they descendants of Abraham? So am I. 23 Are
they ministers of Christ? I am talking like a madman — I am a better
one: with far greater labors, far more imprisonments, with countless
floggings, and often near death. 24 Five times I have received from the
Jews the forty lashes minus one. 25 Three times I was beaten with rods.
Once I received a stoning. Three times I was shipwrecked; for a night
and a day I was adrift at sea; 26 on frequent journeys, in danger from
rivers, danger from bandits, danger from my own people, danger from
Gentiles, danger in the city, danger in the wilderness, danger at sea,
danger from false brothers and sisters; 27 in toil and hardship, through
many a sleepless night, hungry and thirsty, often without food, cold
and naked. 28 And, besides other things, I am under daily pressure
because of my anxiety for all the churches. 29 Who is weak, and I am
not weak? Who is made to stumble, and I am not indignant?

383

2 CORINTHIANS 384

30 If I must boast, I will boast of the things that show my weakness. 31
The God and Father of the Lord Jesus (blessed be he forever!) knows
that I do not lie. 32 In Damascus, the governor under King Aretas
guarded the city of Damascus in order to seize me, 33 but I was let
down in a basket through a window in the wall, and escaped from his
hands.
[2 Corinthians 12]
1 It is necessary to boast; nothing is to be gained by it, but I will go on
to visions and revelations of the Lord. 2 I know a person in Christ who
fourteen years ago was caught up to the third heaven — whether in
the body or out of the body I do not know; God knows. 3 And I know
that such a person — whether in the body or out of the body I do not
know; God knows — 4 was caught up into Paradise and heard things
that are not to be told, that no mortal is permitted to repeat. 5 On
behalf of such a one I will boast, but on my own behalf I will not boast,
except of my weaknesses. 6 But if I wish to boast, I will not be a fool,
for I will be speaking the truth. But I refrain from it, so that no one
may think better of me than what is seen in me or heard from me, 7
even considering the exceptional character of the revelations.
Therefore, to keep me from being too elated, a thorn was given me in
the flesh, a messenger of Satan to torment me, to keep me from being
too elated. 8 Three times I appealed to the Lord about this, that it
would leave me, 9 but he said to me, "My grace is sufficient for you,
for power is made perfect in weakness." So, I will boast all the more
gladly of my weaknesses, so that the power of Christ may dwell in me.
10 Therefore I am content with weaknesses, insults, hardships,
persecutions, and calamities for the sake of Christ; for whenever I am
weak, then I am strong.
Conclusion of the fool's speech
11 I have been a fool! You forced me to it. Indeed you should have
been the ones commending me, for I am not at all inferior to these
super-apostles, even though I am nothing. 12 The signs of a true
apostle were performed among you with utmost patience, signs and
wonders and mighty works. 13 How have you been worse off than the

384

2 CORINTHIANS 385

other churches, except that I myself did not burden you? Forgive me
this wrong!
Paul prepares for a third visit
14 Here I am, ready to come to you this third time. And I will not be a
burden, because I do not want what is yours but you; for children
ought not to lay up for their parents, but parents for their children. 15 I
will most gladly spend and be spent for you. If I love you more, am I to
be loved less? 16 Let it be assumed that I did not burden you.
Nevertheless (you say) since I was crafty, I took you in by deceit. 17 Did I
take advantage of you through any of those whom I sent to you? 18 I
urged Titus to go, and sent the brother with him. Titus did not take
advantage of you, did he? Did we not conduct ourselves with the same
spirit? Did we not take the same steps?
19 Have you been thinking all along that we have been defending
ourselves before you? We are speaking in Christ before God.
Everything we do, beloved, is for the sake of building you up. 20 For I
fear that when I come, I may find you not as I wish, and that you may
find me not as you wish; I fear that there may perhaps be quarreling,
jealousy, anger, selfishness, slander, gossip, conceit, and disorder. 21 I
fear that when I come again, my God may humble me before you, and
that I may have to mourn over many who previously sinned and have
not repented of the impurity, sexual immorality, and licentiousness
that they have practiced.
[2 Corinthians 13]
1 This is the third time I am coming to you. "Any charge must be
sustained by the evidence of two or three witnesses." 2 I warned those
who sinned previously and all the others, and I warn them now while
absent, as I did when present on my second visit, that if I come again, I
will not be lenient — 3 since you desire proof that Christ is speaking in
me. He is not weak in dealing with you, but is powerful in you. 4 For he
was crucified in weakness, but lives by the power of God. For we are
weak in him, but in dealing with you we will live with him by the
power of God.

385

2 CORINTHIANS 386

5 Examine yourselves to see whether you are living in the faith. Test
yourselves. Do you not realize that Jesus Christ is in you? — unless,
indeed, you fail to meet the test! 6 I hope you will find out that we
have not failed. 7 But we pray to God that you may not do anything
wrong — not that we may appear to have met the test, but that you
may do what is right, though we may seem to have failed. 8 For we
cannot do anything against the truth, but only for the truth. 9 For we
rejoice when we are weak and you are strong. This is what we pray for,
that you may become perfect. 10 So I write these things while I am
away from you, so that when I come, I may not have to be severe in
using the authority that the Lord has given me for building up and not
for tearing down.
Final benediction
11 Finally, brothers and sisters, farewell. Put things in order, listen to my
appeal, agree with one another, live in peace; and the God of love and
peace will be with you. 12 Greet one another with a holy kiss. All the
saints greet you.
13 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the
communion of the Holy Spirit be with all of you.

386

GALATIANS 387

GALATIANS
Introduction
By the middle of the first century CE, although the early Christian
movement was still connected to Judaism, an increasing number of its
members were Gentiles. The tireless missionary activity of Paul, who
saw himself as the apostle to the Gentiles (1.16), had fostered this
development. The relationship between these new, non-Jewish
converts and Jewish Christians, and between the emerging Christian
movement and Judaism, became an issue of burning importance. One
crucial issue concerned the status of the law of Moses. Should Gentile
Christians convert to Judaism in the process of becoming Christians?
Were they required to observe Jewish law, even in part? The Letter to
the Galatians gives Paul's view of this controversy and states a position
on the Jewish law that will have far-reaching consequences.
Paul does not, however, discuss the issue in the abstract. Instead, facing
a concrete situation in a particular place, he argues passionately that
his view is crucial both to the survival of his mission in Galatia and,
more important, to that of Christianity generally. In his confrontation
with Peter at Antioch, he had held that the demands of the Jewish law
were an unnecessary burden for Gentiles when even Jewish Christians
had ceased to observe them (2.11-14). Now he argues that the
observance of the Jewish law by Gentiles is in itself incompatible with
acceptance of the gospel (2.15-21). Paul does not directly address the
question of whether Jewish Christians were still bound to keep the law.
In his allegorical argument based upon the story of Hagar and Sarah
(4.21-31) he seems to propose that the Sinai covenant and the
community of Israel based upon the observance of the law is drastically
at odds with the authentic Israel, the community united with the one
true heir of Abraham, Jesus Christ (3.16). Previously Paul has talked
about the law as a provisional measure, a means to discipline those
who would inherit Abraham's promise during their religious infancy
387

GALATIANS 388

(3.24; cf. 4.1-6). The implication of these passages is that Judaism is
redundant, perhaps even an obstacle to God's plan for human
salvation. Paul does not draw this conclusion. Later, in Romans 9-11, he
explicitly rebuts it. Paul accepts that Peter and James are "entrusted
with the gospel to the circumcised" (2.7-8), and observance of the law
was preserved at this time in Jewish Christian communities.
The exact date of the letter's composition is not known, but it was
written presumably some time between the late forties and early fifties
of the Common Era. Paul would develop his views on the law further in
his Letter to the Romans, which is considered his last letter. Although
Galatians follows the form of a letter to specific Christian churches,
there are no references to anyone in the community and little
information about Paul's mission among them. The letter is rather
Paul's defense of his Gentile mission as a whole and the particular
understanding of the law on which it is based. The addresses of the
letter are an unspecified number of "the churches of Galatia" (1.2), a
Roman province in central Asia Minor where, according to Acts, Paul
had preached (Acts 13.14-14.23; cf. 16.6; 18.23).
Prior to writing Galatians, Paul had been involved in discussions of
Gentile observance of the law with the leaders of the Jerusalem church
(2.1-10). This meeting may be identical with the council at Jerusalem,
reported in Acts 15.1-29. Paul's account of his visit to Jerusalem is,
however, very different from the account in Acts. In Galatians Paul is
insistent that no demand was made for Gentiles to observe the law. A
conflict in Antioch ensued over table fellowship of Jews and Gentiles
(2.11-14). Paul names as his opponents in Antioch "certain people...
from James" and "the circumcision faction," but it is unclear whether
the two groups are the same. Nonetheless, they persuaded the rest of
the Jews, including Peter and Barnabas, to break off table fellowship
with Gentiles. Paul repeats his accusation against Peter that Peter
himself no longer observed Jewish law and customs, yet wanted to
impose them on Gentiles.
The context of Paul's formulations was his better struggle with
opponents in Galatia. The content and sharp polemic of Galatians were
worked out in reply to what Paul knew of his opponents' teaching and

388

GALATIANS 389

their attacks upon him. We would have a better understanding of
Paul's intentions if we knew more about them. Despite the best efforts
of scholars to identify and reconstruct the arguments of Paul's
opponents, they remain a shadowy group. Most commentators
describe them as Judaizers because they insisted on circumcision.
Whether they belonged to the same opposition that Paul had faced in
Antioch or during his visit to the Jerusalem leaders (the "false
believers" in 2.4) cannot be decided from Paul's letter. We also have no
evidence that they were missionaries sent by the Jerusalem church and
representing James, notwithstanding Paul's earlier conflict in Antioch.
Nevertheless, the effect of their controversy with Paul is unmistakable.
The opposition forced him to develop a defense of his mission to the
Gentiles which would provide the basis for a Christianity whose
practices would be independent of its Jewish roots.
The letter falls naturally into three parts. In the first, after a salutation
(1.1-5), Paul reviews his life (1.6-2.14): his missionary relationship to the
Galatians (1.6-12); his past, including his own call (1.13-24); and his
relationship with the Jerusalem church and the other apostles (2.1-14).
The second section (2.15-5.1) is a complex and densely argued
presentation of Paul's vision of the gospel: the opposition of faith and
works of the law (2.15-21; the conversion of the Galatians (3.1-5); the
promise to Abraham and his inheritance (3.6-18); the purpose of the
law (3.19-25); baptism (3.26-29); the inheritance of the children of Christ
(4.1-7); the danger of slipping back into bondage (4.8-11); the close
relationship of Paul and the Galatians (4.12-20); and an allegorical
argument based on the story of Hagar and Sarah (4.21-5.1). The third
section (5.2-6.18) presents the practical application of Paul's view:
reasons against the requirement of circumcision (5.2-12); true Christian
liberty (5.13-26); moral exhortation (6.1-10); and a postscript (6.11-18).

389

GALATIANS 390

[Galations 1]
The salutation, stressing Paul's apostolic authority
1 Paul an apostle — sent neither by human commission nor from
human authorities, but through Jesus Christ and God the Father, who
raised him from the dead — 2 and all the members of God's family who
are with me,
3 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ, 4 who gave himself for our sins to set us free from the present
evil age, according to the will of our God and Father, 5 to whom be the
glory forever and ever. Amen.
A recapitulation of Paul's life; Paul rebukes the Galatians
6 I am astonished that you are so quickly deserting the one who called
you in the grace of Christ and are turning to a different gospel — 7 not
that there is another gospel, but there are some who are confusing you
and want to pervert the gospel of Christ. 8 But even if we or an angel
from heaven should proclaim to you a gospel contrary to what we
proclaimed to you, let that one be accursed! 9 As we have said before,
so now I repeat, if anyone proclaims to you a gospel contrary to what
you received, let that one be accursed!
Paul states the defense of his gospel
10 Am I now seeking human approval, or God's approval? Or am I
trying to please people? If I were still pleasing people, I would not be a
servant of Christ.
11 For I want you to know, brothers and sisters, that the gospel that
was proclaimed by me is not of human origin; 12 for I did not receive it
from a human source, nor was I taught it, but I received it through a
revelation of Jesus Christ.

390

GALATIANS 391

Paul recounts his background in Judaism, his calling as an apostle, and
his mission to the Gentiles; Paul's conversion, early life in the church,
and defense of his apostleship.
13 You have heard, no doubt, of my earlier life in Judaism. I was
violently persecuting the church of God and was trying to destroy it. 14
I advanced in Judaism beyond many among my people of the same
age, for I was far more zealous for the traditions of my ancestors. 15
But when God, who had set me apart before I was born and called me
through his grace, was pleased 16 to reveal his Son to me, so that I
might proclaim him among the Gentiles, I did not confer with any
human being, 17 nor did I go up to Jerusalem to those who were
already apostles before me, but I went away at once into Arabia, and
afterwards I returned to Damascus.
18 Then after three years I did go up to Jerusalem to visit Cephas and
stayed with him fifteen days; 19 but I did not see any other apostle
except James the LORD's brother. 20 In what I am writing to you, before
God, I do not lie! 21 Then I went into the regions of Syria and Cilicia, 22
and I was still unknown by sight to the churches of Judea that are in
Christ; 23 they only heard it said, "The one who formerly was
persecuting us is now proclaiming the faith he once tried to destroy."
24 And they glorified God because of me.
[Galatians 2]
Paul meets with the Jerusalem leaders
1 Then after fourteen years I went up again to Jerusalem with
Barnabas, taking Titus along with me. 2 I went up in response to a
revelation. Then I laid before them (though only in a private meeting
with the acknowledged leaders) the gospel that I proclaim among the
Gentiles, in order to make sure that I was not running, or had not run,
in vain. 3 But even Titus, who was with me, was not compelled to be
circumcised, though he was a Greek. 4 But because of false believers
secretly brought in, who slipped in to spy on the freedom we have in
Christ Jesus, so that they might enslave us — 5 we did not submit to
them even for a moment, so that the truth of the gospel might always
remain with you. 6 And from those who were supposed to be

391

GALATIANS 392

acknowledged leaders (what they actually were makes no difference to
me; God shows no partiality) — those leaders contributed nothing to
me. 7 On the contrary, when they saw that I had been entrusted with
the gospel for the uncircumcised, just as Peter had been entrusted with
the gospel for the circumcised 8 (for he who worked through Peter
making him an apostle to the circumcised also worked through me in
sending me to the Gentiles), 9 and when James and Cephas and John,
who were acknowledged pillars, recognized the grace that had been
given to me, they gave to Barnabas and me the right hand of
fellowship, agreeing that we should go to the Gentiles and they to the
circumcised. 10 They asked only one thing, that we remember the poor,
which was actually what I was eager to do.
Paul's confrontation with Peter at Antioch
11 But when Cephas came to Antioch, I opposed him to his face,
because he stood self-condemned; 12 for until certain people came
from James, he used to eat with the Gentiles. But after they came, he
drew back and kept himself separate for fear of the circumcision
faction. 13 And the other Jews joined him in this hypocrisy, so that even
Barnabas was led astray by their hypocrisy. 14 But when I saw that they
were not acting consistently with the truth of the gospel, I said to
Cephas before them all, "If you, though a Jew, live like a Gentile and
not like a Jew, how can you compel the Gentiles to live like Jews?"
Paul's gospel: faith in Christ frees us from observance of Jewish law;
Jews and Gentiles are both justified through Christ
15 We ourselves are Jews by birth and not Gentile sinners; 16 yet we
know that a person is justified not by the works of the law but through
faith in Jesus Christ. And we have come to believe in Christ Jesus, so
that we might be justified by faith in Christ, and not by doing the
works of the law, because no one will be justified by the works of the
law. 17 But if, in our effort to be justified in Christ, we ourselves have
been found to be sinners, is Christ then a servant of sin? Certainly not!
18 But if I build up again the very things that I once tore down, then I
demonstrate that I am a transgressor. 19 For through the law I died to
the law, so that I might live to God. I have been crucified with Christ;

392

GALATIANS 393

20 and it is no longer I who live, but it is Christ who lives in me. And
the life I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the Son of God, who
loved me and gave himself for me. 21 I do not nullify the grace of God;
for if justification comes through the law, then Christ died for nothing.
[Galatians 3]
Paul's challenge to the Galatians
1 You foolish Galatians! Who has bewitched you? It was before your
eyes that Jesus Christ was publicly exhibited as crucified! 2 The only
thing I want to learn from you is this: Did you receive the Spirit by
doing the works of the law or by believing what you heard? 3 Are you
so foolish? Having started with the Spirit, are you now ending with the
flesh? 4 Did you experience so much for nothing? — if it really was for
nothing. 5 Well then, does God supply you with the Spirit and work
miracles among you by your doing the works of the law, or by your
believing what you heard?
Abraham the model for Christian faith
6 Just as Abraham "believed God, and it was reckoned to him as
righteousness," 7 so, you see, those who believe are the descendants of
Abraham. 8 And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the
Gentiles by faith, declared the gospel beforehand to Abraham, saying,
"All the Gentiles shall be blessed in you." 9 For this reason, those who
believe are blessed with Abraham who believed.
10 For all who rely on the works of the law are under a curse; for it is
written, "Cursed is everyone who does not observe and obey all the
things written in the book of the law." 11 Now it is evident that no one
is justified before God by the law; for "The one who is righteous will
live by faith." 12 But the law does not rest on faith; on the contrary,
"Whoever does the works of the law will live by them." 13 Christ
redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us —
for it is written, "Cursed is everyone who hangs on a tree" — 14 in
order that in Christ Jesus the blessing of Abraham might come to the
Gentiles, so that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through
faith.

393

GALATIANS 394

The inheritance of Abraham
15 Brothers and sisters, I give an example from daily life: once a
person's will has been ratified, no one adds to it or annuls it. 16 Now
the promises were made to Abraham and to his offspring; it does not
say, "And to offsprings," as of many; but it says, "And to your
offspring," that is, to one person, who is Christ. 17 My point is this: the
law, which came four hundred thirty years later, does not annul a
covenant previously ratified by God, so as to nullify the promise. 18 For
if the inheritance comes from the law, it no longer comes from the
promise; but God granted it to Abraham through the promise.
The purpose of the law of Moses
19 Why then the law? It was added because of transgressions, until the
offspring would come to whom the promise had been made; and it
was ordained through angels by a mediator. 20 Now a mediator
involves more than one party; but God is one.
21 Is the law then opposed to the promises of God? Certainly not! For if
a law had been given that could make alive, then righteousness would
indeed come through the law. 22 But the scripture has imprisoned all
things under the power of sin, so that what was promised through
faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those who believe.
Baptism into Christ
23 Now before faith came, we were imprisoned and guarded under the
law until faith would be revealed. 24 Therefore the law was our
disciplinarian until Christ came, so that we might be justified by faith.
25 But now that faith has come, we are no longer subject to a
disciplinarian, 26 for in Christ Jesus you are all children of God through
faith. 27 As many of you as were baptized into Christ have clothed
yourselves with Christ. 28 There is no longer Jew or Greek, there is no
longer slave or free, there is no longer male and female; for all of you
are one in Christ Jesus. 29 And if you belong to Christ, then you are
Abraham's offspring, heirs according to the promise.

394

GALATIANS 395

[Galatians 4]
Christ brings believers into their inheritance as adopted children of
God
1 My point is this: heirs, as long as they are minors, are no better than
slaves, though they are the owners of all the property; 2 but they
remain under guardians and trustees until the date set by the father. 3
So with us; while we were minors, we were enslaved to the elemental
spirits of the world. 4 But when the fullness of time had come, God
sent his Son, born of a woman, born under the law, 5 in order to
redeem those who were under the law, so that we might receive
adoption as children. 6 And because you are children, God has sent the
Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, "Abba! Father!" 7 So you are
no longer a slave but a child, and if a child then also an heir, through
God.
The Galatians slip back into bondage
8 Formerly, when you did not know God, you were enslaved to beings
that by nature are not gods. 9 Now, however, that you have come to
know God, or rather to be known by God, how can you turn back
again to the weak and beggarly elemental spirits? How can you want
to be enslaved to them again? 10 You are observing special days, and
months, and seasons, and years. 11 I am afraid that my work for you
may have been wasted.
Paul reminds the Galatians of their close relationship to him
12 Friends, I beg you, become as I am, for I also have become as you
are. You have done me no wrong. 13 You know that it was because of
a physical infirmity that I first announced the gospel to you; 14 though
my condition put you to the test, you did not scorn or despise me, but
welcomed me as an angel of God, as Christ Jesus. 15 What has become
of the goodwill you felt? For I testify that, had it been possible, you
would have torn out your eyes and given them to me. 16 Have I now
become your enemy by telling you the truth? 17 They make much of
you, but for no good purpose; they want to exclude you, so that you
may make much of them. 18 It is good to be made much of for a good

395

GALATIANS 396

purpose at all times, and not only when I am present with you. 19 My
little children, for whom I am again in the pain of childbirth until Christ
is formed in you, 20 I wish I were present with you now and could
change my tone, for I am perplexed about you.
The allegory of Hagar and Sarah
21 Tell me, you who desire to be subject to the law, will you not listen
to the law? 22 For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by a
slave woman and the other by a free woman. 23 One, the child of the
slave, was born according to the flesh; the other, the child of the free
woman, was born through the promise. 24 Now this is an allegory:
these women are two covenants. One woman, in fact, is Hagar, from
Mount Sinai, bearing children for slavery. 25 Now Hagar is Mount Sinai
in Arabia and corresponds to the present Jerusalem, for she is in slavery
with her children. 26 But the other woman corresponds to the
Jerusalem above; she is free, and she is our mother. 27 For it is written,
"Rejoice, you childless one, you who bear no children,
burst into song and shout, you who endure no birth pangs;
for the children of the desolate woman are more numerous
than the children of the one who is married."
28 Now you, my friends, are children of the promise, like Isaac. 29 But
just as at that time the child who was born according to the flesh
persecuted the child who was born according to the Spirit, so it is now
also. 30 But what does the scripture say? "Drive out the slave and her
child; for the child of the slave will not share the inheritance with the
child of the free woman." 31 So then, friends, we are children, not of
the slave but of the free woman. [Galatians 5] 1 For freedom Christ has
set us free. Stand firm, therefore, and do not submit again to a yoke of
slavery.
[Galatians 5]
Practical applications and exhortations; Paul's case against
circumcision
2 Listen! I, Paul, am telling you that if you let yourselves be circumcised,
Christ will be of no benefit to you. 3 Once again I testify to every man
who lets himself be circumcised that he is obliged to obey the entire

396

GALATIANS 397

law. 4 You who want to be justified by the law have cut yourselves off
from Christ; you have fallen away from grace. 5 For through the Spirit,
by faith, we eagerly wait for the hope of righteousness. 6 For in Christ
Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision counts for anything; the
only thing that counts is faith working through love.
7 You were running well; who prevented you from obeying the truth?
8 Such persuasion does not come from the one who calls you. 9 A little
yeast leavens the whole batch of dough. 10 I am confident about you in
the Lord that you will not think otherwise. But whoever it is that is
confusing you will pay the penalty. 11 But my friends, why am I still
being persecuted if I am still preaching circumcision? In that case the
offense of the cross has been removed. 12 I wish those who unsettle
you would castrate themselves!
The behavior of those called in freedom to live by the Spirit; Christian
liberty
13 For you were called to freedom, brothers and sisters; only do not use
your freedom as an opportunity for self-indulgence, but through love
become slaves to one another. 14 For the whole law is summed up in a
single commandment, "You shall love your neighbor as yourself." 15 If,
however, you bite and devour one another, take care that you are not
consumed by one another.
16 Live by the Spirit, I say, and do not gratify the desires of the flesh. 17
For what the flesh desires is opposed to the Spirit, and what the Spirit
desires is opposed to the flesh; for these are opposed to each other, to
prevent you from doing what you want. 18 But if you are led by the
Spirit, you are not subject to the law. 19 Now the works of the flesh are
obvious: fornication, impurity, licentiousness, 20 idolatry, sorcery,
enmities, strife, jealousy, anger, quarrels, dissensions, factions, 21 envy,
drunkenness, carousing, and things like these. I am warning you, as I
warned you before: those who do such things will not inherit the
kingdom of God.

397

GALATIANS 398

22 By contrast, the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience,
kindness, generosity, faithfulness, 23 gentleness, and self-control. There
is no law against such things. 24 And those who belong to Christ Jesus
have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires. 25 If we live by
the Spirit, let us also be guided by the Spirit. 26 Let us not become
conceited, competing against one another, envying one another.
[Galatians 6]
Paul offers the Galatians several maxims by which to judge their
behavior
1 My friends, if anyone is detected in a transgression, you who have
received the Spirit should restore such a one in a spirit of gentleness.
Take care that you yourselves are not tempted. 2 Bear one another's
burdens, and in this way you will fulfill the law of Christ. 3 For if those
who are nothing think they are something, they deceive themselves. 4
All must test their own work; then that work, rather than their
neighbor's work, will become a cause for pride. 5 For all must carry
their own loads.
6 Those who are taught the word must share in all good things with
their teacher.
7 Do not be deceived; God is not mocked, for you reap whatever you
sow. 8 If you sow to your own flesh, you will reap corruption from the
flesh; but if you sow to the Spirit, you will reap eternal life from the
Spirit. 9 So let us not grow weary in doing what is right, for we will
reap at harvest time, if we do not give up. 10 So then, whenever we
have an opportunity, let us work for the good of all, and especially for
those of the family of faith.
Postscript
11 See what large letters I make when I am writing in my own hand! 12
It is those who want to make a good showing in the flesh that try to
compel you to be circumcised — only that they may not be persecuted
for the cross of Christ. 13 Even the circumcised do not themselves obey
the law, but they want you to be circumcised so that they may boast

398

GALATIANS 399

about your flesh. 14 May I never boast of anything except the cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ, by which the world has been crucified to me, and
I to the world. 15 For neither circumcision nor uncircumcision is
anything; but a new creation is everything! 16 As for those who will
follow this rule — peace be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel
of God.
17 From now on, let no one make trouble for me; for I carry the marks
of Jesus branded on my body.
18 May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brothers
and sisters. Amen.

399

EPHESIANS 400

EPHESIANS
Introduction
In powerful poetic language drawn from early Christian hymns and the
Jewish scriptures, the Letter to the Ephesians celebrates the author's
vision of the church. According to God's eternal plan for humanity,
Christ's death brought together both Jews and Gentiles into a new,
unified community: The Jewish law, which previously distinguished and
divided Jew from Gentile, was rendered irrelevant by the cross, and
Christ thus reconciled both groups to each other and to God (2.14-16).
According to Ephesians, human existence is beset by the malevolent
influence of demonic beings. Christ has been given power over them,
and through God's grace human beings may be freed from their
immoral and deceitful influences. The new life of believers is one of
knowledge and spiritual power, and thus there is the recurring contrast
of the old life with the new (2.1-6, 11-13, 19; 4.22-24; 5.8). Another
prominent theme is Paul's role as revealer of God's previously hidden
plan (3.1-12). The church must recognize both Christ as its Lord and
exemplar (4.12-16, 20-24; 5.1-2) and its own exalted status as a spiritfilled community that brings the power and presence of God to the
world (1.22-23; 2.22; 3.10, 19; 4.24). Conflict with demonic forces
continues (6.10-20), but the church looks forward to the complete
reestablishment of God's sovereignty over the creation (1.10) and the
perfection of the church as the body of Christ (4.12-16).
Ephesians begins with a salutation (1.1-2) and an introductory
thanksgiving prayer (1.15-23) and ends with an epilogue (6.21-24), but it
lacks many typical features of Paul's letters and is better classified as a
homily. The text divides into two sections: theological teaching (chs 1-3)
and ethical exhortation (chs 4-6). The first half focuses on the church as
a new community in which Jews and Gentiles equally share in God's
blessings. Tension between Jewish and Gentile believers persisted
through the first century, and it is unclear whether Ephesians is
400

EPHESIANS 401

intended to encourage Gentiles to recognize their position as full
partners more highly. The second half is an appeal for the church to
maintain that new unity and press on toward complete maturity by
rejecting former lifestyles and displaying Christian values of truth, love,
forgiveness, and sexual purity. Rather than advocating a complete
renewal of family relationships based on live, forgiveness, and mutual
submission, however, the author's christology is used to justify the
structure and duties of the ancient patriarchal family (5.22-6.9).
Some early manuscripts and early Christian writers make no reference
to Ephesus in 1.1 (instead reading, "To the saints who are also faithful
in Christ Jesus"), and Ephesians does not address problems specific to a
single congregation. Some scholars conclude that Ephesians was
originally a circular letter, distributed to a number of churches, perhaps
in Asia Minor. Others, noting the text's similarities to Colossians,
believe the original audience was the churches of Hierapolis and
Laodicea (see Col 4.13, 16). The significant contrasts between Ephesians
and the letters we can confidently ascribe to Paul raise questions about
the identity of the author of Ephesians. Many important terms in
Ephesians are not used by Paul elsewhere (e.g., heavenly places,
dividing wall, fellow citizen), and some of Paul's characteristic terms
and emphases either are given new meaning (e.g., mystery, church) or
are completely absent (e.g., the Jews, justify). In addition, the verbose
style of Ephesians, especially the use of complex, long sentences (many
of which have been divided in the NRSV), is not characteristic of Paul.
Theological differences, especially Ephesians' emphasis on believers'
present salvation (1.3-12; 2.4-10) and the use of household rules (5.226.9), are also evident (see the Introduction to Colossians). As a result of
the combine weight of these differences, many scholars hold that
Ephesians was written in the late first century by a Jewish-Christian
admirer of Paul who sought to apply Pauline thought to the situation
of the church in his own day. A minority of scholars hold the author to
be Paul, who was writing at the end of his career while imprisoned,
probably in Rome; different theological emphases are attributed to
developments in Paul's thinking and the particular situation addressed.
There are, nevertheless, many verbal parallels between Ephesians and
the Pauline letters, especially Colossians. If Paul was the author of both
Ephesians and Colossians, they were probably written at the same time;
HT

TH

401

EPHESIANS 402

if Ephesians was written by a later follower of Paul, he drew upon
Colossians' established authority and modeled his work on it.

[Ephesians 1]
Salutation
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God,
To the saints who are in Ephesus and are faithful in Christ Jesus:
2 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ.
Blessing of God for his blessings
3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
blessed us in Christ with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places,
4 just as he chose us in Christ before the foundation of the world to be
holy and blameless before him in love. 5 He destined us for adoption as
his children through Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of his
will, 6 to the praise of his glorious grace that he freely bestowed on us
in the Beloved. 7 In him we have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his grace 8 that
he lavished on us. With all wisdom and insight 9 he has made known to
us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure that he set
forth in Christ, 10 as a plan for the fullness of time, to gather up all
things in him, things in heaven and things on earth. 11 In Christ we
have also obtained an inheritance, having been destined according to
the purpose of him who accomplishes all things according to his
counsel and will, 12 so that we, who were the first to set our hope on
Christ, might live for the praise of his glory. 13 In him you also, when
you had heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation, and had
believed in him, were marked with the seal of the promised Holy Spirit;
14 this is the pledge of our inheritance toward redemption as God's
own people, to the praise of his glory.

402

EPHESIANS 403

Thanksgiving prayer for wisdom and power
15 I have heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus and your love toward all
the saints, and for this reason 16 I do not cease to give thanks for you
as I remember you in my prayers. 17 I pray that the God of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give you a spirit of wisdom and
revelation as you come to know him, 18 so that, with the eyes of your
heart enlightened, you may know what is the hope to which he has
called you, what are the riches of his glorious inheritance among the
saints, 19 and what is the immeasurable greatness of his power for us
who believe, according to the working of his great power. 20 God put
this power to work in Christ when he raised him from the dead and
seated him at his right hand in the heavenly places, 21 far above all rule
and authority and power and dominion, and above every name that is
named, not only in this age but also in the age to come. 22 And he has
put all things under his feet and has made him the head over all things
for the church, 23 which is his body, the fullness of him who fills all in
all.
[Ephesians 2]
The old life contrasted with the new life
1 You were dead through the trespasses and sins 2 in which you once
lived, following the course of this world, following the ruler of the
power of the air, the spirit that is now at work among those who are
disobedient. 3 All of us once lived among them in the passions of our
flesh, following the desires of flesh and senses, and we were by nature
children of wrath, like everyone else. 4 But God, who is rich in mercy,
out of the great love with which he loved us 5 even when we were
dead through our trespasses, made us alive together with Christ — by
grace you have been saved — 6 and raised us up with him and seated
us with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, 7 so that in the ages
to come he might show the immeasurable riches of his grace in
kindness toward us in Christ Jesus. 8 For by grace you have been saved
through faith, and this is not your own doing; it is the gift of God — 9
not the result of works, so that no one may boast. 10 For we are what
he has made us, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God
prepared beforehand to be our way of life.

403

EPHESIANS 404

The unity of Jews and Gentiles in the church
11 So then, remember that at one time you Gentiles by birth, called
"the uncircumcision" by those who are called "the circumcision" — a
physical circumcision made in the flesh by human hands — 12
remember that you were at that time without Christ, being aliens from
the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the covenants of
promise, having no hope and without God in the world. 13 But now in
Christ Jesus you who once were far off have been brought near by the
blood of Christ. 14 For he is our peace; in his flesh he has made both
groups into one and has broken down the dividing wall, that is, the
hostility between us. 15 He has abolished the law with its
commandments and ordinances, that he might create in himself one
new humanity in place of the two, thus making peace, 16 and might
reconcile both groups to God in one body through the cross, thus
putting to death that hostility through it. 17 So he came and
proclaimed peace to you who were far off and peace to those who
were near; 18 for through him both of us have access in one Spirit to
the Father. 19 So then you are no longer strangers and aliens, but you
are citizens with the saints and also members of the household of God,
20 built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, with Christ
Jesus himself as the cornerstone. 21 In him the whole structure is joined
together and grows into a holy temple in the Lord; 22 in whom you
also are built together spiritually into a dwelling place for God.
[Ephesians 3]
Paul reveals God's plan
1 This is the reason that I Paul am a prisoner for Christ Jesus for the
sake of you Gentiles — 2 for surely you have already heard of the
commission of God's grace that was given me for you, 3 and how the
mystery was made known to me by revelation, as I wrote above in a
few words, 4 a reading of which will enable you to perceive my
understanding of the mystery of Christ. 5 In former generations this
mystery was not made known to humankind, as it has now been
revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit: 6 that is, the
Gentiles have become fellow heirs, members of the same body, and
sharers in the promise in Christ Jesus through the gospel.

404

EPHESIANS 405

7 Of this gospel I have become a servant according to the gift of God's
grace that was given me by the working of his power. 8 Although I am
the very least of all the saints, this grace was given to me to bring to
the Gentiles the news of the boundless riches of Christ, 9 and to make
everyone see what is the plan of the mystery hidden for ages in God
who created all things; 10 so that through the church the wisdom of
God in its rich variety might now be made known to the rulers and
authorities in the heavenly places. 11 This was in accordance with the
eternal purpose that he has carried out in Christ Jesus our Lord, 12 in
whom we have access to God in boldness and confidence through faith
in him. 13 I pray therefore that you may not lose heart over my
sufferings for you; they are your glory.
Prayer for the church's maturity
14 For this reason I bow my knees before the Father, 15 from whom
every family in heaven and on earth takes its name. 16 I pray that,
according to the riches of his glory, he may grant that you may be
strengthened in your inner being with power through his Spirit, 17 and
that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith, as you are being
rooted and grounded in love. 18 I pray that you may have the power to
comprehend, with all the saints, what is the breadth and length and
height and depth, 19 and to know the love of Christ that surpasses
knowledge, so that you may be filled with all the fullness of God.
20 Now to him who by the power at work within us is able to
accomplish abundantly far more than all we can ask or imagine, 21 to
him be glory in the church and in Christ Jesus to all generations,
forever and ever. Amen.
[Ephesians 4]
Ethical implications; appeal for unity amid diversity
1 I therefore, the prisoner in the Lord, beg you to lead a life worthy of
the calling to which you have been called, 2 with all humility and
gentleness, with patience, bearing with one another in love, 3 making
every effort to maintain the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. 4
There is one body and one Spirit, just as you were called to the one

405

EPHESIANS 406

hope of your calling, 5 one Lord, one faith, one baptism, 6 one God
and Father of all, who is above all and through all and in all.
7 But each of us was given grace according to the measure of Christ's
gift. 8 Therefore it is said,
"When he ascended on high he made captivity itself a captive;
he gave gifts to his people."
9 (When it says, "He ascended," what does it mean but that he had
also descended into the lower parts of the earth? 10 He who descended
is the same one who ascended far above all the heavens, so that he
might fill all things.) 11 The gifts he gave were that some would be
apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, some pastors and teachers,
12 to equip the saints for the work of ministry, for building up the body
of Christ, 13 until all of us come to the unity of the faith and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, to maturity, to the measure of the full
stature of Christ. 14 We must no longer be children, tossed to and fro
and blown about by every wind of doctrine, by people's trickery, by
their craftiness in deceitful scheming. 15 But speaking the truth in love,
we must grow up in every way into him who is the head, into Christ, 16
from whom the whole body, joined and knit together by every
ligament with which it is equipped, as each part is working properly,
promotes the body's growth in building itself up in love.
Appeal for a changed lifestyle
17 Now this I affirm and insist on in the Lord: you must no longer live as
the Gentiles live, in the futility of their minds. 18 They are darkened in
their understanding, alienated from the life of God because of their
ignorance and hardness of heart. 19 They have lost all sensitivity and
have abandoned themselves to licentiousness, greedy to practice every
kind of impurity. 20 That is not the way you learned Christ! 21 For
surely you have heard about him and were taught in him, as truth is in
Jesus. 22 You were taught to put away your former way of life, your
old self, corrupt and deluded by its lusts, 23 and to be renewed in the
spirit of your minds, 24 and to clothe yourselves with the new self,
created according to the likeness of God in true righteousness and
holiness.

406

EPHESIANS 407

25 So then, putting away falsehood, let all of us speak the truth to our
neighbors, for we are members of one another. 26 Be angry but do not
sin; do not let the sun go down on your anger, 27 and do not make
room for the devil. 28 Thieves must give up stealing; rather let them
labor and work honestly with their own hands, so as to have
something to share with the needy. 29 Let no evil talk come out of
your mouths, but only what is useful for building up, as there is need,
so that your words may give grace to those who hear. 30 And do not
grieve the Holy Spirit of God, with which you were marked with a seal
for the day of redemption. 31 Put away from you all bitterness and
wrath and anger and wrangling and slander, together with all malice,
32 and be kind to one another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another,
as God in Christ has forgiven you. [Ephesians 5] 1 Therefore be
imitators of God, as beloved children, 2 and live in love, as Christ loved
us and gave himself up for us, a fragrant offering and sacrifice to God.
[Ephesians 5]
3 But fornication and impurity of any kind, or greed, must not even be
mentioned among you, as is proper among saints. 4 Entirely out of
place is obscene, silly, and vulgar talk; but instead, let there be
thanksgiving. 5 Be sure of this, that no fornicator or impure person, or
one who is greedy (that is, an idolater), has any inheritance in the
kingdom of Christ and of God.
6 Let no one deceive you with empty words, for because of these
things the wrath of God comes on those who are disobedient. 7
Therefore do not be associated with them. 8 For once you were
darkness, but now in the Lord you are light. Live as children of light —
9 for the fruit of the light is found in all that is good and right and
true. 10 Try to find out what is pleasing to the Lord. 11 Take no part in
the unfruitful works of darkness, but instead expose them. 12 For it is
shameful even to mention what such people do secretly; 13 but
everything exposed by the light becomes visible, 14 for everything that
becomes visible is light. Therefore it says,
"Sleeper, awake!
Rise from the dead,
and Christ will shine on you."

407

EPHESIANS 408

15 Be careful then how you live, not as unwise people but as wise, 16
making the most of the time, because the days are evil. 17 So do not be
foolish, but understand what the will of the Lord is. 18 Do not get
drunk with wine, for that is debauchery; but be filled with the Spirit, 19
as you sing psalms and hymns and spiritual songs among yourselves,
singing and making melody to the Lord in your hearts, 20 giving thanks
to God the Father at all times and for everything in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ.
21 Be subject to one another out of reverence for Christ.
Rules for household relationships
22 Wives, be subject to your husbands as you are to the Lord. 23 For the
husband is the head of the wife just as Christ is the head of the church,
the body of which he is the Savior. 24 Just as the church is subject to
Christ, so also wives ought to be, in everything, to their husbands.
25 Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ loved the church and gave
himself up for her, 26 in order to make her holy by cleansing her with
the washing of water by the word, 27 so as to present the church to
himself in splendor, without a spot or wrinkle or anything of the kind
— yes, so that she may be holy and without blemish. 28 In the same
way, husbands should love their wives as they do their own bodies. He
who loves his wife loves himself. 29 For no one ever hates his own
body, but he nourishes and tenderly cares for it, just as Christ does for
the church, 30 because we are members of his body. 31 "For this reason
a man will leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife, and
the two will become one flesh." 32 This is a great mystery, and I am
applying it to Christ and the church. 33 Each of you, however, should
love his wife as himself, and a wife should respect her husband.
[Ephesians 6]
1 Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right. 2 "Honor
your father and mother" — this is the first commandment with a
promise: 3 "so that it may be well with you and you may live long on
the earth."

408

EPHESIANS 409

4 And, fathers, do not provoke your children to anger, but bring them
up in the discipline and instruction of the Lord.
5 Slaves, obey your earthly masters with fear and trembling, in
singleness of heart, as you obey Christ; 6 not only while being watched,
and in order to please them, but as slaves of Christ, doing the will of
God from the heart. 7 Render service with enthusiasm, as to the Lord
and not to men and women, 8 knowing that whatever good we do, we
will receive the same again from the Lord, whether we are slaves or
free.
9 And, masters, do the same to them. Stop threatening them, for you
know that both of you have the same Master in heaven, and with him
there is no partiality.
Appeal for strength in spiritual battle
10 Finally, be strong in the Lord and in the strength of his power. 11 Put
on the whole armor of God, so that you may be able to stand against
the wiles of the devil. 12 For our struggle is not against enemies of
blood and flesh, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against
the cosmic powers of this present darkness, against the spiritual forces
of evil in the heavenly places. 13 Therefore take up the whole armor of
God, so that you may be able to withstand on that evil day, and having
done everything, to stand firm. 14 Stand therefore, and fasten the belt
of truth around your waist, and put on the breastplate of
righteousness. 15 As shoes for your feet put on whatever will make you
ready to proclaim the gospel of peace. 16 With all of these, take the
shield of faith, with which you will be able to quench all the flaming
arrows of the evil one. 17 Take the helmet of salvation, and the sword
of the Spirit, which is the word of God.
18 Pray in the Spirit at all times in every prayer and supplication. To
that end keep alert and always persevere in supplication for all the
saints. 19 Pray also for me, so that when I speak, a message may be
given to me to make known with boldness the mystery of the gospel,
20 for which I am an ambassador in chains. Pray that I may declare it
boldly, as I must speak.

409

EPHESIANS 410

Epilogue
21 So that you also may know how I am and what I am doing, Tychicus
will tell you everything. He is a dear brother and a faithful minister in
the Lord. 22 I am sending him to you for this very purpose, to let you
know how we are, and to encourage your hearts.
23 Peace be to the whole community, and love with faith, from God
the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 24 Grace be with all who have an
undying love for our Lord Jesus Christ.

410

PHILIPPIANS 411

PHILIPPIANS
Introduction
Philippi was a major city of Macedonia and a Roman colony on the Via
Egnatia, the Roman road linking Byzantium in the East to the western
coast of Macedonia, from which ships could easily reach Italy. The
Christian community in Philippi was the westernmost Pauline church at
the time of its founding (Acts 16.11-13). The mutual affection between
Paul and the Philippians is evident in the letter and stands in contrast
to the problems he had with some other churches.
Paul writes from prison and is uncertain of the outcome for himself
(1.12-26). The themes of opposition and the possibility of death are
therefore prominent. Yet in the midst of suffering and uncertainty, the
theme of joy emerges quite clearly and remarkably (1.4, 18, 25; 2.2, 1718, 28; 4.4, 10). The Philippians too are experiencing some kind of
opposition (1.29), but Paul's major concern is to bring them together
and thus to overcome the threat of internal disharmony. In keeping
with that purpose, he uses the powerful hymnic passage that
celebrates the self-emptying of Christ even to death, for which God
bestowed on him the name of "Lord," the "name above all names"
(2.6-11). The hymn was probably composed by a prior author and
known both to Paul and the Philippians, perhaps as part of a baptismal
liturgy. Here it is the prime example of why they should be willing also
to empty themselves of their own opinions. The example of Paul
himself follows and supports the argument (3.4-16). Paul offers both
Christ and himself as examples of courage and self-surrender in the
face of suffering and death. Thus he attempts to turn the Philippians
from partisan interest to unity.
Except that Paul was in prison and awaiting trail at the time of writing
(1.2-26), it is impossible to speak confidently of the time and place of
the writing of this letter. Because of references to the imperial guard
411

PHILIPPIANS 412

or praetorium (1.13) and to the emperor's household (4.22), and also
because the situation reflected in the letter bears some resemblance to
that described at the very end of the book of Acts, the traditional
setting has been during the period of Paul's imprisonment at Rome
(about 61-63 CE). The indications are by no means conclusive, however,
and more recently it has been thought that the place of composition is
perhaps Caesarea before Paul's arrival in Rome (Acts 24-26) or Ephesus
at an earlier stage in Paul's career, especially because of the several
goings and comings between Paul and Philippi implied in the letter
(2.19, 25-26; 4.10, 18) put against the great distance from Philippi to
Rome. The terms referring to the emperor's establishment were used
also for provincial government centers and the imperial civil service
outside Rome.
The immediate occasion of Paul's writing was the return to Philippi of
Epaphroditus (2.25-30), who had been sent by the Philippian church
with gifts for Paul (4.18), and who had been seriously ill while staying
with him. Paul took this opportunity to thank them for their gifts, and
to set their difficulties in a wider framework by describing his and their
situation in light of the reality of Christ.
The letter follows the usual pattern of Paul's letters, but some
seemingly abrupt changes of topic (especially between 3.1 and 2, and
4.3 and 4), in addition to the fact that an early Christian writer
(Polycarp, Philippians 2.3), speaks of "letters" of Paul to the Philippians,
has led some scholars to conclude that our present Philippians is
composed of as many as three letters that Paul wrote to Philippi. Many
others, however, find that Philippians is a coherent whole as it stands.
After the greeting (1.1-2) and thanksgiving (1.3-11), Paul lays out the
situation (1.12-26) and exhorts the community to unity (1.27-4.3) with
many arguments, including proposing Christ (2.5-11), Timothy and
Epaphroditus (2.19-30), and himself (3.4-14) as models of self-giving for
the good of the whole. He thanks them for their recent gift (4.10-20)
and concludes the letter (4.21-23).

412

PHILIPPIANS 413

[Philippians 1]
Salutation
1 Paul and Timothy, servants of Christ Jesus,
To all the saints in Christ Jesus who are in Philippi, with the bishops and
deacons:
2 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ.
Thanksgiving
3 I thank my God every time I remember you, 4 constantly praying with
joy in every one of my prayers for all of you, 5 because of your sharing
in the gospel from the first day until now. 6 I am confident of this, that
the one who began a good work among you will bring it to
completion by the day of Jesus Christ. 7 It is right for me to think this
way about all of you, because you hold me in your heart, for all of you
share in God's grace with me, both in my imprisonment and in the
defense and confirmation of the gospel. 8 For God is my witness, how I
long for all of you with the compassion of Christ Jesus. 9 And this is my
prayer, that your love may overflow more and more with knowledge
and full insight 10 to help you to determine what is best, so that in the
day of Christ you may be pure and blameless, 11 having produced the
harvest of righteousness that comes through Jesus Christ for the glory
and praise of God.
Paul's situation in chains
12 I want you to know, beloved, that what has happened to me has
actually helped to spread the gospel, 13 so that it has become known
throughout the whole imperial guard and to everyone else that my
imprisonment is for Christ; 14 and most of the brothers and sisters,
having been made confident in the Lord by my imprisonment, dare to
speak the word with greater boldness and without fear.

413

PHILIPPIANS 414

15 Some proclaim Christ from envy and rivalry, but others from
goodwill. 16 These proclaim Christ out of love, knowing that I have
been put here for the defense of the gospel; 17 the others proclaim
Christ out of selfish ambition, not sincerely but intending to increase
my suffering in my imprisonment. 18 What does it matter? Just this,
that Christ is proclaimed in every way, whether out of false motives or
true; and in that I rejoice.
Yes, and I will continue to rejoice, 19 for I know that through your
prayers and the help of the Spirit of Jesus Christ this will turn out for
my deliverance. 20 It is my eager expectation and hope that I will not
be put to shame in any way, but that by my speaking with all boldness,
Christ will be exalted now as always in my body, whether by life or by
death. 21 For to me, living is Christ and dying is gain. 22 If I am to live in
the flesh, that means fruitful labor for me; and I do not know which I
prefer. 23 I am hard pressed between the two: my desire is to depart
and be with Christ, for that is far better; 24 but to remain in the flesh is
more necessary for you. 25 Since I am convinced of this, I know that I
will remain and continue with all of you for your progress and joy in
faith, 26 so that I may share abundantly in your boasting in Christ Jesus
when I come to you again.
Appeal to unity, to be followed by examples
27 Only, live your life in a manner worthy of the gospel of Christ, so
that, whether I come and see you or am absent and hear about you, I
will know that you are standing firm in one spirit, striving side by side
with one mind for the faith of the gospel, 28 and are in no way
intimidated by your opponents. For them this is evidence of their
destruction, but of your salvation. And this is God's doing. 29 For he
has graciously granted you the privilege not only of believing in Christ,
but of suffering for him as well — 30 since you are having the same
struggle that you saw I had and now hear that I still have.

414

PHILIPPIANS 415

[Philippians 2]
First example: self-emptying of Christ
1 If then there is any encouragement in Christ, any consolation from
love, any sharing in the Spirit, any compassion and sympathy, 2 make
my joy complete: be of the same mind, having the same love, being in
full accord and of one mind. 3 Do nothing from selfish ambition or
conceit, but in humility regard others as better than yourselves. 4 Let
each of you look not to your own interests, but to the interests of
others. 5 Let the same mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus,
6 who, though he was in the form of God,
did not regard equality with God
as something to be exploited,
7 but emptied himself,
taking the form of a slave,
being born in human likeness.
And being found in human form,
8
he humbled himself
and became obedient to the point of death —
even death on a cross.
9 Therefore God also highly exalted him
and gave him the name
that is above every name,
10 so that at the name of Jesus
every knee should bend,
in heaven and on earth and under the earth,
11 and every tongue should confess
that Jesus Christ is Lord,
to the glory of God the Father.
12 Therefore, my beloved, just as you have always obeyed me, not only
in my presence, but much more now in my absence, work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling; 13 for it is God who is at work in
you, enabling you both to will and to work for his good pleasure.

415

PHILIPPIANS 416

14 Do all things without murmuring and arguing, 15 so that you may be
blameless and innocent, children of God without blemish in the midst
of a crooked and perverse generation, in which you shine like stars in
the world. 16 It is by your holding fast to the word of life that I can
boast on the day of Christ that I did not run in vain or labor in vain. 17
But even if I am being poured out as a libation over the sacrifice and
the offering of your faith, I am glad and rejoice with all of you — 18
and in the same way you also must be glad and rejoice with me.
Second example: Timothy and Epaphroditus
19 I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you soon, so that I may
be cheered by news of you. 20 I have no one like him who will be
genuinely concerned for your welfare. 21 All of them are seeking their
own interests, not those of Jesus Christ. 22 But Timothy's worth you
know, how like a son with a father he has served with me in the work
of the gospel. 23 I hope therefore to send him as soon as I see how
things go with me; 24 and I trust in the Lord that I will also come soon.
25 Still, I think it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus — my brother
and co-worker and fellow soldier, your messenger and minister to my
need; 26 for he has been longing for all of you, and has been distressed
because you heard that he was ill. 27 He was indeed so ill that he
nearly died. But God had mercy on him, and not only on him but on
me also, so that I would not have one sorrow after another. 28 I am the
more eager to send him, therefore, in order that you may rejoice at
seeing him again, and that I may be less anxious. 29 Welcome him then
in the Lord with all joy, and honor such people, 30 because he came
close to death for the work of Christ, risking his life to make up for
those services that you could not give me.
[Philippians 3]
1 Finally, my brothers and sisters, rejoice in the Lord.

416

PHILIPPIANS 417

A digression
To write the same things to you is not troublesome to me, and for you
it is a safeguard.
2 Beware of the dogs, beware of the evil workers, beware of those
who mutilate the flesh! 3 For it is we who are the circumcision, who
worship in the Spirit of God and boast in Christ Jesus and have no
confidence in the flesh — 4 even though I, too, have reason for
confidence in the flesh.
Third example: Paul himself
If anyone else has reason to be confident in the flesh, I have more: 5
circumcised on the eighth day, a member of the people of Israel, of the
tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew born of Hebrews; as to the law, a
Pharisee; 6 as to zeal, a persecutor of the church; as to righteousness
under the law, blameless.
7 Yet whatever gains I had, these I have come to regard as loss because
of Christ. 8 More than that, I regard everything as loss because of the
surpassing value of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord. For his sake I have
suffered the loss of all things, and I regard them as rubbish, in order
that I may gain Christ 9 and be found in him, not having a
righteousness of my own that comes from the law, but one that comes
through faith in Christ, the righteousness from God based on faith. 10 I
want to know Christ and the power of his resurrection and the sharing
of his sufferings by becoming like him in his death, 11 if somehow I may
attain the resurrection from the dead.
12 Not that I have already obtained this or have already reached the
goal; but I press on to make it my own, because Christ Jesus has made
me his own. 13 Beloved, I do not consider that I have made it my own;
but this one thing I do: forgetting what lies behind and straining
forward to what lies ahead, 14 I press on toward the goal for the prize
of the heavenly call of God in Christ Jesus. 15 Let those of us then who
are mature be of the same mind; and if you think differently about

417

PHILIPPIANS 418

anything, this too God will reveal to you. 16 Only let us hold fast to
what we have attained.
17 Brothers and sisters, join in imitating me, and observe those who live
according to the example you have in us. 18 For many live as enemies
of the cross of Christ; I have often told you of them, and now I tell you
even with tears. 19 Their end is destruction; their god is the belly; and
their glory is in their shame; their minds are set on earthly things. 20
But our citizenship is in heaven, and it is from there that we are
expecting a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. 21 He will transform the body
of our humiliation that it may be conformed to the body of his glory,
by the power that also enables him to make all things subject to
himself. [Philippians 4] 1 Therefore, my brothers and sisters, whom I
love and long for, my joy and crown, stand firm in the Lord in this way,
my beloved.
[Philippians 4]
Heart of the problem
2 I urge Euodia and I urge Syntyche to be of the same mind in the Lord.
3 Yes, and I ask you also, my loyal companion, help these women, for
they have struggled beside me in the work of the gospel, together
with Clement and the rest of my co-workers, whose names are in the
book of life.
4 Rejoice in the Lord always; again I will say, Rejoice. 5 Let your
gentleness be known to everyone. The Lord is near. 6 Do not worry
about anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication with
thanksgiving let your requests be made known to God. 7 And the
peace of God, which surpasses all understanding, will guard your
hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus.
8 Finally, beloved, whatever is true, whatever is honorable, whatever is
just, whatever is pure, whatever is pleasing, whatever is commendable,
if there is any excellence and if there is anything worthy of praise,
think about these things. 9 Keep on doing the things that you have
learned and received and heard and seen in me, and the God of peace
will be with you.

418

PHILIPPIANS 419

Acknowledgment of their gifts
10 I rejoice in the Lord greatly that now at last you have revived your
concern for me; indeed, you were concerned for me, but had no
opportunity to show it. 11 Not that I am referring to being in need; for I
have learned to be content with whatever I have. 12 I know what it is
to have little, and I know what it is to have plenty. In any and all
circumstances I have learned the secret of being well-fed and of going
hungry, of having plenty and of being in need. 13 I can do all things
through him who strengthens me. 14 In any case, it was kind of you to
share my distress.
15 You Philippians indeed know that in the early days of the gospel,
when I left Macedonia, no church shared with me in the matter of
giving and receiving, except you alone. 16 For even when I was in
Thessalonica, you sent me help for my needs more than once. 17 Not
that I seek the gift, but I seek the profit that accumulates to your
account. 18 I have been paid in full and have more than enough; I am
fully satisfied, now that I have received from Epaphroditus the gifts
you sent, a fragrant offering, a sacrifice acceptable and pleasing to
God. 19 And my God will fully satisfy every need of yours according to
his riches in glory in Christ Jesus. 20 To our God and Father be glory
forever and ever. Amen.
Conclusion
21 Greet every saint in Christ Jesus. The friends who are with me greet
you. 22 All the saints greet you, especially those of the emperor's
household.
23 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.:

419

COLOSSIANS 420

COLOSSIANS
Introduction
The church in Colossae, a town on the Lycus river in the Roman
province of Asia, was founded by a Colossian associate of Paul's named
Epaphras (1.7-8; 4.12-13). The letter begins with a highly complimentary
description of the Colossians' lives, but unnamed teachers, who observe
Jewish rituals and pursue mystical experiences through ascetic practices
(2.8-23), pose a threat to their faith. Unfortunately we possess no
independent description of these teachings, and the polemical tone of
this letter (for instance, "empty deceit, according to human tradition,"
2.8) makes their precise identification difficult. The practices advocated
are best understood as a form of Jewish apocalyptic mysticism,
although others have preferred to see a synthesis of Judaism with
proto-Gnostic thought, local Phrygian religious practices, or Hellenistic
philosophy. The fact that these Jewish practices, which did not focus on
Christ, were attractive to Christians reflects the continuing close
connection of the synagogue and the church, as well as a typical firstcentury Christian ambivalence toward Judaism: A Jewish eschatological
outlook and morality are central to the author's Christian vision,
although many Jewish practices are simultaneously rejected as
incompatible with Christ.
Colossians follows the basic structure of a Pauline letter, beginning
with a salutation (1.1-2) and an introductory thanksgiving (1.3-8) and
prayer (1.9-14), and ending with greetings and instructions (4.7-18). The
body of the letter includes both a theological argument (2.6-23) and
ethical instructions (3.1-4.6). The basis of the theological argument is
laid in 1.12-2.5. In the elevated words of an early Christian hymn, Christ
is praised as the supreme power over the cosmos and the church (1.1520). Although demonic forces enslaved humanity in the past, Christians
were freed from their influence, forgiven through Christ's death, and
made full citizens of the kingdom of Christ, to whom they now owe
420

COLOSSIANS 421

complete allegiance and obedience (1.12-14, 21-23). Also emphasized is
Christ's identity as the perfect revelation of God (1.19; 2.9-10) and as the
singular source of wisdom about how to live rightly (1.19; 2.9-10). The
main theological argument focuses on the significance of the cross and
the change in believers' destiny achieved by it (2.9-15); the recurring
contrasts of death and life (2.12-13, 20; 3.1-5), old and new (3.9-10), and
past and present (1.12-14, 21-23) emphasize the fundamental
psychological and moral reorientation demanded of the believer.
Because Jewish rituals and mystical experiences of angelic worship do
not foster allegiance to Christ and belong to the old order, they must
be rejected as distractions from Christ's lordship and as threats to the
church. The members of a true Christian community, rejecting their
previous immoral lifestyle (3.5-11) and reorienting their entire lives
around Christ as Lord (3.1-4), are to live in harmony with each other as
they worship and give thanks to God and Christ (3.12-17). The Christian
household, however, is only a mildly Christianized version of an ancient
patriarchal family (3.18-4.1) rather than a complete renewal of family
relationships based on the equality of all in the new community.
There are many similarities to the undisputed letters of Paul in the
structure, theology, and even language of Colossians. However,
Colossians lacks certain central Pauline terms, utilizes new theological
vocabulary, and is written in a significantly different, liturgical style.
Two theological contrasts stand out: first, the vision of believers'
present lives as nearly completely transformed by Christ's death and
resurrection, instead of Paul's usual tension between the only partly
fulfilled present and future resurrection and full enjoyment of Christ's
benefits; second, the use of household rules, which is more
characteristic of other post-Pauline literature (e.g., Ephesians and the
Pastoral letters of 1 and 2 Timothy and Titus) than of Paul's own ethical
instructions. The combined force of these differences has led some to
conclude that Colossians was written in Paul's name by one of his
disciples — either during Paul's own lifetime or a decade or two after
his death — in order to lend authority to this application of Paul's
thought to a new situation. Others, noting Colossians' close similarities
to Philemon, think the letter was written by Paul himself while
imprisoned (4.3, 10, 18) at Rome near the end of his life, and attribute
the contrasts to developments in Paul's thinking and the particular

421

COLOSSIANS 422

situation addressed in the letter. Colossians also has significant
similarities to Ephesians and was probably used as a model by the
author of that letter (see the Introduction to Ephesians).
HT

TH

[Colossians 1]
Salutation
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our
brother,
2 To the saints and faithful brothers and sisters in Christ in Colossae:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father.
Thanksgiving for Colossians' obedience
3 In our prayers for you we always thank God, the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 4 for we have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and of the
love that you have for all the saints, 5 because of the hope laid up for
you in heaven. You have heard of this hope before in the word of the
truth, the gospel 6 that has come to you. Just as it is bearing fruit and
growing in the whole world, so it has been bearing fruit among
yourselves from the day you heard it and truly comprehended the
grace of God. 7 This you learned from Epaphras, our beloved fellow
servant. He is a faithful minister of Christ on your behalf, 8 and he has
made known to us your love in the Spirit.
Prayer for Colossians' growth
9 For this reason, since the day we heard it, we have not ceased
praying for you and asking that you may be filled with the knowledge
of God's will in all spiritual wisdom and understanding, 10 so that you
may lead lives worthy of the Lord, fully pleasing to him, as you bear
fruit in every good work and as you grow in the knowledge of God. 11
May you be made strong with all the strength that comes from his

422

COLOSSIANS 423

glorious power, and may you be prepared to endure everything with
patience, while joyfully 12 giving thanks to the Father, who has
enabled you to share in the inheritance of the saints in the light. 13 He
has rescued us from the power of darkness and transferred us into the
kingdom of his beloved Son, 14 in whom we have redemption, the
forgiveness of sins.
The supremacy of Christ
15 He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation; 16
for in him all things in heaven and on earth were created, things visible
and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or powers — all
things have been created through him and for him. 17 He himself is
before all things, and in him all things hold together. 18 He is the head
of the body, the church; he is the beginning, the firstborn from the
dead, so that he might come to have first place in everything. 19 For in
him all the fullness of God was pleased to dwell, 20 and through him
God was pleased to reconcile to himself all things, whether on earth or
in heaven, by making peace through the blood of his cross.
Assurance and warning
21 And you who were once estranged and hostile in mind, doing evil
deeds, 22 he has now reconciled in his fleshly body through death, so
as to present you holy and blameless and irreproachable before him —
23 provided that you continue securely established and steadfast in the
faith, without shifting from the hope promised by the gospel that you
heard, which has been proclaimed to every creature under heaven. I,
Paul, became a servant of this gospel.
Paul's mission and pastoral commitment
24 I am now rejoicing in my sufferings for your sake, and in my flesh I
am completing what is lacking in Christ's afflictions for the sake of his
body, that is, the church. 25 I became its servant according to God's
commission that was given to me for you, to make the word of God
fully known, 26 the mystery that has been hidden throughout the ages
and generations but has now been revealed to his saints. 27 To them

423

COLOSSIANS 424

God chose to make known how great among the Gentiles are the
riches of the glory of this mystery, which is Christ in you, the hope of
glory. 28 It is he whom we proclaim, warning everyone and teaching
everyone in all wisdom, so that we may present everyone mature in
Christ. 29 For this I toil and struggle with all the energy that he
powerfully inspires within me.
[Colossians 2]
1 For I want you to know how much I am struggling for you, and for
those in Laodicea, and for all who have not seen me face to face. 2 I
want their hearts to be encouraged and united in love, so that they
may have all the riches of assured understanding and have the
knowledge of God's mystery, that is, Christ himself, 3 in whom are
hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. 4 I am saying this
so that no one may deceive you with plausible arguments. 5 For
though I am absent in body, yet I am with you in spirit, and I rejoice to
see your morale and the firmness of your faith in Christ.
Instruction in Christ and the cross
6 As you therefore have received Christ Jesus the Lord, continue to live
your lives in him, 7 rooted and built up in him and established in the
faith, just as you were taught, abounding in thanksgiving.
8 See to it that no one takes you captive through philosophy and
empty deceit, according to human tradition, according to the
elemental spirits of the universe, and not according to Christ. 9 For in
him the whole fullness of deity dwells bodily, 10 and you have come to
fullness in him, who is the head of every ruler and authority. 11 In him
also you were circumcised with a spiritual circumcision, by putting off
the body of the flesh in the circumcision of Christ; 12 when you were
buried with him in baptism, you were also raised with him through
faith in the power of God, who raised him from the dead. 13 And when
you were dead in trespasses and the uncircumcision of your flesh, God
made you alive together with him, when he forgave us all our
trespasses, 14 erasing the record that stood against us with its legal
demands. He set this aside, nailing it to the cross. 15 He disarmed the

424

COLOSSIANS 425

rulers and authorities and made a public example of them, triumphing
over them in it.
Warnings against destructive religious practices
16 Therefore do not let anyone condemn you in matters of food and
drink or of observing festivals, new moons, or sabbaths. 17 These are
only a shadow of what is to come, but the substance belongs to Christ.
18 Do not let anyone disqualify you, insisting on self-abasement and
worship of angels, dwelling on visions, puffed up without cause by a
human way of thinking, 19 and not holding fast to the head, from
whom the whole body, nourished and held together by its ligaments
and sinews, grows with a growth that is from God.
20 If with Christ you died to the elemental spirits of the universe, why
do you live as if you still belonged to the world? Why do you submit to
regulations, 21 "Do not handle, Do not taste, Do not touch"? 22 All
these regulations refer to things that perish with use; they are simply
human commands and teachings. 23 These have indeed an appearance
of wisdom in promoting self-imposed piety, humility, and severe
treatment of the body, but they are of no value in checking selfindulgence.
[Colossians 3]
Ethical implications; maintain a healthy perspective
1 So if you have been raised with Christ, seek the things that are above,
where Christ is, seated at the right hand of God. 2 Set your minds on
things that are above, not on things that are on earth, 3 for you have
died, and your life is hidden with Christ in God. 4 When Christ who is
your life is revealed, then you also will be revealed with him in glory.
Reject sins of previous life
5 Put to death, therefore, whatever in you is earthly: fornication,
impurity, passion, evil desire, and greed (which is idolatry). 6 On
account of these the wrath of God is coming on those who are
disobedient. 7 These are the ways you also once followed, when you

425

COLOSSIANS 426

were living that life. 8 But now you must get rid of all such things —
anger, wrath, malice, slander, and abusive language from your mouth.
9 Do not lie to one another, seeing that you have stripped off the old
self with its practices 10 and have clothed yourselves with the new self,
which is being renewed in knowledge according to the image of its
creator. 11 In that renewal there is no longer Greek and Jew,
circumcised and uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave and free; but
Christ is all and in all!
Adopt virtues of new life
12 As God's chosen ones, holy and beloved, clothe yourselves with
compassion, kindness, humility, meekness, and patience. 13 Bear with
one another and, if anyone has a complaint against another, forgive
each other; just as the Lord has forgiven you, so you also must forgive.
14 Above all, clothe yourselves with love, which binds everything
together in perfect harmony. 15 And let the peace of Christ rule in your
hearts, to which indeed you were called in the one body. And be
thankful. 16 Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly; teach and
admonish one another in all wisdom; and with gratitude in your hearts
sing psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs to God. 17 And whatever you
do, in word or deed, do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus,
giving thanks to God the Father through him.
Rules for household relationships
18 Wives, be subject to your husbands, as is fitting in the Lord. 19
Husbands, love your wives and never treat them harshly.
20 Children, obey your parents in everything, for this is your acceptable
duty in the Lord. 21 Fathers, do not provoke your children, or they may
lose heart. 22 Slaves, obey your earthly masters in everything, not only
while being watched and in order to please them, but wholeheartedly,
fearing the Lord. 23 Whatever your task, put yourselves into it, as done
for the Lord and not for your masters, 24 since you know that from the
Lord you will receive the inheritance as your reward; you serve the Lord
Christ. 25 For the wrongdoer will be paid back for whatever wrong has
been done, and there is no partiality. [Colossians 4] 1 Masters, treat

426

COLOSSIANS 427

your slaves justly and fairly, for you know that you also have a Master
in heaven.
[Colossians 4]
Final admonitions
2 Devote yourselves to prayer, keeping alert in it with thanksgiving. 3
At the same time pray for us as well that God will open to us a door for
the word, that we may declare the mystery of Christ, for which I am in
prison, 4 so that I may reveal it clearly, as I should.
5 Conduct yourselves wisely toward outsiders, making the most of the
time. 6 Let your speech always be gracious, seasoned with salt, so that
you may know how you ought to answer everyone.
Final greetings and instructions
7 Tychicus will tell you all the news about me; he is a beloved brother,
a faithful minister, and a fellow servant in the Lord. 8 I have sent him
to you for this very purpose, so that you may know how we are and
that he may encourage your hearts; 9 he is coming with Onesimus, the
faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you. They will tell you
about everything here.
10 Aristarchus my fellow prisoner greets you, as does Mark the cousin
of Barnabas, concerning whom you have received instructions — if he
comes to you, welcome him. 11 And Jesus who is called Justus greets
you. These are the only ones of the circumcision among my co-workers
for the kingdom of God, and they have been a comfort to me. 12
Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ Jesus, greets you. He is
always wrestling in his prayers on your behalf, so that you may stand
mature and fully assured in everything that God wills. 13 For I testify for
him that he has worked hard for you and for those in Laodicea and in
Hierapolis. 14 Luke, the beloved physician, and Demas greet you. 15
Give my greetings to the brothers and sisters in Laodicea, and to
Nympha and the church in her house. 16 And when this letter has been
read among you, have it read also in the church of the Laodiceans; and
see that you read also the letter from Laodicea. 17 And say to

427

COLOSSIANS 428

Archippus, "See that you complete the task that you have received in
the Lord."
18 I, Paul, write this greeting with my own hand. Remember my chains.
Grace be with you.

428

1 THESSALONIANS 429

1 THESSALONIANS
Introduction
First Thessalonians is a friendly, exhortative letter of encouragement.
Paul extends affectionate praise for the audience's steadfast hope (1.3)
and consistent behavior (4.1, 9). A stirring recounting of his separation
from the community (2.17-3.7) reveals the community's affection for
him. Allusions to family life such as "father" (1.1, 3; 2.11; 3.11, 13), "sons"
(1.10; 5.5), and "brothers" (14 instances) also convey a friendly tone.
Yet, the numerous imperatives in chs 4 and 5 convey an exhortative
tone as well. This tone also pervades the earlier chapters, for (as with
other ancient letters of exhortation) the letter highlights the imitation
of models (1.6; 2.14) and the remembrance of a teacher's previous
words or deed (2.1-12; 3.4). With the friendly and exhortative tones,
moreover, the letter encourages a community that is facing social
pressures and perhaps outright persecution to maintain its apocalyptic
vigilance.
Thessalonica, the capital of the Roman province of Macedonia, was
strategically located on both sea and land routes. First Thessalonians,
addressed to the congregation there, is Paul's earliest letter. After
being mistreated at Philippi (2.2; Acts 16.19-40), Paul went to
Thessalonica where he established this congregation. After a painful
separation (2.17) and the failure of repeated efforts to return (2.18),
Paul dispatched Timothy to Thessalonica from Athens (3.1) while he
later moved on to Corinth (Acts 18.1-17). From there, perhaps around 50
CE, he wrote this letter.
Commencing with a typical though simple Pauline opening (1.1) and
ending with a typical Pauline closing (5.23-28), the letter offers
repeated encouragement toward steadfastness. A thanksgiving
acknowledges the congregation's growth, the gospel's power, and
429

1 THESSALONIANS 430

Paul's persistence in prayer (1.2-5). Next, Paul recalls the community's
consistency in the reception, proclamation, and early work of the
gospel despite ongoing opposition (1.6-2.16). Although 2.14-16 seems
anti-Jewish and thus not characteristic of Paul, there is no evidence for
a later addition here. Readers should remember that the polemics are
directed toward Jewish persecutors of the Judean churches, not all
Jews. Such polemics, moreover, resonate with other "intra-Jewish"
debates of Paul's day (see, for instance, Josephus Antiquities, 1.15.91;
Philo Cherubim, 17). Then, when he recounts the deep anguish of
separation (2.17-3.13), Paul notes Timothy's mediation of comfort and
his own prayer for a reunion with the congregation. A description of
the sanctified life follows along with commendations toward
apocalyptic vigilance despite the deaths of loved ones and the
temptations of false forms of security (4.1-5.22).

[1 Thessalonians 1]
Salutation
1 Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy,
To the church of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord
Jesus Christ:
Grace to you and peace.
Thanksgiving; the gospel's effectiveness
2 We always give thanks to God for all of you and mention you in our
prayers, constantly 3 remembering before our God and Father your
work of faith and labor of love and steadfastness of hope in our Lord
Jesus Christ. 4 For we know, brothers and sisters beloved by God, that
he has chosen you, 5 because our message of the gospel came to you
not in word only, but also in power and in the Holy Spirit and with full
conviction; just as you know what kind of persons we proved to be
among you for your sake. 6 And you became imitators of us and of the
Lord, for in spite of persecution you received the word with joy
inspired by the Holy Spirit, 7 so that you became an example to all the

430

1 THESSALONIANS 431

believers in Macedonia and in Achaia. 8 For the word of the Lord has
sounded forth from you not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but in
every place your faith in God has become known, so that we have no
need to speak about it. 9 For the people of those regions report about
us what kind of welcome we had among you, and how you turned to
God from idols, to serve a living and true God, 10 and to wait for his
Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead — Jesus, who rescues
us from the wrath that is coming.
[1 Thessalonians 2]
1 You yourselves know, brothers and sisters, that our coming to you
was not in vain, 2 but though we had already suffered and been
shamefully mistreated at Philippi, as you know, we had courage in our
God to declare to you the gospel of God in spite of great opposition. 3
For our appeal does not spring from deceit or impure motives or
trickery, 4 but just as we have been approved by God to be entrusted
with the message of the gospel, even so we speak, not to please
mortals, but to please God who tests our hearts. 5 As you know and as
God is our witness, we never came with words of flattery or with a
pretext for greed; 6 nor did we seek praise from mortals, whether from
you or from others, 7 though we might have made demands as
apostles of Christ. But we were gentle among you, like a nurse tenderly
caring for her own children. 8 So deeply do we care for you that we
are determined to share with you not only the gospel of God but also
our own selves, because you have become very dear to us.
9 You remember our labor and toil, brothers and sisters; we worked
night and day, so that we might not burden any of you while we
proclaimed to you the gospel of God. 10 You are witnesses, and God
also, how pure, upright, and blameless our conduct was toward you
believers. 11 As you know, we dealt with each one of you like a father
with his children, 12 urging and encouraging you and pleading that
you lead a life worthy of God, who calls you into his own kingdom and
glory.

431

1 THESSALONIANS 432

13 We also constantly give thanks to God for this, that when you
received the word of God that you heard from us, you accepted it not
as a human word but as what it really is, God's word, which is also at
work in you believers. 14 For you, brothers and sisters, became
imitators of the churches of God in Christ Jesus that are in Judea, for
you suffered the same things from your own compatriots as they did
from the Jews, 15 who killed both the Lord Jesus and the prophets, and
drove us out; they displease God and oppose everyone 16 by hindering
us from speaking to the Gentiles so that they may be saved. Thus they
have constantly been filling up the measure of their sins; but God's
wrath has overtaken them at last.
Separation and reunion
17 As for us, brothers and sisters, when, for a short time, we were made
orphans by being separated from you — in person, not in heart — we
longed with great eagerness to see you face to face. 18 For we wanted
to come to you — certainly I, Paul, wanted to again and again — but
Satan blocked our way. 19 For what is our hope or joy or crown of
boasting before our Lord Jesus at his coming? Is it not you? 20 Yes, you
are our glory and joy!
[1 Thessalonians 3]
1 Therefore when we could bear it no longer, we decided to be left
alone in Athens; 2 and we sent Timothy, our brother and co-worker for
God in proclaiming the gospel of Christ, to strengthen and encourage
you for the sake of your faith, 3 so that no one would be shaken by
these persecutions. Indeed, you yourselves know that this is what we
are destined for. 4 In fact, when we were with you, we told you
beforehand that we were to suffer persecution; so it turned out, as you
know. 5 For this reason, when I could bear it no longer, I sent to find
out about your faith; I was afraid that somehow the tempter had
tempted you and that our labor had been in vain.
6 But Timothy has just now come to us from you, and has brought us
the good news of your faith and love. He has told us also that you
always remember us kindly and long to see us — just as we long to see

432

1 THESSALONIANS 433

you. 7 For this reason, brothers and sisters, during all our distress and
persecution we have been encouraged about you through your faith. 8
For we now live, if you continue to stand firm in the Lord. 9 How can
we thank God enough for you in return for all the joy that we feel
before our God because of you? 10 Night and day we pray most
earnestly that we may see you face to face and restore whatever is
lacking in your faith.
11 Now may our God and Father himself and our Lord Jesus direct our
way to you. 12 And may the Lord make you increase and abound in
love for one another and for all, just as we abound in love for you. 13
And may he so strengthen your hearts in holiness that you may be
blameless before our God and Father at the coming of our Lord Jesus
with all his saints.
[1 Thessalonians 4]
Exhortation to maintain apocalyptic vigilance
1 Finally, brothers and sisters, we ask and urge you in the Lord Jesus
that, as you learned from us how you ought to live and to please God
(as, in fact, you are doing), you should do so more and more. 2 For you
know what instructions we gave you through the Lord Jesus. 3 For this
is the will of God, your sanctification: that you abstain from
fornication; 4 that each one of you know how to control your own
body in holiness and honor, 5 not with lustful passion, like the Gentiles
who do not know God; 6 that no one wrong or exploit a brother or
sister in this matter, because the Lord is an avenger in all these things,
just as we have already told you beforehand and solemnly warned you.
7 For God did not call us to impurity but in holiness. 8 Therefore
whoever rejects this rejects not human authority but God, who also
gives his Holy Spirit to you.
9 Now concerning love of the brothers and sisters, you do not need to
have anyone write to you, for you yourselves have been taught by God
to love one another; 10 and indeed you do love all the brothers and
sisters throughout Macedonia. But we urge you, beloved, to do so
more and more, 11 to aspire to live quietly, to mind your own affairs,

433

1 THESSALONIANS 434

and to work with your hands, as we directed you, 12 so that you may
behave properly toward outsiders and be dependent on no one.
13 But we do not want you to be uninformed, brothers and sisters,
about those who have died, so that you may not grieve as others do
who have no hope. 14 For since we believe that Jesus died and rose
again, even so, through Jesus, God will bring with him those who have
died. 15 For this we declare to you by the word of the Lord, that we
who are alive, who are left until the coming of the Lord, will by no
means precede those who have died. 16 For the Lord himself, with a cry
of command, with the archangel's call and with the sound of God's
trumpet, will descend from heaven, and the dead in Christ will rise
first. 17 Then we who are alive, who are left, will be caught up in the
clouds together with them to meet the Lord in the air; and so we will
be with the Lord forever. 18 Therefore encourage one another with
these words.
[1 Thessalonians 5]
1 Now concerning the times and the seasons, brothers and sisters, you
do not need to have anything written to you. 2 For you yourselves
know very well that the day of the Lord will come like a thief in the
night. 3 When they say, "There is peace and security," then sudden
destruction will come upon them, as labor pains come upon a pregnant
woman, and there will be no escape! 4 But you, beloved, are not in
darkness, for that day to surprise you like a thief; 5 for you are all
children of light and children of the day; we are not of the night or of
darkness. 6 So then let us not fall asleep as others do, but let us keep
awake and be sober; 7 for those who sleep sleep at night, and those
who are drunk get drunk at night. 8 But since we belong to the day,
let us be sober, and put on the breastplate of faith and love, and for a
helmet the hope of salvation. 9 For God has destined us not for wrath
but for obtaining salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ, 10 who died
for us, so that whether we are awake or asleep we may live with him.
11 Therefore encourage one another and build up each other, as
indeed you are doing.

434

1 THESSALONIANS 435

12 But we appeal to you, brothers and sisters, to respect those who
labor among you, and have charge of you in the Lord and admonish
you; 13 esteem them very highly in love because of their work. Be at
peace among yourselves. 14 And we urge you, beloved, to admonish
the idlers, encourage the fainthearted, help the weak, be patient with
all of them. 15 See that none of you repays evil for evil, but always seek
to do good to one another and to all. 16 Rejoice always, 17 pray
without ceasing, 18 give thanks in all circumstances; for this is the will
of God in Christ Jesus for you. 19 Do not quench the Spirit. 20 Do not
despise the words of prophets, 21 but test everything; hold fast to what
is good; 22 abstain from every form of evil.
Epistolary closing
23 May the God of peace himself sanctify you entirely; and may your
spirit and soul and body be kept sound and blameless at the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ. 24 The one who calls you is faithful, and he will
do this.
25 Beloved, pray for us.
26 Greet all the brothers and sisters with a holy kiss. 27 I solemnly
command you by the Lord that this letter be read to all of them.
28 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.

435

2 THESSALONIANS 436

2 THESSALONIANS
Introduction
Like 1 Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians is an exhortative letter of
encouragement. As with other ancient letters of exhortation, this one
accentuates imitation (3.7a, 9) and remembrance of a teacher's words
and deeds (2.5; 3.7b-10). Also, imperatives recur in chs 2 and 3,
especially in the latter's disciplinary notices (3.6-15). Although the letter
lacks the personal tone of 1 Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians also
encourages a community beset with opposition. Several forms of
encouragement are evident: reports of the congregation's progress
(1.3-4; 2.13); intercessory prayers (1.11-12; 2.16-17; 3.5, 16); and apocalyptic
narratives about the opposition's termination (1.5-10; 2.3-12).
The curiosity of several verbal and structural similarities between 1 and
2 Thessalonians — for example, simple letter openings (1 Thess 1.1; 2
Thess 1.2), repeated words of thanks (1 Thess 1.2; 2.13; 3.9; 2 Thess 1.3,
2.13), and repeated intercessory prayers (1 Thess 3.11; 2 Thess 2.16) —
lead scholars to different conclusions about the authorship of 2
Thessalonians. One deduction from the similarities is that Paul wrote 2
Thessalonians shortly after writing 1 Thessalonians, in the early 50s.
Another deduction, however, is that 2 Thessalonians is a conscious
imitation of 1 Thessalonians written much later by someone else.
Uncertainty remains, but a key argument against Paul's authorship is
the letter's assumption of forgeries (or non-genuine letters, 2.1-2).
Forgeries did not like circulate while an author was alive (for their
authorship could easily be disproved). As well, the letter's insistence
that it contains a distinctive "mark" found in "every letter" (3.17) from
Paul presupposes a time (probably in the late first century) when a
body of Paul's letters had been collected.

436

2 THESSALONIANS 437

First Thessalonians assumes, moreover, that Christ's appearance will be
a surprise; we cannot know the time (1 Thess 5.1-11). In the opposite
direction, 2 Thessalonians infers that at least we can know that the day
of the Lord will not come at once; a dire struggle with evil must take
place first, and even this is to be delayed for some time. The specifics of
this apocalyptic story — the "rebellion" and the "lawless one" (2.3-4,
8), and "the mystery of lawlessness" (2.7), as well as "what is now
restraining [the lawless one]" (2.6) and "the one who restrains it" (2.7),
— are references that may have been clear to the letter's recipients
(2.6), but are not clear to us. The letter's emphasis on a delayed
struggle prepared the church for a period of continued life in this
world.
A typical, though simple, epistolary opening (1.1-2) begins the letter,
and a typical epistolary ending (3.16-18) closes it. The rest offers
encouragement through prayer forms, apocalyptic narratives, and
exhortations (1.3-3.15). An initial thanksgiving prayer with praise for the
congregation's steadfastness despite affliction (1.3-4) closes with an
apocalyptic narrative that promises relief for beleaguered believers and
reprisal for the opposition (1.5-10). Then, a brief intercessory prayer
(1.11-12) acknowledges God's power in bringing the congregation's
election to fruition. Two sets of exhortations follow: one (2.1-17) to
refute apocalyptic enthusiasm and suggest instead an indefinite
interim before the cataclysmic end of time; and a second (3.1-15) to
steer the congregation toward practical pursuits during the interim.
Both sets of admonitions, moreover, include prayer forms: a
thanksgiving (2.13-14) to remind the congregation of its election and
need for sanctification; a prayer request (3.1, 2) for deliverance from
evil persons; and an intercessory prayer 3.3) for God's aid in securing
the congregation's steadfastness.

437

2 THESSALONIANS 438

[2 Thessalonians 1]
Salutation
1 Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy,
To the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord
Jesus Christ:
2 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ.
A thanksgiving prayer with apocalyptic expectations
3 We must always give thanks to God for you, brothers and sisters, as is
right, because your faith is growing abundantly, and the love of
everyone of you for one another is increasing. 4 Therefore we
ourselves boast of you among the churches of God for your
steadfastness and faith during all your persecutions and the afflictions
that you are enduring.
God's election
5 This is evidence of the righteous judgment of God, and is intended to
make you worthy of the kingdom of God, for which you are also
suffering. 6 For it is indeed just of God to repay with affliction those
who afflict you, 7 and to give relief to the afflicted as well as to us,
when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven with his mighty angels 8
in flaming fire, inflicting vengeance on those who do not know God
and on those who do not obey the gospel of our Lord Jesus. 9 These
will suffer the punishment of eternal destruction, separated from the
presence of the Lord and from the glory of his might, 10 when he
comes to be glorified by his saints and to be marveled at on that day
among all who have believed, because our testimony to you was
believed. 11 To this end we always pray for you, asking that our God
will make you worthy of his call and will fulfill by his power every good
resolve and work of faith, 12 so that the name of our Lord Jesus may be
glorified in you, and you in him, according to the grace of our God and
the Lord Jesus Christ.

438

2 THESSALONIANS 439

[2 Thessalonians 2]
Correction of apocalyptic enthusiasm
1 As to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered
together to him, we beg you, brothers and sisters, 2 not to be quickly
shaken in mind or alarmed, either by spirit or by word or by letter, as
though from us, to the effect that the day of the Lord is already here. 3
Let no one deceive you in any way; for that day will not come unless
the rebellion comes first and the lawless one is revealed, the one
destined for destruction. 4 He opposes and exalts himself above every
so-called god or object of worship, so that he takes his seat in the
temple of God, declaring himself to be God. 5 Do you not remember
that I told you these things when I was still with you? 6 And you know
what is now restraining him, so that he may be revealed when his time
comes. 7 For the mystery of lawlessness is already at work, but only
until the one who now restrains it is removed. 8 And then the lawless
one will be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus will destroy with the breath
of his mouth, annihilating him by the manifestation of his coming. 9
The coming of the lawless one is apparent in the working of Satan,
who uses all power, signs, lying wonders, 10 and every kind of wicked
deception for those who are perishing, because they refused to love
the truth and so be saved. 11 For this reason God sends them a
powerful delusion, leading them to believe what is false, 12 so that all
who have not believed the truth but took pleasure in unrighteousness
will be condemned.
13 But we must always give thanks to God for you, brothers and sisters
beloved by the Lord, because God chose you as the first fruits for
salvation through sanctification by the Spirit and through belief in the
truth. 14 For this purpose he called you through our proclamation of
the good news, so that you may obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus
Christ. 15 So then, brothers and sisters, stand firm and hold fast to the
traditions that you were taught by us, either by word of mouth or by
our letter.

439

2 THESSALONIANS 440

16 Now may our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father, who
loved us and through grace gave us eternal comfort and good hope, 17
comfort your hearts and strengthen them in every good work and
word.
[2 Thessalonians 3]
Correction for dissident behavior
1 Finally, brothers and sisters, pray for us, so that the word of the Lord
may spread rapidly and be glorified everywhere, just as it is among
you, 2 and that we may be rescued from wicked and evil people; for
not all have faith. 3 But the Lord is faithful; he will strengthen you and
guard you from the evil one. 4 And we have confidence in the Lord
concerning you, that you are doing and will go on doing the things
that we command. 5 May the Lord direct your hearts to the love of
God and to the steadfastness of Christ.
6 Now we command you, beloved, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to keep away from believers who are living in idleness and not
according to the tradition that they received from us. 7 For you
yourselves know how you ought to imitate us; we were not idle when
we were with you, 8 and we did not eat anyone's bread without
paying for it; but with toil and labor we worked night and day, so that
we might not burden any of you. 9 This was not because we do not
have that right, but in order to give you an example to imitate. 10 For
even when we were with you, we gave you this command: Anyone
unwilling to work should not eat. 11 For we hear that some of you are
living in idleness, mere busybodies, not doing any work. 12 Now such
persons we command and exhort in the Lord Jesus Christ to do their
work quietly and to earn their own living. 13 Brothers and sisters, do
not be weary in doing what is right.
14 Take note of those who do not obey what we say in this letter; have
nothing to do with them, so that they may be ashamed. 15 Do not
regard them as enemies, but warn them as believers.

440

2 THESSALONIANS 441

Epistolary closing
16 Now may the Lord of peace himself give you peace at all times in all
ways. The Lord be with all of you.
17 I, Paul, write this greeting with my own hand. This is the mark in
every letter of mine; it is the way I write. 18 The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with all of you.

441

INTRO TO THE PASTORAL EPISTLES 442

INTRODUCTION TO THE
PASTORAL EPISTLES
The term "Pastoral epistles" has been applied, since the eighteenth
century, to the three letters from Paul to his two coworkers and
envoys, Timothy and Titus. The name reflects the central concern in
these three epistles for the internal life, governance, and behavior of
Christian churches, as well as the individuals who comprise them.
Scholars have long debated whether these letters were written by the
apostle Paul himself, or by a loyal disciple who who sought to provide
Pauline answers for new times and places. While most scholars today
regard them as pseudepigraphical (that is, ascribed to the authority of
a major figure, but not actually written by him, a custom well attested
both in ancient Jewish literature and in Greco-Roman philosophical
and other texts), there is not complete unanimity on the question. The
conclusion that these three epistles were not written by Paul is based
upon literary, historical, and theological criteria. First and Second
Timothy and Titus share a common Greek vocabulary and style which
diverges in many ways from the rest of the Pauline epistles. Historically,
the Pastoral epistles presume a situation marked by increasing
institutionalization of the church and by heretical opposition, which
perhaps better fits a period well after the death of Paul, at the
beginning of the second century CE. And theologically these letters
minimize or lack characteristic Pauline themes (such as justification by
faith, or the church as the body of Christ) in favor of a new emphasis
on adherence to tradition and regulation as signs of the Christian piety
they seek to inculcate in their readers.
Recent challenges to the pseudepigraphical nature of all three letters
have come from those who argue that each should be judged
separately, that the letters contain fragments of original Pauline
material, or that the very concept of "authorship" of a Pauline letter
requires nuance, given that Paul used secretaries and served as a

442

INTRO TO THE PASTORAL EPISTLES 443

member of a cooperative missionary team. Neither is there scholarly
unanimity about which other letters are certainly authentic, nor which
parts of those are most tellingly "Pauline" for comparison with these
epistles. Each reader should consider the evidence about the
authorship of the Pastorals cumulatively, first as a question of historical
fact — did Paul write them or not? Then, and separately, one should
reflect on the hermeneutical and theological implications of such a
decision, for the denial of Pauline authorship may or may not entail a
loss of authoritative status for that document within a particular
religious community.
Regardless of authorship, the Pastoral epistles share the same
rhetorical strategy: Each is addressed to a single individual among
Paul's coworkers, but also has in mind a wider circle of readers. In each
the author presents himself as a Paul who speaks as an unambiguously
authoritative figure of the past to church leaders and members of later
generations who have not known him personally.

Copyright ©2001, New Oxford Annotated Bible with the Apocrypha: New Revised Standard
Version. Ed. Michael D. Coogan. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001. Used by
permission. All rights reserved.

443

1 TIMOTHY 444

1 TIMOTHY
Introduction
This letter from Paul to his "loyal child" Timothy (1.2) presents Paul as a
wise and sure teacher who hands on to his student his deposit of
tradition, his "sound teaching," so that his legacy will be handed down
with fidelity to the next generation. The text presents a vision of
household ethics that brings together instructions on Christian
"godliness" (or "piety") for the individual, with a church order of
regulations and qualifications for various roles in the church,
designated "the household of God" (3.15). This advice is set in a dual
context formed by the positively remembered relationship between
Paul and Timothy, and, negatively, by the frequent allusions to
purveyors of alternate teachings in or near Timothy's church in
Ephesus. (For further information on Timothy, see the Introduction to 2
Timothy.)
HT

TH

The structure of this epistle is somewhat discursive, alternating sections
containing contrast between true and false teaching with instruction
for church order and governance. At times Timothy is directly
addressed, but more often he recedes into the background, and the
author speaks to a more universal audience. As ethical instruction
(parenesis), 1 Timothy is cast in characteristic forms of Greco-Roman
moral exhortation: letters between friends about progress in the
ethical life, lists of virtues and vices, and contrasts between illustrious
examples and notorious counterexamples. Likewise, the content is in
many ways similar to contemporaneous moralizing literature: the
emphasis on decorum and decency, on the hierarchical, orderly
disposition of the patriarchal household, on reliable speech, and
against accumulation of wealth. But the letter's theological universe,
which is punctuated by shorthand terminology and quotations from
established, is distinctly Christian.

444

1 TIMOTHY 445

Although the author names two of his Christian opponents (1.20),
exactly what they taught, and why, is only hazily sketched here, in
vituperative terms (they have "deviated" from the truth [1.6]; they
have "suffered shipwreck" [1.19]). Though no complete historical
reconstruction is possible from these verbal assaults, it seems that these
opponents have some connection with the fellow Christians whom this
author opposes with those who told and treasured the traditions
found in the later apocryphal Acts of Paul and Thecla, which valorizes
and authorizes women's ministries which, in their asceticism and
renunciation of marriage, also claimed Paul as their champion.
The structure of 1 Timothy weaves between contrasting threads that
are picked up, dropped, and then picked up again. After an epistolary
prescript (1.1-2) the author launches (without the customary
thanksgiving) into the body of the letter, which is roughly arranged
with alternating sections of contrast between true and false teachers
(1.3-2.15; 4.1-5.2; 6.2b-21a) and instructions for church order and
governance, understood as the means for living in the church of God
(3.1-16; 5.3-6.2a). The letter concludes with summary exhortations to
Timothy to guard this tradition with which he has been entrusted (6.1121). As with all Pauline letters a final benediction (6.21) seals the letter,
perhaps in preparation for liturgical appropriation.

[1 Timothy 1]
Epistolary prescript: sender, addresses, and salutation
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the command of God our Savior
and of Christ Jesus our hope,
2 To Timothy, my loyal child in the faith:
Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our
Lord.

445

1 TIMOTHY 446

The contrast of true and false teaching (part one); opening warning
against false teachers
3 I urge you, as I did when I was on my way to Macedonia, to remain in
Ephesus so that you may instruct certain people not to teach any
different doctrine, 4 and not to occupy themselves with myths and
endless genealogies that promote speculations rather than the divine
training that is known by faith. 5 But the aim of such instruction is love
that comes from a pure heart, a good conscience, and sincere faith. 6
Some people have deviated from these and turned to meaningless talk,
7 desiring to be teachers of the law, without understanding either
what they are saying or the things about which they make assertions.
8 Now we know that the law is good, if one uses it legitimately. 9 This
means understanding that the law is laid down not for the innocent
but for the lawless and disobedient, for the godless and sinful, for the
unholy and profane, for those who kill their father or mother, for
murderers, 10 fornicators, sodomites, slave traders, liars, perjurers, and
whatever else is contrary to the sound teaching 11 that conforms to the
glorious gospel of the blessed God, which he entrusted to me.
Contrasting portraits of faithfulness and faithlessness
12 I am grateful to Christ Jesus our Lord, who has strengthened me,
because he judged me faithful and appointed me to his service, 13 even
though I was formerly a blasphemer, a persecutor, and a man of
violence. But I received mercy because I had acted ignorantly in
unbelief, 14 and the grace of our Lord overflowed for me with the faith
and love that are in Christ Jesus. 15 The saying is sure and worthy of full
acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners — of
whom I am the foremost. 16 But for that very reason I received mercy,
so that in me, as the foremost, Jesus Christ might display the utmost
patience, making me an example to those who would come to believe
in him for eternal life. 17 To the King of the ages, immortal, invisible,
the only God, be honor and glory forever and ever. Amen.

446

1 TIMOTHY 447

18 I am giving you these instructions, Timothy, my child, in accordance
with the prophecies made earlier about you, so that by following them
you may fight the good fight, 19 having faith and a good conscience.
By rejecting conscience, certain persons have suffered shipwreck in the
faith; 20 among them are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I have
turned over to Satan, so that they may learn not to blaspheme.
[1 Timothy 2]
Instruction on prayer
1 First of all, then, I urge that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and
thanksgivings be made for everyone, 2 for kings and all who are in
high positions, so that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and dignity. 3 This is right and is acceptable in the sight of
God our Savior, 4 who desires everyone to be saved and to come to the
knowledge of the truth. 5 For
there is one God;
there is also one mediator between God and humankind,
Christ Jesus, himself human,
6
who gave himself a ransom for all
— this was attested at the right time. 7 For this I was appointed a
herald and an apostle (I am telling the truth, I am not lying), a teacher
of the Gentiles in faith and truth.
The proper demeanor of faithful women
8 I desire, then, that in every place the men should pray, lifting up holy
hands without anger or argument; 9 also that the women should dress
themselves modestly and decently in suitable clothing, not with their
hair braided, or with gold, pearls, or expensive clothes, 10 but with
good works, as is proper for women who profess reverence for God. 11
Let a woman learn in silence with full submission. 12 I permit no
woman to teach or to have authority over a man; she is to keep silent.
13 For Adam was formed first, then Eve; 14 and Adam was not
deceived, but the woman was deceived and became a transgressor. 15
Yet she will be saved through childbearing, provided they continue in
faith and love and holiness, with modesty.

447

1 TIMOTHY 448

[1 Timothy 3]
Living in the church of God (part one)
1 The saying is sure: whoever aspires to the office of bishop desires a
noble task. 2 Now a bishop must be above reproach, married only once,
temperate, sensible, respectable, hospitable, an apt teacher, 3 not a
drunkard, not violent but gentle, not quarrelsome, and not a lover of
money. 4 He must manage his own household well, keeping his
children submissive and respectful in every way — 5 for if someone
does not know how to manage his own household, how can he take
care of God's church? 6 He must not be a recent convert, or he may be
puffed up with conceit and fall into the condemnation of the devil. 7
Moreover, he must be well thought of by outsiders, so that he may not
fall into disgrace and the snare of the devil.
8 Deacons likewise must be serious, not double-tongued, not indulging
in much wine, not greedy for money; 9 they must hold fast to the
mystery of the faith with a clear conscience. 10 And let them first be
tested; then, if they prove themselves blameless, let them serve as
deacons. 11 Women likewise must be serious, not slanderers, but
temperate, faithful in all things. 12 Let deacons be married only once,
and let them manage their children and their households well; 13 for
those who serve well as deacons gain a good standing for themselves
and great boldness in the faith that is in Christ Jesus.
14 I hope to come to you soon, but I am writing these instructions to
you so that, 15 if I am delayed, you may know how one ought to
behave in the household of God, which is the church of the living God,
the pillar and bulwark of the truth. 16 Without any doubt, the mystery
of our religion is great:
He was revealed in flesh,
vindicated in spirit,
seen by angels,
proclaimed among Gentiles,
believed in throughout the world,
taken up in glory.

448

1 TIMOTHY 449

[1 Timothy 4]
The contrast of true and false teaching (part two)
1 Now the Spirit expressly says that in later times some will renounce
the faith by paying attention to deceitful spirits and teachings of
demons, 2 through the hypocrisy of liars whose consciences are seared
with a hot iron. 3 They forbid marriage and demand abstinence from
foods, which God created to be received with thanksgiving by those
who believe and know the truth. 4 For everything created by God is
good, and nothing is to be rejected, provided it is received with
thanksgiving; 5 for it is sanctified by God's word and by prayer.
6 If you put these instructions before the brothers and sisters, you will
be a good servant of Christ Jesus, nourished on the words of the faith
and of the sound teaching that you have followed. 7 Have nothing to
do with profane myths and old wives' tales. Train yourself in godliness,
8 for, while physical training is of some value, godliness is valuable in
every way, holding promise for both the present life and the life to
come. 9 The saying is sure and worthy of full acceptance. 10 For to this
end we toil and struggle, because we have our hope set on the living
God, who is the Savior of all people, especially of those who believe.
11 These are the things you must insist on and teach. 12 Let no one
despise your youth, but set the believers an example in speech and
conduct, in love, in faith, in purity. 13 Until I arrive, give attention to
the public reading of scripture, to exhorting, to teaching. 14 Do not
neglect the gift that is in you, which was given to you through
prophecy with the laying on of hands by the council of elders. 15 Put
these things into practice, devote yourself to them, so that all may see
your progress. 16 Pay close attention to yourself and to your teaching;
continue in these things, for in doing this you will save both yourself
and your hearers.

449

1 TIMOTHY 450

[1 Timothy 5]
Living in the church of God (part two)
1 Do not speak harshly to an older man, but speak to him as to a
father, to younger men as brothers, 2 to older women as mothers, to
younger women as sisters — with absolute purity.
3 Honor widows who are really widows. 4 If a widow has children or
grandchildren, they should first learn their religious duty to their own
family and make some repayment to their parents; for this is pleasing
in God's sight. 5 The real widow, left alone, has set her hope on God
and continues in supplications and prayers night and day; 6 but the
widow who lives for pleasure is dead even while she lives. 7 Give these
commands as well, so that they may be above reproach. 8 And
whoever does not provide for relatives, and especially for family
members, has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever.
9 Let a widow be put on the list if she is not less than sixty years old
and has been married only once; 10 she must be well attested for her
good works, as one who has brought up children, shown hospitality,
washed the saints' feet, helped the afflicted, and devoted herself to
doing good in every way. 11 But refuse to put younger widows on the
list; for when their sensual desires alienate them from Christ, they want
to marry, 12 and so they incur condemnation for having violated their
first pledge. 13 Besides that, they learn to be idle, gadding about from
house to house; and they are not merely idle, but also gossips and
busybodies, saying what they should not say. 14 So I would have
younger widows marry, bear children, and manage their households,
so as to give the adversary no occasion to revile us. 15 For some have
already turned away to follow Satan. 16 If any believing woman has
relatives who are really widows, let her assist them; let the church not
be burdened, so that it can assist those who are real widows.
17 Let the elders who rule well be considered worthy of double honor,
especially those who labor in preaching and teaching; 18 for the
scripture says, "You shall not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the
grain," and, "The laborer deserves to be paid." 19 Never accept any
accusation against an elder except on the evidence of two or three

450

1 TIMOTHY 451

witnesses. 20 As for those who persist in sin, rebuke them in the
presence of all, so that the rest also may stand in fear. 21 In the
presence of God and of Christ Jesus and of the elect angels, I warn you
to keep these instructions without prejudice, doing nothing on the
basis of partiality. 22 Do not ordain anyone hastily, and do not
participate in the sins of others; keep yourself pure.
23 No longer drink only water, but take a little wine for the sake of
your stomach and your frequent ailments.
24 The sins of some people are conspicuous and precede them to
judgment, while the sins of others follow them there. 25 So also good
works are conspicuous; and even when they are not, they cannot
remain hidden.
[1 Timothy 6]
1 Let all who are under the yoke of slavery regard their masters as
worthy of all honor, so that the name of God and the teaching may
not be blasphemed. 2 Those who have believing masters must not be
disrespectful to them on the ground that they are members of the
church; rather they must serve them all the more, since those who
benefit by their service are believers and beloved.
The contrast of true and false teaching (part three)
Teach and urge these duties. 3 Whoever teaches otherwise and does
not agree with the sound words of our Lord Jesus Christ and the
teaching that is in accordance with godliness, 4 is conceited,
understanding nothing, and has a morbid craving for controversy and
for disputes about words. From these come envy, dissension, slander,
base suspicions, 5 and wrangling among those who are depraved in
mind and bereft of the truth, imagining that godliness is a means of
gain. 6 Of course, there is great gain in godliness combined with
contentment; 7 for we brought nothing into the world, so that we can
take nothing out of it; 8 but if we have food and clothing, we will be
content with these. 9 But those who want to be rich fall into
temptation and are trapped by many senseless and harmful desires

451

1 TIMOTHY 452

that plunge people into ruin and destruction. 10 For the love of money
is a root of all kinds of evil, and in their eagerness to be rich some have
wandered away from the faith and pierced themselves with many
pains.
11 But as for you, man of God, shun all this; pursue righteousness,
godliness, faith, love, endurance, gentleness. 12 Fight the good fight of
the faith; take hold of the eternal life, to which you were called and
for which you made the good confession in the presence of many
witnesses. 13 In the presence of God, who gives life to all things, and of
Christ Jesus, who in his testimony before Pontius Pilate made the good
confession, I charge you 14 to keep the commandment without spot or
blame until the manifestation of our Lord Jesus Christ, 15 which he will
bring about at the right time — he who is the blessed and only
Sovereign, the King of kings and Lord of lords. 16 It is he alone who has
immortality and dwells in unapproachable light, whom no one has ever
seen or can see; to him be honor and eternal dominion. Amen.
17 As for those who in the present age are rich, command them not to
be haughty, or to set their hopes on the uncertainty of riches, but
rather on God who richly provides us with everything for our
enjoyment. 18 They are to do good, to be rich in good works,
generous, and ready to share, 19 thus storing up for themselves the
treasure of a good foundation for the future, so that they may take
hold of the life that really is life.
Timothy the guardian of the true teaching
20 Timothy, guard what has been entrusted to you. Avoid the profane
chatter and contradictions of what is falsely called knowledge; 21 by
professing it some have missed the mark as regards the faith.
Concluding benediction
Grace be with you.

452

2 TIMOTHY 453

2 TIMOTHY
Introduction
The second epistle addressed to Paul's "beloved child" Timothy, despite
its similarities in address and diction, has a more personal tone than
the first. (See the Introduction to The Pastoral Epistles.) Less concerned
with general church order and roles, here Paul is portrayed as near
death, in testamentary fashion handing on to his spiritual heir,
Timothy, the wisdom and truth he has accumulated through a life of
mission, ministry and, above all, suffering for the gospel. The letter is
set within a carefully scripted historical circumstance marked by Paul's
imminent death and Timothy's bereavement, at a time of distortions to
the sound doctrine or "healthy teaching" received from the apostle.
HT

TH

Timothy is known from Paul's letters as one of his most loyal disciples
(Phil 2.19-22), who acts as a delegate to churches (1 Cor 4.17; 16.10) and
co-sender of six of the Pauline epistles (2 Cor 1.1; Phil 1.1; Col 1.1; 1 Thess
1.1; 2 Thess 1.1; Philem 1), as well as being the recipient of two.
According to Acts 16, Timothy's mother was Jewish and his father
Greek, which is why Paul circumcised him in the face of probably
Jewish persecution (Acts 16.3, an event not corroborated by the
epistles). This letter sketches Timothy's life only in broad strokes, from
his early immersion in the scriptures (3.15) and matrilineal Christian
pedigree (1.5), to his authorization for ministry by the laying on of
Paul's hands (1.6), and his present ecclesiastical challenges. More
prominent in the letter, however, is the detailed and passionate
portrait of Paul, imprisoned for the gospel in Rome (1.8, 16-17; 2.9), and
forsaken by even his close friends (1.15; 4.10, 16), yet empowered by his
Lord not only to endure suffering and death, but to celebrate them as
the fitting culmination of his life of ministry and service (4.6-8, 17-18).

453

2 TIMOTHY 454

The theme of 2 Timothy is announced in 1.8: that Timothy and all who
follow him should not be ashamed of the gospel or its representative,
Paul, but should stand in fidelity to them, even to the point of
suffering similarly. The structure of the letter reflects Timothy's
alternatives, between Paul the prototypical example of faith, and the
seductive, dangerous power of deceitful opposition. The letter
implores Timothy to adhere to Paul's example of suffering for the
gospel (1.12; 2.9-10; 3.11; 4.6-7, 16-18), which he is called upon to imitate
(2.3; 4.5), as are all believers (2.11-12).
Second Timothy follows a regular epistolary structure with prescript
(1.1-2), thanksgiving (1.3-7), and body (1.8-4.18). Timothy is urged to
suffer for the gospel through contemplating the positive example of
Paul (1.8-14) and the negative one afforded by those who deserted Paul
in time of need (1.15-18). The exhortation to Timothy to be strong and
teach others rightly (2.1-13) is contrasted with false teachers who must
be contended with (2.14-26), for, as expected at the end time, signs of
their appearance are already here (3.1-9). But Timothy is to follow in
Paul's footsteps (3.10-4.5). These exhortations build up to the depiction
of Paul's death-bed reflections on his life and its imminent conclusion
(4.6-8). But the letter ends on a more hopeful note as the imprisoned
apostle exults in his divine deliverance (both past and future) and
issues spirited directives for the ministry, including a future visit from
Timothy (4.8-18).

[2 Timothy 1]
Salutation, following the typical form of a Pauline letter
1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, for the sake of the
promise of life that is in Christ Jesus,
2 To Timothy, my beloved child:
Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.

454

2 TIMOTHY 455

Thanksgiving for Timothy's faith
3 I am grateful to God — whom I worship with a clear conscience, as
my ancestors did — when I remember you constantly in my prayers
night and day. 4 Recalling your tears, I long to see you so that I may be
filled with joy. 5 I am reminded of your sincere faith, a faith that lived
first in your grandmother Lois and your mother Eunice and now, I am
sure, lives in you. 6 For this reason I remind you to rekindle the gift of
God that is within you through the laying on of my hands; 7 for God
did not give us a spirit of cowardice, but rather a spirit of power and of
love and of self-discipline.
Theme: co-suffering, rather than shame, for the gospel and its apostle
8 Do not be ashamed, then, of the testimony about our Lord or of me
his prisoner, but join with me in suffering for the gospel, relying on the
power of God, 9 who saved us and called us with a holy calling, not
according to our works but according to his own purpose and grace.
This grace was given to us in Christ Jesus before the ages began, 10 but
it has now been revealed through the appearing of our Savior Christ
Jesus, who abolished death and brought life and immortality to light
through the gospel. 11 For this gospel I was appointed a herald and an
apostle and a teacher, 12 and for this reason I suffer as I do. But I am
not ashamed, for I know the one in whom I have put my trust, and I am
sure that he is able to guard until that day what I have entrusted to
him. 13 Hold to the standard of sound teaching that you have heard
from me, in the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus. 14 Guard the
good treasure entrusted to you, with the help of the Holy Spirit living
in us.
Examples, worthy and unworthy
15 You are aware that all who are in Asia have turned away from me,
including Phygelus and Hermogenes. 16 May the Lord grant mercy to
the household of Onesiphorus, because he often refreshed me and was
not ashamed of my chain; 17 when he arrived in Rome, he eagerly
searched for me and found me 18 — may the Lord grant that he will

455

2 TIMOTHY 456

find mercy from the Lord on that day! And you know very well how
much service he rendered in Ephesus.
[2 Timothy 2]
Timothy's charge to suffer for the gospel
1 You then, my child, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus; 2 and
what you have heard from me through many witnesses entrust to
faithful people who will be able to teach others as well. 3 Share in
suffering like a good soldier of Christ Jesus. 4 No one serving in the
army gets entangled in everyday affairs; the soldier's aim is to please
the enlisting officer. 5 And in the case of an athlete, no one is crowned
without competing according to the rules. 6 It is the farmer who does
the work who ought to have the first share of the crops. 7 Think over
what I say, for the Lord will give you understanding in all things.
8 Remember Jesus Christ, raised from the dead, a descendant of David
— that is my gospel, 9 for which I suffer hardship, even to the point of
being chained like a criminal. But the word of God is not chained. 10
Therefore I endure everything for the sake of the elect, so that they
may also obtain the salvation that is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory.
11 The saying is sure:
If we have died with him, we will also live with him;
12 if we endure, we will also reign with him;
if we deny him, he will also deny us;
13 if we are faithless, he remains faithful —
for he cannot deny himself.
Strategies for proper combat with false teachers
14 Remind them of this, and warn them before God that they are to
avoid wrangling over words, which does no good but only ruins those
who are listening. 15 Do your best to present yourself to God as one
approved by him, a worker who has no need to be ashamed, rightly
explaining the word of truth. 16 Avoid profane chatter, for it will lead
people into more and more impiety, 17 and their talk will spread like
gangrene. Among them are Hymenaeus and Philetus, 18 who have
swerved from the truth by claiming that the resurrection has already

456

2 TIMOTHY 457

taken place. They are upsetting the faith of some. 19 But God's firm
foundation stands, bearing this inscription: "The Lord knows those
who are his," and, "Let everyone who calls on the name of the Lord
turn away from wickedness."
20 In a large house there are utensils not only of gold and silver but
also of wood and clay, some for special use, some for ordinary. 21 All
who cleanse themselves of the things I have mentioned will become
special utensils, dedicated and useful to the owner of the house, ready
for every good work. 22 Shun youthful passions and pursue
righteousness, faith, love, and peace, along with those who call on the
Lord from a pure heart. 23 Have nothing to do with stupid and
senseless controversies; you know that they breed quarrels. 24 And the
LORD's servant must not be quarrelsome but kindly to everyone, an apt
teacher, patient, 25 correcting opponents with gentleness. God may
perhaps grant that they will repent and come to know the truth, 26
and that they may escape from the snare of the devil, having been held
captive by him to do his will.
[2 Timothy 3]
End-time now: a close-up picture of the opposition
1 You must understand this, that in the last days distressing times will
come. 2 For people will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money,
boasters, arrogant, abusive, disobedient to their parents, ungrateful,
unholy, 3 inhuman, implacable, slanderers, profligates, brutes, haters
of good, 4 treacherous, reckless, swollen with conceit, lovers of
pleasure rather than lovers of God, 5 holding to the outward form of
godliness but denying its power. Avoid them! 6 For among them are
those who make their way into households and captivate silly women,
overwhelmed by their sins and swayed by all kinds of desires, 7 who are
always being instructed and can never arrive at a knowledge of the
truth. 8 As Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so these people, of
corrupt mind and counterfeit faith, also oppose the truth. 9 But they
will not make much progress, because, as in the case of those two men,
their folly will become plain to everyone.

457

2 TIMOTHY 458

Timothy's charge to steadfastness in his ministry
10 Now you have observed my teaching, my conduct, my aim in life, my
faith, my patience, my love, my steadfastness, 11 my persecutions, and
my suffering the things that happened to me in Antioch, Iconium, and
Lystra. What persecutions I endured! Yet the Lord rescued me from all
of them. 12 Indeed, all who want to live a godly life in Christ Jesus will
be persecuted. 13 But wicked people and impostors will go from bad to
worse, deceiving others and being deceived. 14 But as for you, continue
in what you have learned and firmly believed, knowing from whom
you learned it, 15 and how from childhood you have known the sacred
writings that are able to instruct you for salvation through faith in
Christ Jesus. 16 All scripture is inspired by God and is useful for
teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in righteousness,
17 so that everyone who belongs to God may be proficient, equipped
for every good work.
[2 Timothy 4]
1 In the presence of God and of Christ Jesus, who is to judge the living
and the dead, and in view of his appearing and his kingdom, I solemnly
urge you: 2 proclaim the message; be persistent whether the time is
favorable or unfavorable; convince, rebuke, and encourage, with the
utmost patience in teaching. 3 For the time is coming when people will
not put up with sound doctrine, but having itching ears, they will
accumulate for themselves teachers to suit their own desires, 4 and will
turn away from listening to the truth and wander away to myths. 5 As
for you, always be sober, endure suffering, do the work of an
evangelist, carry out your ministry fully.
Paul's reflections on his impending death; an update from prison
6 As for me, I am already being poured out as a libation, and the time
of my departure has come. 7 I have fought the good fight, I have
finished the race, I have kept the faith. 8 From now on there is
reserved for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the
righteous judge, will give me on that day, and not only to me but also
to all who have longed for his appearing.

458

2 TIMOTHY 459

9 Do your best to come to me soon, 10 for Demas, in love with this
present world, has deserted me and gone to Thessalonica; Crescens has
gone to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia. 11 Only Luke is with me. Get Mark
and bring him with you, for he is useful in my ministry. 12 I have sent
Tychicus to Ephesus. 13 When you come, bring the cloak that I left with
Carpus at Troas, also the books, and above all the parchments. 14
Alexander the coppersmith did me great harm; the Lord will pay him
back for his deeds. 15 You also must beware of him, for he strongly
opposed our message.
16 At my first defense no one came to my support, but all deserted me.
May it not be counted against them! 17 But the Lord stood by me and
gave me strength, so that through me the message might be fully
proclaimed and all the Gentiles might hear it. So I was rescued from
the lion's mouth. 18 The Lord will rescue me from every evil attack and
save me for his heavenly kingdom. To him be the glory forever and
ever. Amen.
Epistolary greetings
19 Greet Prisca and Aquila, and the household of Onesiphorus. 20
Erastus remained in Corinth; Trophimus I left ill in Miletus. 21 Do your
best to come before winter. Eubulus sends greetings to you, as do
Pudens and Linus and Claudia and all the brothers and sisters.
Concluding benediction
22 The Lord be with your spirit. Grace be with you.

459

TITUS 460

TITUS
Introduction
This epistle directed to Paul's envoy and coworker, Titus, bears many
similarities to 1 Timothy. It is cast as a reminder and incitement to Titus
to complete the things which remain to be done in his mission on Crete
(1.5). Acts and the other Pauline letters make no mention of an
apostolic mission to this, the largest of the Aegean islands, and home
to a large Jewish community. Those who argue that the letter is
genuine contend that such a mission could have taken place after
Paul's imprisonment at Rome recounted in Acts 28, while those who
regard it as pseudepigraphical (see the Introduction to The Pastoral
Epistles for the terms of the debate) think the author has chose Crete
simply as a locale representing quintessential disobedience (1.12), or
because of a later tradition associating Titus with the island.
HT

TH

Although he is never mentioned in Acts, we are well informed about
Titus from Paul's letters. According to Gal 2.3 he was a Gentile who
accompanied Paul on his famous conference with the Jerusalem
apostles, where he served as a kind of test case for the noncircumcision
of Gentile converts. In the pastoral ministry to Corinth Titus played a
crucial role, first as a key administrator of the collection for the saints
in Jerusalem (2 Cor 8.6, 16-17, 23; 12.18), and later as Paul's diplomatic
envoy who successfully brokered a reconciliation between the apostle
and the church, which had harbored doubts about Paul's legitimacy
and financial reliability (2 Cor 2.13; 7.6-7, 13-16).
Paul delegates two tasks to Titus in this letter, under the heading of
"putting things in order" (1.5): exhorting the faithful in sound teaching
(1.9, 13; 2.1-2, 8), and refuting the opposition (2.2, 15; cf. 1.9). The
mainstay of sound teaching, as the author defines it, is strict
maintenance of a patriarchal church order and the proper submission it
demands (2.5, 9; 3.1; contrast the characterization of the opponents as
460

TITUS 461

"insubordinate" or "rebellious" in 1.6, 10). This logic of the "household
code" as applied to the Christian house church reflects the wider
cultural context of the Greco-Roman world in the Imperial period and
is characteristic of the Pastoral epistles. The second task, the refutation
of opponents (fellow Christians of Jewish background who adhere to
the requirements of the laws of Moses, the Torah, such as dietary laws),
is addressed by the author mostly in a negative fashion, through sharp
invective and ridicule (1.10-16; 2.8; 3.9-11) rather than theological
debate, which the author appears to eye largely with suspicion (1.13-14;
3.9-11).
Though short, this epistle is theologically dense, requiring readers to
pause and reconstruct the underlying gospel narrative and theological
concepts, which the author often invokes by terse shorthand. Passages
such as 1.1-3; 2.11-14; 3.4-7 allow for instructive comparison with other
tight Pauline formulations (such as Gal 4.1-11; Rom 3.21-26; 2 Tim 1.9-10),
so the theology constructed here can be appreciated both for its
distinctiveness and for its continuity with earlier traditions.
The epistle to Titus is framed as a commissioning letter for Paul's envoy
to Crete. After the usual epistolary prescript (1.1-4, which is expanded
with a theological creed), the body of the letter focuses on Titus's dual
commission to correct things on Crete and appoint elders (1.5-16). The
basis for his work follows in sections devoted to the submission
expected of various roles in the church (2.1-10), the theological basis for
pious living (2.11-15), and a final section bringing the two themes — of
submission and good works — together (3.1-11). The epistle concludes
with a discussion of travel plans (3.12-13), a final exhortation to good
works (3.14), epistolary greetings (3.15a), and a benediction (3.15b).
[Titus 1]
Salutation
1 Paul, a servant of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ, for the sake of
the faith of God's elect and the knowledge of the truth that is in
accordance with godliness, 2 in the hope of eternal life that God, who
never lies, promised before the ages began — 3 in due time he

461

TITUS 462

revealed his word through the proclamation with which I have been
entrusted by the command of God our Savior,
4 To Titus, my loyal child in the faith we share:
Grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Savior.
Titus's commission in Crete
5 I left you behind in Crete for this reason, so that you should put in
order what remained to be done, and should appoint elders in every
town, as I directed you: 6 someone who is blameless, married only
once, whose children are believers, not accused of debauchery and not
rebellious. 7 For a bishop, as God's steward, must be blameless; he must
not be arrogant or quick-tempered or addicted to wine or violent or
greedy for gain; 8 but he must be hospitable, a lover of goodness,
prudent, upright, devout, and self-controlled. 9 He must have a firm
grasp of the word that is trustworthy in accordance with the teaching,
so that he may be able both to preach with sound doctrine and to
refute those who contradict it.
10 There are also many rebellious people, idle talkers and deceivers,
especially those of the circumcision; 11 they must be silenced, since they
are upsetting whole families by teaching for sordid gain what it is not
right to teach. 12 It was one of them, their very own prophet, who said,
"Cretans are always liars, vicious brutes, lazy gluttons."
13 That testimony is true. For this reason rebuke them sharply, so that
they may become sound in the faith, 14 not paying attention to Jewish
myths or to commandments of those who reject the truth. 15 To the
pure all things are pure, but to the corrupt and unbelieving nothing is
pure. Their very minds and consciences are corrupted. 16 They profess
to know God, but they deny him by their actions. They are detestable,
disobedient, unfit for any good work.

462

TITUS 463

[Titus 2]
The proclamation of sound teaching in submission
1 But as for you, teach what is consistent with sound doctrine. 2 Tell the
older men to be temperate, serious, prudent, and sound in faith, in
love, and in endurance.
3 Likewise, tell the older women to be reverent in behavior, not to be
slanderers or slaves to drink; they are to teach what is good, 4 so that
they may encourage the young women to love their husbands, to love
their children, 5 to be self-controlled, chaste, good managers of the
household, kind, being submissive to their husbands, so that the word
of God may not be discredited.
6 Likewise, urge the younger men to be self-controlled. 7 Show
yourself in all respects a model of good works, and in your teaching
show integrity, gravity, 8 and sound speech that cannot be censured;
then any opponent will be put to shame, having nothing evil to say of
us.
9 Tell slaves to be submissive to their masters and to give satisfaction in
every respect; they are not to talk back, 10 not to pilfer, but to show
complete and perfect fidelity, so that in everything they may be an
ornament to the doctrine of God our Savior.
The theological basis for present pious living
11 For the grace of God has appeared, bringing salvation to all, 12
training us to renounce impiety and worldly passions, and in the
present age to live lives that are self-controlled, upright, and godly, 13
while we wait for the blessed hope and the manifestation of the glory
of our great God and Savior, Jesus Christ. 14 He it is who gave himself
for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity and purify for himself
a people of his own who are zealous for good deeds.
15 Declare these things; exhort and reprove with all authority. Let no
one look down on you.

463

TITUS 464

[Titus 3]
Submission and good works are the marks of the saved
1 Remind them to be subject to rulers and authorities, to be obedient,
to be ready for every good work, 2 to speak evil of no one, to avoid
quarreling, to be gentle, and to show every courtesy to everyone. 3 For
we ourselves were once foolish, disobedient, led astray, slaves to
various passions and pleasures, passing our days in malice and envy,
despicable, hating one another. 4 But when the goodness and loving
kindness of God our Savior appeared, 5 he saved us, not because of any
works of righteousness that we had done, but according to his mercy,
through the water of rebirth and renewal by the Holy Spirit. 6 This
Spirit he poured out on us richly through Jesus Christ our Savior, 7 so
that, having been justified by his grace, we might become heirs
according to the hope of eternal life. 8 The saying is sure.
I desire that you insist on these things, so that those who have come to
believe in God may be careful to devote themselves to good works;
these things are excellent and profitable to everyone. 9 But avoid
stupid controversies, genealogies, dissensions, and quarrels about the
law, for they are unprofitable and worthless. 10 After a first and
second admonition, have nothing more to do with anyone who causes
divisions, 11 since you know that such a person is perverted and sinful,
being self-condemned.
Travel plans; concluding exhortation to good works
12 When I send Artemas to you, or Tychicus, do your best to come to
me at Nicopolis, for I have decided to spend the winter there. 13 Make
every effort to send Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their way, and
see that they lack nothing. 14 And let people learn to devote
themselves to good works in order to meet urgent needs, so that they
may not be unproductive.

464

TITUS 465

Epistolary greetings and benediction
15 All who are with me send greetings to you. Greet those who love us
in the faith.
Grace be with all of you.

465

PHILEMON 466

PHILEMON
Introduction
This enigmatic text is a piece of the apostle Paul's business
correspondence, a curious but intentional blend of personal and public
appeal, addressed to three named recipients (Philemon, Apphia, and
Archippus) and to the church that meets in one their houses (v. 2). The
letters shows Paul's epistolary style at its very best, and employs some
of his most subtle rhetoric to make a request of one of the recipients —
probably Philemon, because he is the first named. The exact nature of
the request, however, is the basis for the enigma that the epistle to
Philemon represents.
In order to interpret this brief epistle, one must reconstruct the
situation it presupposes, but to do so the reader must largely depend
upon the letter itself. Paul writes this letter while he is in prison (vv. 1,
9-10, but the precise location is not specified), where he has been
joined by a person named Onesimus, whom, Paul recounts, he has
converted to the gospel while there (v. 10). This Onesimus, who is the
slave of Philemon, (v. 16), is the subject of the letter, and the object of
Paul's appeal (v. 10). While the circumstances that led to Onesimus's
encounter with Paul are not described in the letter itself, two quite
different possibilities suggest themselves: Either Onesimus ran away
from his master, perhaps after causing him some financial loss (vv. 15,
18), or Onesimus was sent by his owner to serve Paul in prison (v. 13),
much like Epaphroditus appears to have been sent to Paul in prison by
the Philippians (Phil 2.25-30). The advantage of the latter possibility is
that it explains how Onesimus came to be in prison with Paul, whereas
the former option must explain why a slave would run away to a
prison, though this can perhaps be overcome by the suggestion that
Onesimus, according to legal precedent, sought out a friend of his
master's to act as an intermediary for himself. The precise occasion of
the letter is the moment of Paul's sending Onesimus back to his master
466

PHILEMON 467

(v. 12). The letter is intended to accompany Onesimus and register a
plea on his behalf (v. 10). What exactly is Paul asking Philemon to do?
Because Paul formulates his request for Onesimus in intentionally
vague and suggestively persuasive terms, a certain judgment is hard to
make. Readers should try out at least three possible interpretations: (1)
Paul is asking Philemon to receive Onesimus back into service and
forgive his transgressions, whatever they might have been (vv. 17-18);
(2) Paul is primarily asking Philemon to send Onesimus back to him to
continue to serve his physical needs while in prison (vv. 13-14); (3) Paul is
strongly hinting that Philemon should not only receive Onesimus back,
but free him (vv. 16, 21). Each of these options has some grounding in
the text, and the choice of which the reader adopts depends upon
which verses are thought to be the highlight of the argument, and
upon how one assesses Paul's tone at various points. One thing,
however, is certain about this letter: Paul engages in full-strength armtwisting of Philemon to do his "good deed" (v. 14). But the final
decision of what to do is left up to Philemon himself to decide — in the
context of a range of onlookers among his fellow Christians! One of
the most remarkable things about this letter is that it was preserved at
all, and ultimately incorporated in the canonical collection of Paul's
letters, which perhaps gives us a hint about Philemon's ultimate
decision.
This letter has played a key role in the history of Christian social ethics
disproportionate to its length. The adequacy of Paul's attitude and
actions toward the institution of slavery, both in his context and as a
legacy for Christian social thought, continues to be debated.
The structure of Philemon is neatly exact. After the epistolary
salutation (vv. 1-3) and thanksgiving (vv. 4-7), which praise Philemon for
his past benefactions, in the epistolary body (vv. 8-22) Paul makes a
fresh request for the present situation involving Onesimus through
various forms of subtle and overt appeal, ending with a forecast of his
impending visit. He closes the letter with epistolary greetings from
missionary coworkers that accent the public arena of Philemon's
decision.

467

PHILEMON 468

[Philemon 1]
Salutation
1 Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy our brother,
To Philemon our dear friend and co-worker, 2 to Apphia our sister, to
Archippus our fellow soldier, and to the church in your house:
3 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ.
Thanksgiving for Philemon's past good deeds
4 When I remember you in my prayers, I always thank my God 5
because I hear of your love for all the saints and your faith toward the
Lord Jesus. 6 I pray that the sharing of your faith may become effective
when you perceive all the good that we may do for Christ. 7 I have
indeed received much joy and encouragement from your love, because
the hearts of the saints have been refreshed through you, my brother.
Paul's appeal for another good deed from Philemon
8 For this reason, though I am bold enough in Christ to command you
to do your duty, 9 yet I would rather appeal to you on the basis of love
— and I, Paul, do this as an old man, and now also as a prisoner of
Christ Jesus. 10 I am appealing to you for my child, Onesimus, whose
father I have become during my imprisonment. 11 Formerly he was
useless to you, but now he is indeed useful both to you and to me. 12 I
am sending him, that is, my own heart, back to you. 13 I wanted to
keep him with me, so that he might be of service to me in your place
during my imprisonment for the gospel; 14 but I preferred to do
nothing without your consent, in order that your good deed might be
voluntary and not something forced. 15 Perhaps this is the reason he
was separated from you for a while, so that you might have him back
forever, 16 no longer as a slave but more than a slave, a beloved
brother — especially to me but how much more to you, both in the
flesh and in the Lord.

468

PHILEMON 469

17 So if you consider me your partner, welcome him as you would
welcome me. 18 If he has wronged you in any way, or owes you
anything, charge that to my account. 19 I, Paul, am writing this with my
own hand: I will repay it. I say nothing about your owing me even your
own self. 20 Yes, brother, let me have this benefit from you in the
Lord! Refresh my heart in Christ. 21 Confident of your obedience, I am
writing to you, knowing that you will do even more than I say.
22 One thing more — prepare a guest room for me, for I am hoping
through your prayers to be restored to you.
Greetings and concluding benediction
23 Epaphras, my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus, sends greetings to you,
24 and so do Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke, my fellow workers.
25 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.

469

HEBREWS 470

HEBREWS
Introduction
Traditionally known as "The Epistle of Paul to the Hebrews," this New
Testament writing can best be understood as an anonymous sermon
written to encourage an early Christian community to continued faith
and hope in the face of hardship. In a manner unique among New
Testament books, the sermon develops the image of Christ as the great
high priest who fulfills and complete the Jewish system of sacrifice. In a
sophisticated rhetorical style, the author alternates argument and
exhortation. Although it concludes with greetings and other features
of a letter (13.22-25), the work has not opening greeting and no
identification of the author or of those addressed. Rather, the author
refers to it as a "word of exhortation" (13.22) a phrase used in Acts 13.15
to describe a synagogue sermon of Paul.
When the New Testament was being formed, this anonymous sermon
was attributed to Paul, presumably because of the growing authority
of Paul's name and reputation as a letter writer. The early church
leaders Origen, Clement, and Tertullian, however, recognized the
differences in style and theology between Hebrews and Paul's letters.
Clement argued that Luke translated Paul's Hebrew original into Greek
and Origen suggested that a disciple of Paul wrote the letter based on
Paul's notes. Modern interpreters have suggested other authors,
including Apollos and Prisca (Priscilla). There is not sufficient historical
evidence, however, to prove that any person named in the New
Testament was the author of Hebrews.
Like the name of the author, the precise date of Hebrews cannot be
determined. Because the argument depends on description of the
Temple sacrifice, some scholars argue that it must originate before the
destruction of the Temple in 70 CE. Because the work deals with the
exegesis of scriptural texts, however, the literal existence of Temple
470

HEBREWS 471

sacrifice is not necessary for the argument to be persuasive. The
probably date of the work therefore falls somewhere in the range of
60 to 100 CE.
Despite the title "to the Hebrews," the audience probably consists of
people of both Jewish and Gentile background. Evidence within the
sermon for the identity of its audience suggests that the community
has suffered hardship and persecution (10.32) and that some may have
renounced their faith (2.3; 6.4-6; 12.25). The central role of
interpretation of the Jewish scriptures (used by the author in their
ancient Greek translation, the Septuagint [LXX]) in the argument of
the sermon shows the continued importance of the Bible and of Jewish
tradition for those who believed in Christ. The author seeks both to
ground the argument in scripture and to argue that Jesus is superior to
Jewish traditions. Within the audience were both Jewish Christians well
versed in scripture and Gentile Christians who also would have found
such arguments persuasive.
Because so many of the standard historical introductory questions
about Hebrews are uncertain, Hebrews can best be read by leaving
those questions open and exploring the work as a distinctive Christian
writing. The work attempts to interpret the significance of Jesus Christ
and his death in categories familiar to the author and audience. Its
readers could appreciate the sophisticated rhetorical style, follow the
repetition and development of images and vocabulary, and understand
the logic of the author's argument in the context of Platonic and
allegorical interpretation and of other early Christian language.
Hebrews is a document in which themes and motifs anticipate and
reinforce each other. The sermon is organized into four main sections.
Heb 1.1-4.13 explores the word of God spoken through the Son. Heb
4.14-10.31 interprets Jesus as the eternal high priest against the
background of the Israelite priesthood. The third part, 10.32-12.29,
describes faith as insight into a heavenly world of reality. Finally,
chapter 13 gives practical advice and greetings.

471

HEBREWS 472

[Hebrews 1]
Work of God spoken through the Son; the prologue; God has spoken
through a Son
1 Long ago God spoke to our ancestors in many and various ways by
the prophets, 2 but in these last days he has spoken to us by a Son,
whom he appointed heir of all things, through whom he also created
the worlds. 3 He is the reflection of God's glory and the exact imprint
of God's very being, and he sustains all things by his powerful word.
When he had made purification for sins, he sat down at the right hand
of the Majesty on high, 4 having become as much superior to angels as
the name he has inherited is more excellent than theirs.
The superiority of the Son to the angels
5 For to which of the angels did God ever say,
"You are my Son;
today I have begotten you"?
Or again,
"I will be his Father,
and he will be my Son"?
6 And again, when he brings the firstborn into the world, he says,
"Let all God's angels worship him."
7 Of the angels he says,
"He makes his angels winds,
and his servants flames of fire."
8 But of the Son he says,
"Your throne, O God, is forever and ever,
and the righteous scepter is the scepter of your kingdom.
9 You have loved righteousness and hated wickedness;
therefore God, your God, has anointed you
with the oil of gladness beyond your companions."
10 And,
"In the beginning, Lord, you founded the earth,
and the heavens are the work of your hands;
11 they will perish, but you remain;
they will all wear out like clothing;

472

HEBREWS 473

12 like a cloak you will roll them up,
and like clothing they will be changed.
But you are the same,
and your years will never end."
13 But to which of the angels has he ever said,
"Sit at my right hand
until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet"?
14 Are not all angels spirits in the divine service, sent to serve for the
sake of those who are to inherit salvation?
[Hebrews 2]
Exhortation not to fall away
1 Therefore we must pay greater attention to what we have heard, so
that we do not drift away from it. 2 For if the message declared
through angels was valid, and every transgression or disobedience
received a just penalty, 3 how can we escape if we neglect so great a
salvation? It was declared at first through the Lord, and it was attested
to us by those who heard him, 4 while God added his testimony by
signs and wonders and various miracles, and by gifts of the Holy Spirit,
distributed according to his will.
Jesus' exaltation through abasement
5 Now God did not subject the coming world, about which we are
speaking, to angels. 6 But someone has testified somewhere,
"What are human beings that you are mindful of them,
or mortals, that you care for them?
7 You have made them for a little while lower than the angels;
you have crowned them with glory and honor,
8
subjecting all things under their feet."
Now in subjecting all things to them, God left nothing outside their
control. As it is, we do not yet see everything in subjection to them, 9
but we do see Jesus, who for a little while was made lower than the
angels, now crowned with glory and honor because of the suffering of
death, so that by the grace of God he might taste death for everyone.

473

HEBREWS 474

10 It was fitting that God, for whom and through whom all things exist,
in bringing many children to glory, should make the pioneer of their
salvation perfect through sufferings. 11 For the one who sanctifies and
those who are sanctified all have one Father. For this reason Jesus is
not ashamed to call them brothers and sisters, 12 saying,
"I will proclaim your name to my brothers and sisters,
in the midst of the congregation I will praise you."
13 And again,
"I will put my trust in him."
And again,
"Here am I and the children whom God has given me."
14 Since, therefore, the children share flesh and blood, he himself
likewise shared the same things, so that through death he might
destroy the one who has the power of death, that is, the devil, 15 and
free those who all their lives were held in slavery by the fear of death.
16 For it is clear that he did not come to help angels, but the
descendants of Abraham. 17 Therefore he had to become like his
brothers and sisters in every respect, so that he might be a merciful and
faithful high priest in the service of God, to make a sacrifice of
atonement for the sins of the people. 18 Because he himself was tested
by what he suffered, he is able to help those who are being tested.
[Hebrews 3]
Comparison of Jesus and Moses
1 Therefore, brothers and sisters, holy partners in a heavenly calling,
consider that Jesus, the apostle and high priest of our confession, 2 was
faithful to the one who appointed him, just as Moses also "was faithful
in all God's house." 3 Yet Jesus is worthy of more glory than Moses, just
as the builder of a house has more honor than the house itself. 4 (For
every house is built by someone, but the builder of all things is God.) 5
Now Moses was faithful in all God's house as a servant, to testify to the
things that would be spoken later. 6 Christ, however, was faithful over
God's house as a son, and we are his house if we hold firm the
confidence and the pride that belong to hope.

474

HEBREWS 475

Entering God's rest
7 Therefore, as the Holy Spirit says,
"Today, if you hear his voice,
8 do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion,
as on the day of testing in the wilderness,
9 where your ancestors put me to the test,
though they had seen my works 10 for forty years.
Therefore I was angry with that generation,
and I said, 'They always go astray in their hearts,
and they have not known my ways.'
11 As in my anger I swore,
'They will not enter my rest.'"
12 Take care, brothers and sisters, that none of you may have an evil,
unbelieving heart that turns away from the living God. 13 But exhort
one another every day, as long as it is called "today," so that none of
you may be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. 14 For we have
become partners of Christ, if only we hold our first confidence firm to
the end. 15 As it is said,
"Today, if you hear his voice,
do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion."
16 Now who were they who heard and yet were rebellious? Was it not
all those who left Egypt under the leadership of Moses? 17 But with
whom was he angry forty years? Was it not those who sinned, whose
bodies fell in the wilderness? 18 And to whom did he swear that they
would not enter his rest, if not to those who were disobedient? 19 So
we see that they were unable to enter because of unbelief.
[Hebrews 4]
The faithfulness required of Christians
1 Therefore, while the promise of entering his rest is still open, let us
take care that none of you should seem to have failed to reach it. 2 For
indeed the good news came to us just as to them; but the message
they heard did not benefit them, because they were not united by
faith with those who listened. 3 For we who have believed enter that
rest, just as God has said,

475

HEBREWS 476

"As in my anger I swore,
'They shall not enter my rest,'"
though his works were finished at the foundation of the world. 4 For
in one place it speaks about the seventh day as follows, "And God
rested on the seventh day from all his works." 5 And again in this place
it says, "They shall not enter my rest." 6 Since therefore it remains
open for some to enter it, and those who formerly received the good
news failed to enter because of disobedience, 7 again he sets a certain
day — "today" — saying through David much later, in the words
already quoted,
"Today, if you hear his voice,
do not harden your hearts."
8 For if Joshua had given them rest, God would not speak later about
another day. 9 So then, a sabbath rest still remains for the people of
God; 10 for those who enter God's rest also cease from their labors as
God did from his. 11 Let us therefore make every effort to enter that
rest, so that no one may fall through such disobedience as theirs.
12 Indeed, the word of God is living and active, sharper than any twoedged sword, piercing until it divides soul from spirit, joints from
marrow; it is able to judge the thoughts and intentions of the heart. 13
And before him no creature is hidden, but all are naked and laid bare
to the eyes of the one to whom we must render an account.
Jesus as the eternal high priest; Christ as the great high priest
14 Since, then, we have a great high priest who has passed through the
heavens, Jesus, the Son of God, let us hold fast to our confession. 15 For
we do not have a high priest who is unable to sympathize with our
weaknesses, but we have one who in every respect has been tested as
we are, yet without sin. 16 Let us therefore approach the throne of
grace with boldness, so that we may receive mercy and find grace to
help in time of need.

476

HEBREWS 477

[Hebrews 5]
1 Every high priest chosen from among mortals is put in charge of
things pertaining to God on their behalf, to offer gifts and sacrifices
for sins. 2 He is able to deal gently with the ignorant and wayward,
since he himself is subject to weakness; 3 and because of this he must
offer sacrifice for his own sins as well as for those of the people. 4 And
one does not presume to take this honor, but takes it only when called
by God, just as Aaron was.
5 So also Christ did not glorify himself in becoming a high priest, but
was appointed by the one who said to him,
"You are my Son,
today I have begotten you";
6 as he says also in another place,
"You are a priest forever,
according to the order of Melchizedek."
7 In the days of his flesh, Jesus offered up prayers and supplications,
with loud cries and tears, to the one who was able to save him from
death, and he was heard because of his reverent submission. 8
Although he was a Son, he learned obedience through what he
suffered; 9 and having been made perfect, he became the source of
eternal salvation for all who obey him, 10 having been designated by
God a high priest according to the order of Melchizedek.
Exhortation to hope
11 About this we have much to say that is hard to explain, since you
have become dull in understanding. 12 For though by this time you
ought to be teachers, you need someone to teach you again the basic
elements of the oracles of God. You need milk, not solid food; 13 for
everyone who lives on milk, being still an infant, is unskilled in the
word of righteousness. 14 But solid food is for the mature, for those
whose faculties have been trained by practice to distinguish good from
evil.

477

HEBREWS 478

[Hebrews 6]
1 Therefore let us go on toward perfection, leaving behind the basic
teaching about Christ, and not laying again the foundation:
repentance from dead works and faith toward God, 2 instruction about
baptisms, laying on of hands, resurrection of the dead, and eternal
judgment. 3 And we will do this, if God permits. 4 For it is impossible to
restore again to repentance those who have once been enlightened,
and have tasted the heavenly gift, and have shared in the Holy Spirit, 5
and have tasted the goodness of the word of God and the powers of
the age to come, 6 and then have fallen away, since on their own they
are crucifying again the Son of God and are holding him up to
contempt. 7 Ground that drinks up the rain falling on it repeatedly,
and that produces a crop useful to those for whom it is cultivated,
receives a blessing from God. 8 But if it produces thorns and thistles, it
is worthless and on the verge of being cursed; its end is to be burned
over.
9 Even though we speak in this way, beloved, we are confident of
better things in your case, things that belong to salvation. 10 For God is
not unjust; he will not overlook your work and the love that you
showed for his sake in serving the saints, as you still do. 11 And we
want each one of you to show the same diligence so as to realize the
full assurance of hope to the very end, 12 so that you may not become
sluggish, but imitators of those who through faith and patience inherit
the promises.
13 When God made a promise to Abraham, because he had no one
greater by whom to swear, he swore by himself, 14 saying, "I will surely
bless you and multiply you." 15 And thus Abraham, having patiently
endured, obtained the promise. 16 Human beings, of course, swear by
someone greater than themselves, and an oath given as confirmation
puts an end to all dispute. 17 In the same way, when God desired to
show even more clearly to the heirs of the promise the unchangeable
character of his purpose, he guaranteed it by an oath, 18 so that
through two unchangeable things, in which it is impossible that God
would prove false, we who have taken refuge might be strongly
encouraged to seize the hope set before us. 19 We have this hope, a

478

HEBREWS 479

sure and steadfast anchor of the soul, a hope that enters the inner
shrine behind the curtain, 20 where Jesus, a forerunner on our behalf,
has entered, having become a high priest forever according to the
order of Melchizedek.
[Hebrews 7]
The priesthood of Melchizedek and the Levitical priesthood compared
1 This "King Melchizedek of Salem, priest of the Most High God, met
Abraham as he was returning from defeating the kings and blessed
him"; 2 and to him Abraham apportioned "one-tenth of everything."
His name, in the first place, means "king of righteousness"; next he is
also king of Salem, that is, "king of peace." 3 Without father, without
mother, without genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end
of life, but resembling the Son of God, he remains a priest forever.
4 See how great he is! Even Abraham the patriarch gave him a tenth of
the spoils. 5 And those descendants of Levi who receive the priestly
office have a commandment in the law to collect tithes from the
people, that is, from their kindred, though these also are descended
from Abraham. 6 But this man, who does not belong to their ancestry,
collected tithes from Abraham and blessed him who had received the
promises. 7 It is beyond dispute that the inferior is blessed by the
superior. 8 In the one case, tithes are received by those who are mortal;
in the other, by one of whom it is testified that he lives. 9 One might
even say that Levi himself, who receives tithes, paid tithes through
Abraham, 10 for he was still in the loins of his ancestor when
Melchizedek met him.
The Levitical priesthood is inadequate
11 Now if perfection had been attainable through the levitical
priesthood — for the people received the law under this priesthood —
what further need would there have been to speak of another priest
arising according to the order of Melchizedek, rather than one
according to the order of Aaron? 12 For when there is a change in the
priesthood, there is necessarily a change in the law as well. 13 Now the
one of whom these things are spoken belonged to another tribe, from

479

HEBREWS 480

which no one has ever served at the altar. 14 For it is evident that our
Lord was descended from Judah, and in connection with that tribe
Moses said nothing about priests.
15 It is even more obvious when another priest arises, resembling
Melchizedek, 16 one who has become a priest, not through a legal
requirement concerning physical descent, but through the power of an
indestructible life. 17 For it is attested of him,
"You are a priest forever,
according to the order of Melchizedek."
18 There is, on the one hand, the abrogation of an earlier
commandment because it was weak and ineffectual 19 (for the law
made nothing perfect); there is, on the other hand, the introduction of
a better hope, through which we approach God.
20 This was confirmed with an oath; for others who became priests
took their office without an oath, 21 but this one became a priest with
an oath, because of the one who said to him,
"The Lord has sworn
and will not change his mind,
'You are a priest forever'" —
22 accordingly Jesus has also become the guarantee of a better
covenant.
23 Furthermore, the former priests were many in number, because they
were prevented by death from continuing in office; 24 but he holds his
priesthood permanently, because he continues forever. 25
Consequently he is able for all time to save those who approach God
through him, since he always lives to make intercession for them.
Summary of the merits of the high priest, Jesus the Son of God
26 For it was fitting that we should have such a high priest, holy,
blameless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and exalted above the
heavens. 27 Unlike the other high priests, he has no need to offer
sacrifices day after day, first for his own sins, and then for those of the
people; this he did once for all when he offered himself. 28 For the law
appoints as high priests those who are subject to weakness, but the

480

HEBREWS 481

word of the oath, which came later than the law, appoints a Son who
has been made perfect forever.
[Hebrews 8]
Old and new ministry
1 Now the main point in what we are saying is this: we have such a
high priest, one who is seated at the right hand of the throne of the
Majesty in the heavens, 2 a minister in the sanctuary and the true tent
that the Lord, and not any mortal, has set up. 3 For every high priest is
appointed to offer gifts and sacrifices; hence it is necessary for this
priest also to have something to offer. 4 Now if he were on earth, he
would not be a priest at all, since there are priests who offer gifts
according to the law. 5 They offer worship in a sanctuary that is a
sketch and shadow of the heavenly one; for Moses, when he was about
to erect the tent, was warned, "See that you make everything
according to the pattern that was shown you on the mountain." 6 But
Jesus has now obtained a more excellent ministry, and to that degree
he is the mediator of a better covenant, which has been enacted
through better promises. 7 For if that first covenant had been faultless,
there would have been no need to look for a second one.
Old and new covenant
8 God finds fault with them when he says:
"The days are surely coming, says the Lord,
when I will establish a new covenant with the house of Israel
and with the house of Judah;
9 not like the covenant that I made with their ancestors,
on the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the
land of Egypt;
for they did not continue in my covenant,
and so I had no concern for them, says the Lord.

481

HEBREWS 482

10 This is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel
after those days, says the Lord:
I will put my laws in their minds,
and write them on their hearts,
and I will be their God,
and they shall be my people.
11 And they shall not teach one another
or say to each other, 'Know the Lord,'
for they shall all know me,
from the least of them to the greatest.
12 For I will be merciful toward their iniquities,
and I will remember their sins no more."
13 In speaking of "a new covenant," he has made the first one
obsolete. And what is obsolete and growing old will soon disappear.
[Hebrews 9]
The earthly sanctuary
1 Now even the first covenant had regulations for worship and an
earthly sanctuary. 2 For a tent was constructed, the first one, in which
were the lampstand, the table, and the bread of the Presence; this is
called the Holy Place. 3 Behind the second curtain was a tent called the
Holy of Holies. 4 In it stood the golden altar of incense and the ark of
the covenant overlaid on all sides with gold, in which there were a
golden urn holding the manna, and Aaron's rod that budded, and the
tablets of the covenant; 5 above it were the cherubim of glory
overshadowing the mercy seat. Of these things we cannot speak now
in detail.
6 Such preparations having been made, the priests go continually into
the first tent to carry out their ritual duties; 7 but only the high priest
goes into the second, and he but once a year, and not without taking
the blood that he offers for himself and for the sins committed
unintentionally by the people. 8 By this the Holy Spirit indicates that
the way into the sanctuary has not yet been disclosed as long as the
first tent is still standing. 9 This is a symbol of the present time, during
which gifts and sacrifices are offered that cannot perfect the
conscience of the worshiper, 10 but deal only with food and drink and

482

HEBREWS 483

various baptisms, regulations for the body imposed until the time
comes to set things right.
The sacrifice of Christ
11 But when Christ came as a high priest of the good things that have
come, then through the greater and perfect tent (not made with
hands, that is, not of this creation), 12 he entered once for all into the
Holy Place, not with the blood of goats and calves, but with his own
blood, thus obtaining eternal redemption. 13 For if the blood of goats
and bulls, with the sprinkling of the ashes of a heifer, sanctifies those
who have been defiled so that their flesh is purified, 14 how much
more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered
himself without blemish to God, purify our conscience from dead
works to worship the living God!
15 For this reason he is the mediator of a new covenant, so that those
who are called may receive the promised eternal inheritance, because a
death has occurred that redeems them from the transgressions under
the first covenant. 16 Where a will is involved, the death of the one
who made it must be established. 17 For a will takes effect only at
death, since it is not in force as long as the one who made it is alive. 18
Hence not even the first covenant was inaugurated without blood. 19
For when every commandment had been told to all the people by
Moses in accordance with the law, he took the blood of calves and
goats, with water and scarlet wool and hyssop, and sprinkled both the
scroll itself and all the people, 20 saying, "This is the blood of the
covenant that God has ordained for you." 21 And in the same way he
sprinkled with the blood both the tent and all the vessels used in
worship. 22 Indeed, under the law almost everything is purified with
blood, and without the shedding of blood there is no forgiveness of
sins.
23 Thus it was necessary for the sketches of the heavenly things to be
purified with these rites, but the heavenly things themselves need
better sacrifices than these. 24 For Christ did not enter a sanctuary
made by human hands, a mere copy of the true one, but he entered
into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God on our behalf.

483

HEBREWS 484

25 Nor was it to offer himself again and again, as the high priest enters
the Holy Place year after year with blood that is not his own; 26 for
then he would have had to suffer again and again since the
foundation of the world. But as it is, he has appeared once for all at
the end of the age to remove sin by the sacrifice of himself. 27 And just
as it is appointed for mortals to die once, and after that the judgment,
28 so Christ, having been offered once to bear the sins of many, will
appear a second time, not to deal with sin, but to save those who are
eagerly waiting for him.
[Hebrews 10]
Old and new sacrifice
1 Since the law has only a shadow of the good things to come and not
the true form of these realities, it can never, by the same sacrifices that
are continually offered year after year, make perfect those who
approach. 2 Otherwise, would they not have ceased being offered,
since the worshipers, cleansed once for all, would no longer have any
consciousness of sin? 3 But in these sacrifices there is a reminder of sin
year after year. 4 For it is impossible for the blood of bulls and goats to
take away sins. 5 Consequently, when Christ came into the world, he
said,
"Sacrifices and offerings you have not desired,
but a body you have prepared for me;
6 in burnt offerings and sin offerings
you have taken no pleasure.
7 Then I said, 'See, God, I have come to do your will, O God'
(in the scroll of the book it is written of me)."
8 When he said above, "You have neither desired nor taken pleasure in
sacrifices and offerings and burnt offerings and sin offerings" (these
are offered according to the law), 9 then he added, "See, I have come
to do your will." He abolishes the first in order to establish the second.
10 And it is by God's will that we have been sanctified through the
offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
11 And every priest stands day after day at his service, offering again
and again the same sacrifices that can never take away sins. 12 But
when Christ had offered for all time a single sacrifice for sins, "he sat

484

HEBREWS 485

down at the right hand of God," 13 and since then has been waiting
"until his enemies would be made a footstool for his feet." 14 For by a
single offering he has perfected for all time those who are sanctified.
15 And the Holy Spirit also testifies to us, for after saying,
16 "This is the covenant that I will make with them
after those days, says the Lord:
I will put my laws in their hearts,
and I will write them on their minds,"
17 he also adds,
"I will remember their sins and their lawless deeds no more."
18 Where there is forgiveness of these, there is no longer any offering
for sin.
Exhortations and warnings
19 Therefore, my friends, since we have confidence to enter the
sanctuary by the blood of Jesus, 20 by the new and living way that he
opened for us through the curtain (that is, through his flesh), 21 and
since we have a great priest over the house of God, 22 let us approach
with a true heart in full assurance of faith, with our hearts sprinkled
clean from an evil conscience and our bodies washed with pure water.
23 Let us hold fast to the confession of our hope without wavering, for
he who has promised is faithful. 24 And let us consider how to provoke
one another to love and good deeds, 25 not neglecting to meet
together, as is the habit of some, but encouraging one another, and all
the more as you see the Day approaching.
26 For if we willfully persist in sin after having received the knowledge
of the truth, there no longer remains a sacrifice for sins, 27 but a
fearful prospect of judgment, and a fury of fire that will consume the
adversaries. 28 Anyone who has violated the law of Moses dies without
mercy "on the testimony of two or three witnesses." 29 How much
worse punishment do you think will be deserved by those who have
spurned the Son of God, profaned the blood of the covenant by which
they were sanctified, and outraged the Spirit of grace? 30 For we know
the one who said, "Vengeance is mine, I will repay." And again, "The
Lord will judge his people." 31 It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God.

485

HEBREWS 486

Living by faith and its power
32 But recall those earlier days when, after you had been enlightened,
you endured a hard struggle with sufferings, 33 sometimes being
publicly exposed to abuse and persecution, and sometimes being
partners with those so treated. 34 For you had compassion for those
who were in prison, and you cheerfully accepted the plundering of
your possessions, knowing that you yourselves possessed something
better and more lasting. 35 Do not, therefore, abandon that
confidence of yours; it brings a great reward. 36 For you need
endurance, so that when you have done the will of God, you may
receive what was promised. 37 For yet
"in a very little while,
the one who is coming will come and will not delay;
38 but my righteous one will live by faith.
My soul takes no pleasure in anyone who shrinks back."
39 But we are not among those who shrink back and so are lost, but
among those who have faith and so are saved.
[Hebrews 11]
A cloud of witnesses to faith
1 Now faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction of
things not seen. 2 Indeed, by faith our ancestors received approval. 3 By
faith we understand that the worlds were prepared by the word of
God, so that what is seen was made from things that are not visible.
4 By faith Abel offered to God a more acceptable sacrifice than Cain's.
Through this he received approval as righteous, God himself giving
approval to his gifts; he died, but through his faith he still speaks. 5 By
faith Enoch was taken so that he did not experience death; and "he
was not found, because God had taken him." For it was attested
before he was taken away that "he had pleased God." 6 And without
faith it is impossible to please God, for whoever would approach him
must believe that he exists and that he rewards those who seek him. 7
By faith Noah, warned by God about events as yet unseen, respected
the warning and built an ark to save his household; by this he

486

HEBREWS 487

condemned the world and became an heir to the righteousness that is
in accordance with faith.
8 By faith Abraham obeyed when he was called to set out for a place
that he was to receive as an inheritance; and he set out, not knowing
where he was going. 9 By faith he stayed for a time in the land he had
been promised, as in a foreign land, living in tents, as did Isaac and
Jacob, who were heirs with him of the same promise. 10 For he looked
forward to the city that has foundations, whose architect and builder is
God. 11 By faith he received power of procreation, even though he was
too old — and Sarah herself was barren — because he considered him
faithful who had promised. 12 Therefore from one person, and this one
as good as dead, descendants were born, "as many as the stars of
heaven and as the innumerable grains of sand by the seashore."
13 All of these died in faith without having received the promises, but
from a distance they saw and greeted them. They confessed that they
were strangers and foreigners on the earth, 14 for people who speak in
this way make it clear that they are seeking a homeland. 15 If they had
been thinking of the land that they had left behind, they would have
had opportunity to return. 16 But as it is, they desire a better country,
that is, a heavenly one. Therefore God is not ashamed to be called their
God; indeed, he has prepared a city for them.
17 By faith Abraham, when put to the test, offered up Isaac. He who
had received the promises was ready to offer up his only son, 18 of
whom he had been told, "It is through Isaac that descendants shall be
named for you." 19 He considered the fact that God is able even to
raise someone from the dead — and figuratively speaking, he did
receive him back. 20 By faith Isaac invoked blessings for the future on
Jacob and Esau. 21 By faith Jacob, when dying, blessed each of the sons
of Joseph, "bowing in worship over the top of his staff." 22 By faith
Joseph, at the end of his life, made mention of the exodus of the
Israelites and gave instructions about his burial.

487

HEBREWS 488

23 By faith Moses was hidden by his parents for three months after his
birth, because they saw that the child was beautiful; and they were not
afraid of the king's edict. 24 By faith Moses, when he was grown up,
refused to be called a son of Pharaoh's daughter, 25 choosing rather to
share ill-treatment with the people of God than to enjoy the fleeting
pleasures of sin. 26 He considered abuse suffered for the Christ to be
greater wealth than the treasures of Egypt, for he was looking ahead
to the reward. 27 By faith he left Egypt, unafraid of the king's anger;
for he persevered as though he saw him who is invisible. 28 By faith he
kept the Passover and the sprinkling of blood, so that the destroyer of
the firstborn would not touch the firstborn of Israel.
29 By faith the people passed through the Red Sea as if it were dry
land, but when the Egyptians attempted to do so they were drowned.
30 By faith the walls of Jericho fell after they had been encircled for
seven days. 31 By faith Rahab the prostitute did not perish with those
who were disobedient, because she had received the spies in peace.
32 And what more should I say? For time would fail me to tell of
Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, of David and Samuel and the
prophets — 33 who through faith conquered kingdoms, administered
justice, obtained promises, shut the mouths of lions, 34 quenched
raging fire, escaped the edge of the sword, won strength out of
weakness, became mighty in war, put foreign armies to flight. 35
Women received their dead by resurrection. Others were tortured,
refusing to accept release, in order to obtain a better resurrection. 36
Others suffered mocking and flogging, and even chains and
imprisonment. 37 They were stoned to death, they were sawn in two,
they were killed by the sword; they went about in skins of sheep and
goats, destitute, persecuted, tormented — 38 of whom the world was
not worthy. They wandered in deserts and mountains, and in caves and
holes in the ground.
39 Yet all these, though they were commended for their faith, did not
receive what was promised, 40 since God had provided something
better so that they would not, apart from us, be made perfect.

488

HEBREWS 489

[Hebrews 12]
Jesus, the ultimate example of faith
1 Therefore, since we are surrounded by so great a cloud of witnesses,
let us also lay aside every weight and the sin that clings so closely, and
let us run with perseverance the race that is set before us, 2 looking to
Jesus the pioneer and perfecter of our faith, who for the sake of the
joy that was set before him endured the cross, disregarding its shame,
and has taken his seat at the right hand of the throne of God.
The discipline of God
3 Consider him who endured such hostility against himself from
sinners, so that you may not grow weary or lose heart. 4 In your
struggle against sin you have not yet resisted to the point of shedding
your blood. 5 And you have forgotten the exhortation that addresses
you as children —
"My child, do not regard lightly the discipline of the Lord,
or lose heart when you are punished by him;
6 for the Lord disciplines those whom he loves,
and chastises every child whom he accepts."
7 Endure trials for the sake of discipline. God is treating you as
children; for what child is there whom a parent does not discipline? 8 If
you do not have that discipline in which all children share, then you are
illegitimate and not his children. 9 Moreover, we had human parents
to discipline us, and we respected them. Should we not be even more
willing to be subject to the Father of spirits and live? 10 For they
disciplined us for a short time as seemed best to them, but he
disciplines us for our good, in order that we may share his holiness. 11
Now, discipline always seems painful rather than pleasant at the time,
but later it yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness to those who have
been trained by it.
12 Therefore lift your drooping hands and strengthen your weak knees,
13 and make straight paths for your feet, so that what is lame may not
be put out of joint, but rather be healed.

489

HEBREWS 490

14 Pursue peace with everyone, and the holiness without which no one
will see the Lord. 15 See to it that no one fails to obtain the grace of
God; that no root of bitterness springs up and causes trouble, and
through it many become defiled. 16 See to it that no one becomes like
Esau, an immoral and godless person, who sold his birthright for a
single meal. 17 You know that later, when he wanted to inherit the
blessing, he was rejected, for he found no chance to repent, even
though he sought the blessing with tears.
Mount Sinai and Mount Zion contrasted
18 You have not come to something that can be touched, a blazing
fire, and darkness, and gloom, and a tempest, 19 and the sound of a
trumpet, and a voice whose words made the hearers beg that not
another word be spoken to them. 20 (For they could not endure the
order that was given, "If even an animal touches the mountain, it shall
be stoned to death." 21 Indeed, so terrifying was the sight that Moses
said, "I tremble with fear.") 22 But you have come to Mount Zion and
to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to
innumerable angels in festal gathering, 23 and to the assembly of the
firstborn who are enrolled in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and
to the spirits of the righteous made perfect, 24 and to Jesus, the
mediator of a new covenant, and to the sprinkled blood that speaks a
better word than the blood of Abel.
25 See that you do not refuse the one who is speaking; for if they did
not escape when they refused the one who warned them on earth,
how much less will we escape if we reject the one who warns from
heaven! 26 At that time his voice shook the earth; but now he has
promised, "Yet once more I will shake not only the earth but also the
heaven." 27 This phrase, "Yet once more," indicates the removal of
what is shaken — that is, created things — so that what cannot be
shaken may remain. 28 Therefore, since we are receiving a kingdom
that cannot be shaken, let us give thanks, by which we offer to God an
acceptable worship with reverence and awe; 29 for indeed our God is a
consuming fire.

490

HEBREWS 491

[Hebrews 13]
Practical instructions to the community and greetings; the sermon
concludes
1 Let mutual love continue. 2 Do not neglect to show hospitality to
strangers, for by doing that some have entertained angels without
knowing it. 3 Remember those who are in prison, as though you were
in prison with them; those who are being tortured, as though you
yourselves were being tortured. 4 Let marriage be held in honor by all,
and let the marriage bed be kept undefiled; for God will judge
fornicators and adulterers. 5 Keep your lives free from the love of
money, and be content with what you have; for he has said, "I will
never leave you or forsake you." 6 So we can say with confidence,
"The Lord is my helper;
I will not be afraid.
What can anyone do to me?"
7 Remember your leaders, those who spoke the word of God to you;
consider the outcome of their way of life, and imitate their faith. 8
Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today and forever. 9 Do not be
carried away by all kinds of strange teachings; for it is well for the
heart to be strengthened by grace, not by regulations about food,
which have not benefited those who observe them. 10 We have an
altar from which those who officiate in the tent have no right to eat. 11
For the bodies of those animals whose blood is brought into the
sanctuary by the high priest as a sacrifice for sin are burned outside the
camp. 12 Therefore Jesus also suffered outside the city gate in order to
sanctify the people by his own blood. 13 Let us then go to him outside
the camp and bear the abuse he endured. 14 For here we have no
lasting city, but we are looking for the city that is to come. 15 Through
him, then, let us continually offer a sacrifice of praise to God, that is,
the fruit of lips that confess his name. 16 Do not neglect to do good
and to share what you have, for such sacrifices are pleasing to God.
17 Obey your leaders and submit to them, for they are keeping watch
over your souls and will give an account. Let them do this with joy and
not with sighing — for that would be harmful to you.

491

HEBREWS 492

Greetings, blessing, and postscript
18 Pray for us; we are sure that we have a clear conscience, desiring to
act honorably in all things. 19 I urge you all the more to do this, so that
I may be restored to you very soon.
20 Now may the God of peace, who brought back from the dead our
Lord Jesus, the great shepherd of the sheep, by the blood of the
eternal covenant, 21 make you complete in everything good so that
you may do his will, working among us that which is pleasing in his
sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory forever and ever.
Amen.
22 I appeal to you, brothers and sisters, bear with my word of
exhortation, for I have written to you briefly. 23 I want you to know
that our brother Timothy has been set free; and if he comes in time, he
will be with me when I see you. 24 Greet all your leaders and all the
saints. Those from Italy send you greetings. 25 Grace be with all of you.

492

JAMES 493

JAMES
Introduction
This letter takes its name from the authority and tradition associated
with James, the brother of Jesus (Mt 13.55; Mk 6.3; Gal 1.19), who
eventually became the leader of the church in Jerusalem (Gal 2.9, 12;
Acts 12.17; 15.13; 21.18). Throughout the document, a consistent tone of
moral authority (59 of 108 versions are in the imperative) determines its
literary character as a series of moral instructions (parenesis or
exhortation) and wisdom sayings, inspired by different parts of the
Bible. The advice alludes both to the Hebrew Bible and to the Jesus
tradition (particularly that of Matthew and Luke); there may also be
references to Paul's teaching (2.14-26). The letter thereby combines
pastoral, prophetic, and teaching moods appropriate to address the
community crises. Its basic message is an urgent appeal for those who
call themselves Christians to adopt a courageous faith that will help
them cope effectively with the trials of life, and will produce in them
heightened moral integrity and loving actions.
Directed by Jewish Christian congregations ("your assembly," lit.
"synagogue," 2.2) toward the close of the first century, this letter was
probably written in at least two stages. The original text was a sermon
by James in the months prior to his martyrdom in the mid-60s. Then,
someone skilled in Hellenistic rhetoric edited, expanded, and
distributed the sermon in the form of a circular letter, probably in the
late 80s or 90s. It went to Diaspora churches that were in disarray and
needed to hear again the authoritative voice of the Jerusalem church's
leader. Its aim was to instruct Jewish Christians experiencing tensions
between their allegiance to the Torah and their newfound faith in
Jesus. In this sense, James and Jude are the last New Testament echoes
of Jewish Christianity.

493

JAMES 494

In dealing with issues of concern to Jewish Christians, the letter
(particularly in 2.14-26) appears to oppose the thinking of Paul on the
issue of the relation between faith and works, and the means by which
the believer attains "justification" or the state of right relationship
with God. Paul and James each interpret a verse from the Hebrew Bible
— "And he [Abraham] believed the Lord; and the Lord reckoned it to
him as righteousness" (Gen 15.6) — to support his own view (Paul in
Gal 3.6-14, James in Jas 2.21-24). For Paul, the believer's justification
comes through faith, not works (Rom 4.16-5.2); for James, "faith by
itself, if it has no works, is dead" (2.17). The conflict, however, is more
apparent than real. For Paul, faith is primarily trust in God (Rom 4.5), a
sense of the word that James also shares (1.5); but, in his critique of
faith, James means by it essentially the assent to ideas about God
without any personal relationship or commitment to inform them:
"Even the demons believe" (2.19). James sees works as the acts that
spring from the love of the believer for God (2.14), whereas for Paul
works are the external observations of ritual, like circumcision,
regarded in isolation from any connection to one's relationship to God.
The letter of James may strike the reader as having little in the way of
unity and coherence, but rather as skipping from one topic to another
without much connection. Its inherent unity, however, can bee seen if
one views the letter as a response to the situation in which these early
Christians found themselves. The Christian assemblies were tiny
minorities existing within large populations that were indifferent or
hostile to their beliefs. The writer is concerned that these early
Christian groups should not adopt, or fall back into, the values or the
behavior of the surrounding population (4.4). From this comes the
strategic mixture in the letter of the prophetic tradition (for instance,
2.5-7) and the wisdom tradition (for instance, 1.5-8). This combination is
meant to help those who are struggling to live morally: the prophetic
denunciations of arrogant wealth and immorality (2.6-7); 5.1-6) are
strengthened and completed through the development of wisdom
(3.13). Wisdom can serve both as a guide to behavior (for instance,
guarding against malicious speech 3.8-10; 4.11) and as an aid to
discernment (seeing the joy that lies beyond present suffering, 3.17-18).
The testing to which the faithful are subjected will help them learn and
be transformed (1.12): it will show them what really matters, and it can

494

JAMES 495

be, if seen in the right way, a strengthening rather than a weakening
ordeal. Thus, these communities will be built up through their
sufferings (4.7-10), and their faith will be, not a substitute for acts of
love (2.15-16), but rather a means to help them undertake such acts
(1.22-27).
Martin Luther's cavalier assessment of James as "an epistle of straw"
because it seemingly denigrated the Pauline doctrine of justification by
faith (2.14-26) influenced its interpretation for many years. Yet as a
witness to Jewish Christianity the letter of James constitutes "the
second voice of Jesus," reminding Christians that a faith that fails to
bear fruit in the moral life cannot save.

[James 1]
Salutation
1 James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ,
To the twelve tribes in the Dispersion:
Greetings.
Faith that rejoices in trials
2 My brothers and sisters, whenever you face trials of any kind,
consider it nothing but joy, 3 because you know that the testing of
your faith produces endurance; 4 and let endurance have its full effect,
so that you may be mature and complete, lacking in nothing.
5 If any of you is lacking in wisdom, ask God, who gives to all
generously and ungrudgingly, and it will be given you. 6 But ask in
faith, never doubting, for the one who doubts is like a wave of the sea,
driven and tossed by the wind; 7, 8 for the doubter, being doubleminded and unstable in every way, must not expect to receive anything
from the Lord.

495

JAMES 496

A reversal of fortunes
9 Let the believer who is lowly boast in being raised up, 10 and the rich
in being brought low, because the rich will disappear like a flower in
the field. 11 For the sun rises with its scorching heat and withers the
field; its flower falls, and its beauty perishes. It is the same way with
the rich; in the midst of a busy life, they will wither away.
God who rewards faithful endurance
12 Blessed is anyone who endures temptation. Such a one has stood the
test and will receive the crown of life that the Lord has promised to
those who love him. 13 No one, when tempted, should say, "I am being
tempted by God"; for God cannot be tempted by evil and he himself
tempts no one. 14 But one is tempted by one's own desire, being lured
and enticed by it; 15 then, when that desire has conceived, it gives birth
to sin, and that sin, when it is fully grown, gives birth to death. 16 Do
not be deceived, my beloved.
17 Every generous act of giving, with every perfect gift, is from above,
coming down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no
variation or shadow due to change. 18 In fulfillment of his own
purpose he gave us birth by the word of truth, so that we would
become a kind of first fruits of his creatures.
Righteousness in word and deed
19 You must understand this, my beloved: let everyone be quick to
listen, slow to speak, slow to anger; 20 for your anger does not
produce God's righteousness. 21 Therefore rid yourselves of all
sordidness and rank growth of wickedness, and welcome with
meekness the implanted word that has the power to save your souls.
22 But be doers of the word, and not merely hearers who deceive
themselves. 23 For if any are hearers of the word and not doers, they
are like those who look at themselves in a mirror; 24 for they look at
themselves and, on going away, immediately forget what they were
like. 25 But those who look into the perfect law, the law of liberty, and

496

JAMES 497

persevere, being not hearers who forget but doers who act — they will
be blessed in their doing.
Religion that is personal and social
26 If any think they are religious, and do not bridle their tongues but
deceive their hearts, their religion is worthless. 27 Religion that is pure
and undefiled before God, the Father, is this: to care for orphans and
widows in their distress, and to keep oneself unstained by the world.
[James 2]
Faith and acts of discrimination
1 My brothers and sisters, do you with your acts of favoritism really
believe in our glorious Lord Jesus Christ? 2 For if a person with gold
rings and in fine clothes comes into your assembly, and if a poor person
in dirty clothes also comes in, 3 and if you take notice of the one
wearing the fine clothes and say, "Have a seat here, please," while to
the one who is poor you say, "Stand there," or, "Sit at my feet," 4 have
you not made distinctions among yourselves, and become judges with
evil thoughts? 5 Listen, my beloved brothers and sisters. Has not God
chosen the poor in the world to be rich in faith and to be heirs of the
kingdom that he has promised to those who love him? 6 But you have
dishonored the poor. Is it not the rich who oppress you? Is it not they
who drag you into court? 7 Is it not they who blaspheme the excellent
name that was invoked over you?
8 You do well if you really fulfill the royal law according to the
scripture, "You shall love your neighbor as yourself." 9 But if you show
partiality, you commit sin and are convicted by the law as transgressors.
10 For whoever keeps the whole law but fails in one point has become
accountable for all of it. 11 For the one who said, "You shall not
commit adultery," also said, "You shall not murder." Now if you do not
commit adultery but if you murder, you have become a transgressor of
the law. 12 So speak and so act as those who are to be judged by the
law of liberty. 13 For judgment will be without mercy to anyone who
has shown no mercy; mercy triumphs over judgment.

497

JAMES 498

The unity of faith and deeds
14 What good is it, my brothers and sisters, if you say you have faith
but do not have works? Can faith save you? 15 If a brother or sister is
naked and lacks daily food, 16 and one of you says to them, "Go in
peace; keep warm and eat your fill," and yet you do not supply their
bodily needs, what is the good of that? 17 So faith by itself, if it has no
works, is dead.
18 But someone will say, "You have faith and I have works." Show me
your faith apart from your works, and I by my works will show you my
faith. 19 You believe that God is one; you do well. Even the demons
believe — and shudder. 20 Do you want to be shown, you senseless
person, that faith apart from works is barren? 21 Was not our ancestor
Abraham justified by works when he offered his son Isaac on the altar?
22 You see that faith was active along with his works, and faith was
brought to completion by the works. 23 Thus the scripture was fulfilled
that says, "Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him as
righteousness," and he was called the friend of God. 24 You see that a
person is justified by works and not by faith alone. 25 Likewise, was not
Rahab the prostitute also justified by works when she welcomed the
messengers and sent them out by another road? 26 For just as the body
without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is also dead.
[James 3]
Faithfulness through a disciplined tongue
1 Not many of you should become teachers, my brothers and sisters, for
you know that we who teach will be judged with greater strictness. 2
For all of us make many mistakes. Anyone who makes no mistakes in
speaking is perfect, able to keep the whole body in check with a bridle.
3 If we put bits into the mouths of horses to make them obey us, we
guide their whole bodies. 4 Or look at ships: though they are so large
that it takes strong winds to drive them, yet they are guided by a very
small rudder wherever the will of the pilot directs. 5 So also the tongue
is a small member, yet it boasts of great exploits.

498

JAMES 499

How great a forest is set ablaze by a small fire! 6 And the tongue is a
fire. The tongue is placed among our members as a world of iniquity; it
stains the whole body, sets on fire the cycle of nature, and is itself set
on fire by hell. 7 For every species of beast and bird, of reptile and sea
creature, can be tamed and has been tamed by the human species, 8
but no one can tame the tongue — a restless evil, full of deadly poison.
9 With it we bless the Lord and Father, and with it we curse those who
are made in the likeness of God. 10 From the same mouth come
blessing and cursing. My brothers and sisters, this ought not to be so. 11
Does a spring pour forth from the same opening both fresh and
brackish water? 12 Can a fig tree, my brothers and sisters, yield olives,
or a grapevine figs? No more can salt water yield fresh.
Two kinds of wisdom
13 Who is wise and understanding among you? Show by your good life
that your works are done with gentleness born of wisdom. 14 But if
you have bitter envy and selfish ambition in your hearts, do not be
boastful and false to the truth. 15 Such wisdom does not come down
from above, but is earthly, unspiritual, devilish. 16 For where there is
envy and selfish ambition, there will also be disorder and wickedness of
every kind. 17 But the wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, willing to yield, full of mercy and good fruits, without a trace
of partiality or hypocrisy. 18 And a harvest of righteousness is sown in
peace for those who make peace.
[James 4]
Faithlessness in the community
1 Those conflicts and disputes among you, where do they come from?
Do they not come from your cravings that are at war within you? 2 You
want something and do not have it; so you commit murder. And you
covet something and cannot obtain it; so you engage in disputes and
conflicts. You do not have, because you do not ask. 3 You ask and do
not receive, because you ask wrongly, in order to spend what you get
on your pleasures. 4 Adulterers! Do you not know that friendship with
the world is enmity with God? Therefore whoever wishes to be a friend
of the world becomes an enemy of God. 5 Or do you suppose that it is

499

JAMES 500

for nothing that the scripture says, "God yearns jealously for the spirit
that he has made to dwell in us"? 6 But he gives all the more grace;
therefore it says,
"God opposes the proud,
but gives grace to the humble."
Corrective formulae: a call to repentance
7 Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee
from you. 8 Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you. Cleanse
your hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, you double-minded. 9
Lament and mourn and weep. Let your laughter be turned into
mourning and your joy into dejection. 10 Humble yourselves before the
Lord, and he will exalt you.
Warning against improper speech
11 Do not speak evil against one another, brothers and sisters. Whoever
speaks evil against another or judges another, speaks evil against the
law and judges the law; but if you judge the law, you are not a doer of
the law but a judge. 12 There is one lawgiver and judge who is able to
save and to destroy. So who, then, are you to judge your neighbor?
Cautions to those who take God for granted
13 Come now, you who say, "Today or tomorrow we will go to such
and such a town and spend a year there, doing business and making
money." 14 Yet you do not even know what tomorrow will bring. What
is your life? For you are a mist that appears for a little while and then
vanishes. 15 Instead you ought to say, "If the Lord wishes, we will live
and do this or that." 16 As it is, you boast in your arrogance; all such
boasting is evil. 17 Anyone, then, who knows the right thing to do and
fails to do it, commits sin.

500

JAMES 501

[James 5]
Warnings to the rich
1 Come now, you rich people, weep and wail for the miseries that are
coming to you. 2 Your riches have rotted, and your clothes are motheaten. 3 Your gold and silver have rusted, and their rust will be
evidence against you, and it will eat your flesh like fire. You have laid
up treasure for the last days. 4 Listen! The wages of the laborers who
mowed your fields, which you kept back by fraud, cry out, and the cries
of the harvesters have reached the ears of the Lord of hosts. 5 You
have lived on the earth in luxury and in pleasure; you have fattened
your hearts in a day of slaughter. 6 You have condemned and
murdered the righteous one, who does not resist you.
A word of consolation to the faithful
7 Be patient, therefore, beloved, until the coming of the Lord. The
farmer waits for the precious crop from the earth, being patient with it
until it receives the early and the late rains. 8 You also must be patient.
Strengthen your hearts, for the coming of the Lord is near. 9 Beloved,
do not grumble against one another, so that you may not be judged.
See, the Judge is standing at the doors! 10 As an example of suffering
and patience, beloved, take the prophets who spoke in the name of
the Lord. 11 Indeed we call blessed those who showed endurance. You
have heard of the endurance of Job, and you have seen the purpose of
the Lord, how the Lord is compassionate and merciful.
12 Above all, my beloved, do not swear, either by heaven or by earth or
by any other oath, but let your "Yes" be yes and your "No" be no, so
that you may not fall under condemnation.
A closing litany of pastoral concerns
13 Are any among you suffering? They should pray. Are any cheerful?
They should sing songs of praise. 14 Are any among you sick? They
should call for the elders of the church and have them pray over them,
anointing them with oil in the name of the Lord. 15 The prayer of faith
will save the sick, and the Lord will raise them up; and anyone who has

501

JAMES 502

committed sins will be forgiven. 16 Therefore confess your sins to one
another, and pray for one another, so that you may be healed. The
prayer of the righteous is powerful and effective. 17 Elijah was a
human being like us, and he prayed fervently that it might not rain,
and for three years and six months it did not rain on the earth. 18 Then
he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain and the earth yielded its
harvest.
19 My brothers and sisters, if anyone among you wanders from the
truth and is brought back by another, 20 you should know that
whoever brings back a sinner from wandering will save the sinner's
soul from death and will cover a multitude of sins.

502

1 PETER 503

1 PETER
Introduction
The First Letter of Peter presents itself as a pastoral letter written by
the apostle Peter from "Babylon," where he is accompanied by Silvanus
(= Silas) and Mark (5.12-13), to churches in five provinces of Asia Minor
(1.1). Some scholars continue to understand this as a literal description,
with Silvanus often regarded as the actual writer at Peter's behest. The
situation indirectly described by the letter, however, points to a time
after Peter's death. The language, style, content, and thought would
seem inappropriate to Peter the Galilean fisherman and missionary to
the Jews (Gal 2.9). The excellent and sophisticated Greek, the lack of
references to the life and teaching of the earthly Jesus, the
christological emphasis on the cosmic Christ, and the address to Gentile
Christians who had previously lived a sinful, idolatrous life (1.14, 18,21;
2.1, 9-11, 25; 4.3) point to a disciple of Peter writing in the name of the
revered apostle. Thus most critical scholars interpret the document as a
letter from the last decade of the first century CE, written in Peter's
name in order to claim that its teaching represented the apostolic
faith. The letter itself indicates it was written by a presbyter (elder; 5.1)
of the Roman church — the "Babylon" of 5.13 was a common
cryptogram for Rome at the end of the first century (see, for instance,
Rev 17.5, 9; 18.2, 10, 21). The references to Silvanus and Mark, both
known companions of Paul (1 Thess 1.1; Philem 24), are part of the
fictive literary picture that combines elements of Pauline tradition with
the figure of Peter, as is the Pauline letter form itself adopted by 1
Peter. The letter thus represents the combination of Pauline and
Petrine traditions in the church of Rome at the end of the first century,
set forth in Peter's name as a pastoral letter to churches struggling in a
difficult social situation.

503

1 PETER 504

First Peter is a real letter, a united composition. It is not, as has often
been thought, a baptismal homily or liturgy to which epistolary
elements have been added secondarily. The letter addresses a critical
situation in the lives of the addressees, who once participated in the
social and cultural life of their communities, but since their conversion
to Christ have become marginalized and abused. The society to which
they once belonged now considers them an unwelcome, even
dangerous sectarian movement (as in Acts 28.22 — "the sect
everywhere spoken against"). While Christians are called to suffer "for
the name" (4.15-16), the abuse is mostly verbal (2.22-23; 3.9-12, 16). The
positive attitude toward the state (2.13-17) indicates there is as yet no
overt government persecution, except perhaps for occasional arbitrary
acts by subordinate officials. First Peter offers realistic encouragement
and instruction to Christians attempting to live faithfully in such a
situation.
The author does not present a theological essay, but the instructions he
gives are based on deep theological reflection, expressed indirectly by
the narrative milieu the letter projects: God created the world (4.19);
God chose an elect people (2.9-10); God sent the Christ who was
rejected by humans but exalted by God (2.4); God sent the Spirit and
Christian evangelists who established a new people of God and
converted the addressees (1.12); and God will send Christ in the near
future to conduct the final judgment (1.7, 13; 4.7). Christians live their
lives in the time between Christ's resurrection and return. The
christological pattern of suffering and exaltation is foundational for
the ethic he commends: Just as Christ was misunderstood and suffered
unjustly for the sake of others, so Christians are now called to follow
"in his steps" (2.21). Just as all Christians are instructed to respect the
government authorities (2.13-17), so the most vulnerable Christians,
slaves of unbelieving master and wives of unbelieving husbands, are
instructed to fit complacently into the given structures of society as a
testimony to the faith (2.18-3.6). Such behavior may convert the
oppressor (3.1-2), but if not it is still following the example set by Christ
and will be vindicated at the last judgment that is soon to come (4.5-7).

504

1 PETER 505

The structure of First Peter represents an adaptation of the Pauline
letter form: epistolary greeting (1.1-2); thanksgiving (1.3-12); the body of
the letter (1.13-5.11) portraying the new identity of the people of God
(1.13-2.10), Christian conduct in the given structures of society (2.11-3.12),
and responsible suffering in the face of society (3.13-5.11); epistolary
conclusion (5.12-14).

[1 Peter 1]
Salutation
1 Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ,
To the exiles of the Dispersion in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and
Bithynia, 2 who have been chosen and destined by God the Father and
sanctified by the Spirit to be obedient to Jesus Christ and to be
sprinkled with his blood:
May grace and peace be yours in abundance.
Thanksgiving
3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! By his great
mercy he has given us a new birth into a living hope through the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, 4 and into an inheritance
that is imperishable, undefiled, and unfading, kept in heaven for you, 5
who are being protected by the power of God through faith for a
salvation ready to be revealed in the last time. 6 In this you rejoice,
even if now for a little while you have had to suffer various trials, 7 so
that the genuineness of your faith — being more precious than gold
that, though perishable, is tested by fire — may be found to result in
praise and glory and honor when Jesus Christ is revealed. 8 Although
you have not seen him, you love him; and even though you do not see
him now, you believe in him and rejoice with an indescribable and
glorious joy, 9 for you are receiving the outcome of your faith, the
salvation of your souls.

505

1 PETER 506

10 Concerning this salvation, the prophets who prophesied of the grace
that was to be yours made careful search and inquiry, 11 inquiring
about the person or time that the Spirit of Christ within them indicated
when it testified in advance to the sufferings destined for Christ and
the subsequent glory. 12 It was revealed to them that they were serving
not themselves but you, in regard to the things that have now been
announced to you through those who brought you good news by the
Holy Spirit sent from heaven — things into which angels long to look!
Body of the letter; the new identity as the elect and holy people of
God
13 Therefore prepare your minds for action; discipline yourselves; set all
your hope on the grace that Jesus Christ will bring you when he is
revealed. 14 Like obedient children, do not be conformed to the desires
that you formerly had in ignorance. 15 Instead, as he who called you is
holy, be holy yourselves in all your conduct; 16 for it is written, "You
shall be holy, for I am holy."
17 If you invoke as Father the one who judges all people impartially
according to their deeds, live in reverent fear during the time of your
exile. 18 You know that you were ransomed from the futile ways
inherited from your ancestors, not with perishable things like silver or
gold, 19 but with the precious blood of Christ, like that of a lamb
without defect or blemish. 20 He was destined before the foundation
of the world, but was revealed at the end of the ages for your sake. 21
Through him you have come to trust in God, who raised him from the
dead and gave him glory, so that your faith and hope are set on God.
22 Now that you have purified your souls by your obedience to the
truth so that you have genuine mutual love, love one another deeply
from the heart. 23 You have been born anew, not of perishable but of
imperishable seed, through the living and enduring word of God. 24
For
"All flesh is like grass
and all its glory like the flower of grass.
The grass withers,
and the flower falls,

506

1 PETER 507

25 but the word of the Lord endures forever."
That word is the good news that was announced to you.
[1 Peter 2]
1 Rid yourselves, therefore, of all malice, and all guile, insincerity, envy,
and all slander. 2 Like newborn infants, long for the pure, spiritual
milk, so that by it you may grow into salvation — 3 if indeed you have
tasted that the Lord is good.
4 Come to him, a living stone, though rejected by mortals yet chosen
and precious in God's sight, and 5 like living stones, let yourselves be
built into a spiritual house, to be a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. 6 For it stands in
scripture:
"See, I am laying in Zion a stone,
a cornerstone chosen and precious;
and whoever believes in him will not be put to shame."
7 To you then who believe, he is precious; but for those who do not
believe,
"The stone that the builders rejected
has become the very head of the corner,"
8 and
"A stone that makes them stumble,
and a rock that makes them fall."
They stumble because they disobey the word, as they were destined to
do.
9 But you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, God's
own people, in order that you may proclaim the mighty acts of him
who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light.
10 Once you were not a people,
but now you are God's people;
once you had not received mercy,
but now you have received mercy.

507

1 PETER 508

Christian existence and conduct in society
11 Beloved, I urge you as aliens and exiles to abstain from the desires of
the flesh that wage war against the soul. 12 Conduct yourselves
honorably among the Gentiles, so that, though they malign you as
evildoers, they may see your honorable deeds and glorify God when he
comes to judge.
13 For the LORD's sake accept the authority of every human institution,
whether of the emperor as supreme, 14 or of governors, as sent by him
to punish those who do wrong and to praise those who do right. 15 For
it is God's will that by doing right you should silence the ignorance of
the foolish. 16 As servants of God, live as free people, yet do not use
your freedom as a pretext for evil. 17 Honor everyone. Love the family
of believers. Fear God. Honor the emperor.
18 Slaves, accept the authority of your masters with all deference, not
only those who are kind and gentle but also those who are harsh. 19
For it is a credit to you if, being aware of God, you endure pain while
suffering unjustly. 20 If you endure when you are beaten for doing
wrong, what credit is that? But if you endure when you do right and
suffer for it, you have God's approval. 21 For to this you have been
called, because Christ also suffered for you, leaving you an example, so
that you should follow in his steps.
22 "He committed no sin,
and no deceit was found in his mouth."
23 When he was abused, he did not return abuse; when he suffered, he
did not threaten; but he entrusted himself to the one who judges
justly. 24 He himself bore our sins in his body on the cross, so that, free
from sins, we might live for righteousness; by his wounds you have
been healed. 25 For you were going astray like sheep, but now you
have returned to the shepherd and guardian of your souls.
[1 Peter 3]
1 Wives, in the same way, accept the authority of your husbands, so
that, even if some of them do not obey the word, they may be won
over without a word by their wives' conduct, 2 when they see the

508

1 PETER 509

purity and reverence of your lives. 3 Do not adorn yourselves outwardly
by braiding your hair, and by wearing gold ornaments or fine clothing;
4 rather, let your adornment be the inner self with the lasting beauty
of a gentle and quiet spirit, which is very precious in God's sight. 5 It
was in this way long ago that the holy women who hoped in God used
to adorn themselves by accepting the authority of their husbands. 6
Thus Sarah obeyed Abraham and called him lord. You have become her
daughters as long as you do what is good and never let fears alarm
you.
7 Husbands, in the same way, show consideration for your wives in
your life together, paying honor to the woman as the weaker sex, since
they too are also heirs of the gracious gift of life — so that nothing
may hinder your prayers.
8 Finally, all of you, have unity of spirit, sympathy, love for one
another, a tender heart, and a humble mind. 9 Do not repay evil for
evil or abuse for abuse; but, on the contrary, repay with a blessing. It is
for this that you were called — that you might inherit a blessing. 10 For
"Those who desire life
and desire to see good days,
let them keep their tongues from evil
and their lips from speaking deceit;
11 let them turn away from evil and do good;
let them seek peace and pursue it.
12 For the eyes of the Lord are on the righteous,
and his ears are open to their prayer.
But the face of the Lord is against those who do evil."
Responsible suffering in the face of hostility; suffering for doing right;
Christological grounding
13 Now who will harm you if you are eager to do what is good? 14 But
even if you do suffer for doing what is right, you are blessed. Do not
fear what they fear, and do not be intimidated, 15 but in your hearts
sanctify Christ as Lord. Always be ready to make your defense to
anyone who demands from you an accounting for the hope that is in
you; 16 yet do it with gentleness and reverence. Keep your conscience

509

1 PETER 510

clear, so that, when you are maligned, those who abuse you for your
good conduct in Christ may be put to shame. 17 For it is better to suffer
for doing good, if suffering should be God's will, than to suffer for
doing evil. 18 For Christ also suffered for sins once for all, the righteous
for the unrighteous, in order to bring you to God. He was put to death
in the flesh, but made alive in the spirit, 19 in which also he went and
made a proclamation to the spirits in prison, 20 who in former times
did not obey, when God waited patiently in the days of Noah, during
the building of the ark, in which a few, that is, eight persons, were
saved through water. 21 And baptism, which this prefigured, now saves
you — not as a removal of dirt from the body, but as an appeal to God
for a good conscience, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ, 22 who
has gone into heaven and is at the right hand of God, with angels,
authorities, and powers made subject to him.
[1 Peter 4]
Application to the Christian life
1 Since therefore Christ suffered in the flesh, arm yourselves also with
the same intention (for whoever has suffered in the flesh has finished
with sin), 2 so as to live for the rest of your earthly life no longer by
human desires but by the will of God. 3 You have already spent
enough time in doing what the Gentiles like to do, living in
licentiousness, passions, drunkenness, revels, carousing, and lawless
idolatry. 4 They are surprised that you no longer join them in the same
excesses of dissipation, and so they blaspheme. 5 But they will have to
give an accounting to him who stands ready to judge the living and the
dead. 6 For this is the reason the gospel was proclaimed even to the
dead, so that, though they had been judged in the flesh as everyone is
judged, they might live in the spirit as God does.
Eschatological exhortation
7 The end of all things is near; therefore be serious and discipline
yourselves for the sake of your prayers. 8 Above all, maintain constant
love for one another, for love covers a multitude of sins. 9 Be
hospitable to one another without complaining. 10 Like good stewards
of the manifold grace of God, serve one another with whatever gift

510

1 PETER 511

each of you has received. 11 Whoever speaks must do so as one
speaking the very words of God; whoever serves must do so with the
strength that God supplies, so that God may be glorified in all things
through Jesus Christ. To him belong the glory and the power forever
and ever. Amen.
Suffering in joy and hope
12 Beloved, do not be surprised at the fiery ordeal that is taking place
among you to test you, as though something strange were happening
to you. 13 But rejoice insofar as you are sharing Christ's sufferings, so
that you may also be glad and shout for joy when his glory is revealed.
14 If you are reviled for the name of Christ, you are blessed, because
the spirit of glory, which is the Spirit of God, is resting on you. 15 But
let none of you suffer as a murderer, a thief, a criminal, or even as a
mischief maker. 16 Yet if any of you suffers as a Christian, do not
consider it a disgrace, but glorify God because you bear this name. 17
For the time has come for judgment to begin with the household of
God; if it begins with us, what will be the end for those who do not
obey the gospel of God? 18 And
"If it is hard for the righteous to be saved,
what will become of the ungodly and the sinners?"
19 Therefore, let those suffering in accordance with God's will entrust
themselves to a faithful Creator, while continuing to do good.
[1 Peter 5]
Concluding exhortation
1 Now as an elder myself and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, as
well as one who shares in the glory to be revealed, I exhort the elders
among you 2 to tend the flock of God that is in your charge, exercising
the oversight, not under compulsion but willingly, as God would have
you do it — not for sordid gain but eagerly. 3 Do not lord it over those
in your charge, but be examples to the flock. 4 And when the chief
shepherd appears, you will win the crown of glory that never fades
away. 5 In the same way, you who are younger must accept the
authority of the elders. And all of you must clothe yourselves with
humility in your dealings with one another, for

511

1 PETER 512

"God opposes the proud,
but gives grace to the humble."
6 Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, so that
he may exalt you in due time. 7 Cast all your anxiety on him, because
he cares for you. 8 Discipline yourselves, keep alert. Like a roaring lion
your adversary the devil prowls around, looking for someone to
devour. 9 Resist him, steadfast in your faith, for you know that your
brothers and sisters in all the world are undergoing the same kinds of
suffering. 10 And after you have suffered for a little while, the God of
all grace, who has called you to his eternal glory in Christ, will himself
restore, support, strengthen, and establish you. 11 To him be the power
forever and ever. Amen.
Conclusion of the letter
12 Through Silvanus, whom I consider a faithful brother, I have written
this short letter to encourage you and to testify that this is the true
grace of God. Stand fast in it. 13 Your sister church in Babylon, chosen
together with you, sends you greetings; and so does my son Mark. 14
Greet one another with a kiss of love.
Peace to all of you who are in Christ.

512

2 PETER 513

2 PETER
Introduction
The Second Letter of Peter follows the typical form of a letter, except
that it lacks the customary final greeting. It also shares the
characteristics of a testament (especially in 1.12-14), the final advice and
warnings of a patriarch before his death (compare Paul's final address
to the Ephesian elders in Acts 20.25-35). This combination of forms has
resulted in the modification of each. Testaments are usually presented
as a third-person report of the last spoken words of a patriarch to his
sons before his death. Second Peter, however, is a first-person, written
delivery of the last words of Peter to all who are of like faith (1.1). The
writer makes use of a rich cultural heritage, including Hellenistic
philosophical speculation, Jewish exegetical and apocalyptic traditions,
the Hebrew Bible, traditions about Jesus, the Letter of Jude, and a
collection of Paul's letters. The Greek style of 2 Peter is an example of
the popular Greek rhetorical style of that age, characterized by
grandiose, elaborate language.
There is little historical or literary evidence to connect the author of
this letter to either Simon Peter or to the author of 1 Peter. The author
wrote in the name of Peter, not to transmit a particular form of Petrine
tradition, but to convey the common apostolic tradition of the church.
Peter is chosen because of his reputation and his closeness to Jesus.
Such pseudepigraphical attribution is frequent in the Bible and in other
ancient literatures. The writer takes pains to appeal to the common
apostolic teaching (3.2), explicitly including Paul (3.15-16). The letter was
probably written from Rome around the end of the first century CE or
the beginning of the second.

513

2 PETER 514

Second Peter is characterized by an apocalyptic vision of this world as
corrupt because of lust (1.4) and bound for destruction. It urges the
reader to escape by means of the knowledge of Christ and of God and
by earnest moral striving that is grounded in the promises and gifts of
God. The goal is to participate in the divine nature and to enter the
eternal kingdom (1.11).
After a brief greeting, the letter opens with an ethical exhortation to
pursue a chain of virtues based on the all-sufficient promises and gifts
of God and achieved through knowledge and remembering (1.1-11).
Three statements follow that establish the solemnity of the
exhortation. The letter represents Peter's final "testament" (1.12-15);
the heavenly voice guarantees the power and coming of Jesus (1.16-18);
and the scripture is certain (1.19-21). Chapter 2 (much of which is
adapted from Jude) is a warning against false teachers who want to
exploit the unstable for the sake of greed and licentiousness. Their
final destruction is as sure as is the final salvation of the godly. Those
who are enticed by their empty promise of freedom are likewise
doomed. Chapter 3 returns to the admonitions of chapter 1 and warns
of the certainty of judgment. Just as the heaven and earth in Noah's
time were destroyed through water, so the present heavens and earth
will be destroyed through fire. Finally, there will be "new heavens and
a new earth, where righteousness is at home" (3.13). Those who wait
for these things should take Paul's advice and use the time that
remains to repent. They should abstain from the defilement of the
world, avoid being led astray by the error of the lawless, and grow in
grace and knowledge.

514

2 PETER 515

[2 Peter 1]
Salutation
1 Simeon Peter, a servant and apostle of Jesus Christ,
To those who have received a faith as precious as ours through the
righteousness of our God and Savior Jesus Christ:
2 May grace and peace be yours in abundance in the knowledge of
God and of Jesus our Lord.
Opening exhortation
3 His divine power has given us everything needed for life and
godliness, through the knowledge of him who called us by his own
glory and goodness. 4 Thus he has given us, through these things, his
precious and very great promises, so that through them you may
escape from the corruption that is in the world because of lust, and
may become participants of the divine nature. 5 For this very reason,
you must make every effort to support your faith with goodness, and
goodness with knowledge, 6 and knowledge with self-control, and
self-control with endurance, and endurance with godliness, 7 and
godliness with mutual affection, and mutual affection with love. 8 For
if these things are yours and are increasing among you, they keep you
from being ineffective and unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ. 9 For anyone who lacks these things is nearsighted and
blind, and is forgetful of the cleansing of past sins. 10 Therefore,
brothers and sisters, be all the more eager to confirm your call and
election, for if you do this, you will never stumble. 11 For in this way,
entry into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ will
be richly provided for you.
Three solemn appeals
12 Therefore I intend to keep on reminding you of these things, though
you know them already and are established in the truth that has come
to you. 13 I think it right, as long as I am in this body, to refresh your
memory, 14 since I know that my death will come soon, as indeed our

515

2 PETER 516

Lord Jesus Christ has made clear to me. 15 And I will make every effort
so that after my departure you may be able at any time to recall these
things.
16 For we did not follow cleverly devised myths when we made known
to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but we had
been eyewitnesses of his majesty. 17 For he received honor and glory
from God the Father when that voice was conveyed to him by the
Majestic Glory, saying, "This is my Son, my Beloved, with whom I am
well pleased." 18 We ourselves heard this voice come from heaven,
while we were with him on the holy mountain.
19 So we have the prophetic message more fully confirmed. You will do
well to be attentive to this as to a lamp shining in a dark place, until
the day dawns and the morning star rises in your hearts. 20 First of all
you must understand this, that no prophecy of scripture is a matter of
one's own interpretation, 21 because no prophecy ever came by human
will, but men and women moved by the Holy Spirit spoke from God.
[2 Peter 2]
Warnings against false teachings
1 But false prophets also arose among the people, just as there will be
false teachers among you, who will secretly bring in destructive
opinions. They will even deny the Master who bought them —
bringing swift destruction on themselves. 2 Even so, many will follow
their licentious ways, and because of these teachers the way of truth
will be maligned. 3 And in their greed they will exploit you with
deceptive words. Their condemnation, pronounced against them long
ago, has not been idle, and their destruction is not asleep.
4 For if God did not spare the angels when they sinned, but cast them
into hell and committed them to chains of deepest darkness to be kept
until the judgment; 5 and if he did not spare the ancient world, even
though he saved Noah, a herald of righteousness, with seven others,
when he brought a flood on a world of the ungodly; 6 and if by
turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah to ashes he condemned
them to extinction and made them an example of what is coming to

516

2 PETER 517

the ungodly; 7 and if he rescued Lot, a righteous man greatly distressed
by the licentiousness of the lawless 8 (for that righteous man, living
among them day after day, was tormented in his righteous soul by
their lawless deeds that he saw and heard), 9 then the Lord knows how
to rescue the godly from trial, and to keep the unrighteous under
punishment until the day of judgment 10 — especially those who
indulge their flesh in depraved lust, and who despise authority.
Bold and willful, they are not afraid to slander the glorious ones, 11
whereas angels, though greater in might and power, do not bring
against them a slanderous judgment from the Lord. 12 These people,
however, are like irrational animals, mere creatures of instinct, born to
be caught and killed. They slander what they do not understand, and
when those creatures are destroyed, they also will be destroyed, 13
suffering the penalty for doing wrong. They count it a pleasure to revel
in the daytime. They are blots and blemishes, reveling in their
dissipation while they feast with you. 14 They have eyes full of
adultery, insatiable for sin. They entice unsteady souls. They have
hearts trained in greed. Accursed children! 15 They have left the
straight road and have gone astray, following the road of Balaam son
of Bosor, who loved the wages of doing wrong, 16 but was rebuked for
his own transgression; a speechless donkey spoke with a human voice
and restrained the prophet's madness.
17 These are waterless springs and mists driven by a storm; for them the
deepest darkness has been reserved. 18 For they speak bombastic
nonsense, and with licentious desires of the flesh they entice people
who have just escaped from those who live in error. 19 They promise
them freedom, but they themselves are slaves of corruption; for people
are slaves to whatever masters them. 20 For if, after they have escaped
the defilements of the world through the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled in them and
overpowered, the last state has become worse for them than the first.
21 For it would have been better for them never to have known the
way of righteousness than, after knowing it, to turn back from the holy
commandment that was passed on to them. 22 It has happened to
them according to the true proverb,

517

2 PETER 518

"The dog turns back to its own vomit,"
and,
"The sow is washed only to wallow in the mud."
[2 Peter 3]
A defense of the expectation of the coming of Christ
1 This is now, beloved, the second letter I am writing to you; in them I
am trying to arouse your sincere intention by reminding you 2 that you
should remember the words spoken in the past by the holy prophets,
and the commandment of the Lord and Savior spoken through your
apostles. 3 First of all you must understand this, that in the last days
scoffers will come, scoffing and indulging their own lusts 4 and saying,
"Where is the promise of his coming? For ever since our ancestors died,
all things continue as they were from the beginning of creation!" 5
They deliberately ignore this fact, that by the word of God heavens
existed long ago and an earth was formed out of water and by means
of water, 6 through which the world of that time was deluged with
water and perished. 7 But by the same word the present heavens and
earth have been reserved for fire, being kept until the day of judgment
and destruction of the godless.
8 But do not ignore this one fact, beloved, that with the Lord one day
is like a thousand years, and a thousand years are like one day. 9 The
Lord is not slow about his promise, as some think of slowness, but is
patient with you, not wanting any to perish, but all to come to
repentance. 10 But the day of the Lord will come like a thief, and then
the heavens will pass away with a loud noise, and the elements will be
dissolved with fire, and the earth and everything that is done on it will
be disclosed.
11 Since all these things are to be dissolved in this way, what sort of
persons ought you to be in leading lives of holiness and godliness, 12
waiting for and hastening the coming of the day of God, because of
which the heavens will be set ablaze and dissolved, and the elements
will melt with fire? 13 But, in accordance with his promise, we wait for
new heavens and a new earth, where righteousness is at home.

518

2 PETER 519

Final exhortation and doxology
14 Therefore, beloved, while you are waiting for these things, strive to
be found by him at peace, without spot or blemish; 15 and regard the
patience of our Lord as salvation. So also our beloved brother Paul
wrote to you according to the wisdom given him, 16 speaking of this as
he does in all his letters. There are some things in them hard to
understand, which the ignorant and unstable twist to their own
destruction, as they do the other scriptures. 17 You therefore, beloved,
since you are forewarned, beware that you are not carried away with
the error of the lawless and lose your own stability. 18 But grow in the
grace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him be
the glory both now and to the day of eternity. Amen.

519

1 JOHN 520

1 JOHN
Introduction
Though it lacks the formal features of an ancient letter — such as the
opening greeting, designation of recipients and sender, reference to
local persons, sender's plans, and concluding greeting (see 2 and 3
John) — 1 John presents itself as an authoritative, written
communication between the sender and its audience (1.4; 2.1, 7-8, 12-14,
21, 26). The opening (1.1-4) echoes the prologue of the Fourth Gospel
(Jn 1.1-18), including the testimony of a communal "we" to its belief in
Jesus Christ (1.1; Jn 1.14). Where the Gospel emphasized the presence of
the eternal Word of God in Jesus, the epistle focuses on the physical
reality of the word of life.
The "we" of a group of authorized teachers provides a formal
backdrop for the individual who writes these instructions to the
community. In the rest of the letter, the author uses "we" to indicate
the common faith that he shares with the readers (e.g., 3.23-24). First
John is the work of a single teacher, writing in the Johannine tradition.
The opening "we" suggests that he belongs to a school of such
teachers.
By the end of the second century, the author of 1 John had been
identified with John, the evangelist (Eusebius, Historia ecclesiastica
iii.39.17; Muratorian Canon, lines 26-31; Irenaeus, Adversus Haereses
3.16.5). Eventually, the Elder, author of 2 and 3 John, was also
identified with John, the evangelist. Both theology and language,
however, suggest that the Johannine letter were written ca. 100 CE by
one or more teachers who are heirs to the evangelist's teaching, rather
than by the evangelist himself.

520

1 JOHN 521

First John often echoes phrases that remind readers of the Fourth
Gospel. Yet such expressions also differ from the evangelist. Where the
Gospel consistently speaks of Jesus as the light of the world (e.g., Jn
1.4-5, 7; 9.5; 12.46), in 1 John, "light" refers to God (1.5). "Walking in
light" not only refers to belief in Jesus as revelation of God in the
Gospel (Jn 8.12; 12.46) but to ethical conduct in life in 1 John 1.5-7. This
ethical meaning for the image occurs in Jewish and other early
Christian texts; 1 John often seems closer to those materials than to the
Gospel's perspective that Jesus is the unique revelation of God. In the
Gospel, belief in Jesus' relationship to the Father determines an
individual's salvation (e.g., Jn 3.35-36). The hostile confrontation with
Jews over the Christian claims for Jesus, which dominates the ministry
of Jesus in the Gospel (for instance, Jn 8.13-59), never appears in 1 John.
Interpreters who conclude that 1 John reflects an earlier form of the
Johannine tradition therefore have to account for the general lack of
Jewish concerns in 1 John. In fact, only unbelieving pagans (1 Jn 5.21)
and dissident Christians who have broken communion with the
Johannine churches (2.18-21) threaten the faith of 1 John's readers.
The writer accuses the dissidents of denying that Jesus is the messiah,
that is, dying the Father and Son (2.22-23). Early Christian sayings warn
that those who deny Jesus will be rejected in the judgment (cf. Mt
10.32-33 and its parallel at Lk 12.8-9). In the Gospel, denying the divinity
of the Son is equivalent to denying the Father (e.g., Jn 5.20-23). Since
the author of 1 John writes to ensure that its readers will not be
deceived by the doctrine of opposing teachers (2.26-27), it would hardly
have been the case that the secessionists denied the Christian belief
that Jesus is the messiah or the Johannine insight that Jesus is identical
with the Father. The link between christological belief and salvation is
central to the Johannine tradition (5.1; Jn 1.12). The false teaching must
have been one that introduced a subtle change into the tradition. First
John 4.1-3 provides a clue: The opponents do not confess that Jesus has
come "in the flesh." Combined with the opening stress on testimony to
the physical reality of the word of life (1.1-4), this phrase suggests that
their dispute concerned the humanity of Jesus.

521

1 JOHN 522

Since 1 John does not argue against opposing views directly,
interpreters often turn to other reports about dissident teachers in
early Christianity. A close similarity to the views rejected in Christ 1
John appears in references to the Gnostic heretic, Cerinthus (ca. 100
CE). He argued that the divine Christ descended upon the righteous
man, Jesus, at his baptism. This gift of the Spirit enabled Jesus to work
miracles and reveal the unknown Father-God, who is the above Jewish
creator. Since the divine cannot suffer, the Christ separated from Jesus
prior to his death on the cross (see Irenaeus, Adversus Haereses 1.26.1).
First John hints that the dissidents taught that Jesus Christ came in
water only, not in water and blood (5.6). They apparently denied any
saving significance to the death of Jesus on the cross. Though the clues
in 1 John suggest that the opponents held some views in common with
Cerinthus, the evidence is not decisive. There are no traces of the
typical Gnostic teaching about a Father God beyond the creator or
hostility to the God of Genesis in 1 John. Perhaps the secessionists
derived their views of Jesus and the Spirit from the portrayal of Jesus in
the Gospel of John.
Since the Gospel highlights the unity of believers with Jesus and
through him with God (e.g., Jn 15.1-10; 17.6-19), schism threatened the
promise of salvation at the heart of the Johannine Christianity. First
John charges the dissidents with breaking the commandment of love
by which Jesus and the Father dwell with the community (2.9-11, 20-21;
4.7-12; cf. Jn 14.15, 21; 15.9-10). The appearance of such schismatics
fulfills the prediction that false prophets and messiahs will attempt to
deceive God's faithful (2.22; 4.1; cf. Mk 13.22). Because 1 John is so
indirect in speaking about dissident teachers, one cannot determine
whether all of the exhortation concerns them. Certainly questions
concerning sin, judgment, mutual love among Christians, and
confidence in prayer and in the redemptive death of Christ arose in
other early Christian churches. Much of 1 John may reflect the ordinary
style of preaching in the circle of Johannine teachers (for instance, 5.1321). First John remains confident that the Spirit's presence in the
community will enable readers to recognize this work as an expression
of the truth revealed in Jesus (2.27; 4.6, 13).

522

1 JOHN 523

[1 John 1]
Introduction
1 We declare to you what was from the beginning, what we have
heard, what we have seen with our eyes, what we have looked at and
touched with our hands, concerning the word of life — 2 this life was
revealed, and we have seen it and testify to it, and declare to you the
eternal life that was with the Father and was revealed to us — 3 we
declare to you what we have seen and heard so that you also may have
fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father and with
his Son Jesus Christ. 4 We are writing these things so that our joy may
be complete.
Holiness in the community
5 This is the message we have heard from him and proclaim to you,
that God is light and in him there is no darkness at all. 6 If we say that
we have fellowship with him while we are walking in darkness, we lie
and do not do what is true; 7 but if we walk in the light as he himself is
in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of
Jesus his Son cleanses us from all sin. 8 If we say that we have no sin,
we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. 9 If we confess our sins,
he who is faithful and just will forgive us our sins and cleanse us from
all unrighteousness. 10 If we say that we have not sinned, we make him
a liar, and his word is not in us.
[1 John 2]
Christ, our advocate
1 My little children, I am writing these things to you so that you may
not sin. But if anyone does sin, we have an advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous; 2 and he is the atoning sacrifice for our sins,
and not for ours only but also for the sins of the whole world.
3 Now by this we may be sure that we know him, if we obey his
commandments. 4 Whoever says, "I have come to know him," but does
not obey his commandments, is a liar, and in such a person the truth
does not exist; 5 but whoever obeys his word, truly in this person the

523

1 JOHN 524

love of God has reached perfection. By this we may be sure that we are
in him: 6 whoever says, "I abide in him," ought to walk just as he
walked.
The love commandment
7 Beloved, I am writing you no new commandment, but an old
commandment that you have had from the beginning; the old
commandment is the word that you have heard. 8 Yet I am writing you
a new commandment that is true in him and in you, because the
darkness is passing away and the true light is already shining. 9
Whoever says, "I am in the light," while hating a brother or sister, is
still in the darkness. 10 Whoever loves a brother or sister lives in the
light, and in such a person there is no cause for stumbling. 11 But
whoever hates another believer is in the darkness, walks in the
darkness, and does not know the way to go, because the darkness has
brought on blindness.
Victory over evil
12 I am writing to you, little children,
because your sins are forgiven on account of his name.
13 I am writing to you, fathers,
because you know him who is from the beginning.
I am writing to you, young people,
because you have conquered the evil one.
14 I write to you, children,
because you know the Father.
I write to you, fathers,
because you know him who is from the beginning.
I write to you, young people,
because you are strong
and the word of God abides in you,
and you have overcome the evil one.
15 Do not love the world or the things in the world. The love of the
Father is not in those who love the world; 16 for all that is in the world
— the desire of the flesh, the desire of the eyes, the pride in riches —

524

1 JOHN 525

comes not from the Father but from the world. 17 And the world and
its desire are passing away, but those who do the will of God live
forever.
Victory over false teaching
18 Children, it is the last hour! As you have heard that antichrist is
coming, so now many antichrists have come. From this we know that it
is the last hour. 19 They went out from us, but they did not belong to
us; for if they had belonged to us, they would have remained with us.
But by going out they made it plain that none of them belongs to us.
20 But you have been anointed by the Holy One, and all of you have
knowledge. 21 I write to you, not because you do not know the truth,
but because you know it, and you know that no lie comes from the
truth. 22 Who is the liar but the one who denies that Jesus is the
Christ? This is the antichrist, the one who denies the Father and the
Son. 23 No one who denies the Son has the Father; everyone who
confesses the Son has the Father also. 24 Let what you heard from the
beginning abide in you. If what you heard from the beginning abides
in you, then you will abide in the Son and in the Father. 25 And this is
what he has promised us, eternal life.
26 I write these things to you concerning those who would deceive
you. 27 As for you, the anointing that you received from him abides in
you, and so you do not need anyone to teach you. But as his anointing
teaches you about all things, and is true and is not a lie, and just as it
has taught you, abide in him.
28 And now, little children, abide in him, so that when he is revealed
we may have confidence and not be put to shame before him at his
coming.
God's children are holy
29 If you know that he is righteous, you may be sure that everyone
who does right has been born of him. [1 John 3] 1 See what love the
Father has given us, that we should be called children of God; and that
is what we are. The reason the world does not know us is that it did

525

1 JOHN 526

not know him. 2 Beloved, we are God's children now; what we will be
has not yet been revealed. What we do know is this: when he is
revealed, we will be like him, for we will see him as he is. 3 And all who
have this hope in him purify themselves, just as he is pure.
4 Everyone who commits sin is guilty of lawlessness; sin is lawlessness. 5
You know that he was revealed to take away sins, and in him there is
no sin. 6 No one who abides in him sins; no one who sins has either
seen him or known him. 7 Little children, let no one deceive you.
Everyone who does what is right is righteous, just as he is righteous. 8
Everyone who commits sin is a child of the devil; for the devil has been
sinning from the beginning. The Son of God was revealed for this
purpose, to destroy the works of the devil. 9 Those who have been
born of God do not sin, because God's seed abides in them; they
cannot sin, because they have been born of God. 10 The children of
God and the children of the devil are revealed in this way: all who do
not do what is right are not from God, nor are those who do not love
their brothers and sisters.
Moral examples
11 For this is the message you have heard from the beginning, that we
should love one another. 12 We must not be like Cain who was from
the evil one and murdered his brother. And why did he murder him?
Because his own deeds were evil and his brother's righteous. 13 Do not
be astonished, brothers and sisters, that the world hates you. 14 We
know that we have passed from death to life because we love one
another. Whoever does not love abides in death. 15 All who hate a
brother or sister are murderers, and you know that murderers do not
have eternal life abiding in them. 16 We know love by this, that he laid
down his life for us — and we ought to lay down our lives for one
another. 17 How does God's love abide in anyone who has the world's
goods and sees a brother or sister in need and yet refuses help?
Love as confidence before God
18 Little children, let us love, not in word or speech, but in truth and
action. 19 And by this we will know that we are from the truth and will

526

1 JOHN 527

reassure our hearts before him 20 whenever our hearts condemn us;
for God is greater than our hearts, and he knows everything. 21
Beloved, if our hearts do not condemn us, we have boldness before
God; 22 and we receive from him whatever we ask, because we obey
his commandments and do what pleases him.
23 And this is his commandment, that we should believe in the name of
his Son Jesus Christ and love one another, just as he has commanded
us. 24 All who obey his commandments abide in him, and he abides in
them. And by this we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit that he
has given us.
[1 John 4]
Testing spirits
1 Beloved, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits to see whether
they are from God; for many false prophets have gone out into the
world. 2 By this you know the Spirit of God: every spirit that confesses
that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is from God, 3 and every spirit
that does not confess Jesus is not from God. And this is the spirit of the
antichrist, of which you have heard that it is coming; and now it is
already in the world. 4 Little children, you are from God, and have
conquered them; for the one who is in you is greater than the one who
is in the world. 5 They are from the world; therefore what they say is
from the world, and the world listens to them. 6 We are from God.
Whoever knows God listens to us, and whoever is not from God does
not listen to us. From this we know the spirit of truth and the spirit of
error.
God's love as the basis of salvation
7 Beloved, let us love one another, because love is from God; everyone
who loves is born of God and knows God. 8 Whoever does not love
does not know God, for God is love. 9 God's love was revealed among
us in this way: God sent his only Son into the world so that we might
live through him. 10 In this is love, not that we loved God but that he
loved us and sent his Son to be the atoning sacrifice for our sins. 11
Beloved, since God loved us so much, we also ought to love one

527

1 JOHN 528

another. 12 No one has ever seen God; if we love one another, God
lives in us, and his love is perfected in us.
13 By this we know that we abide in him and he in us, because he has
given us of his Spirit. 14 And we have seen and do testify that the
Father has sent his Son as the Savior of the world. 15 God abides in
those who confess that Jesus is the Son of God, and they abide in God.
16 So we have known and believe the love that God has for us.
God is love, and those who abide in love abide in God, and God abides
in them. 17 Love has been perfected among us in this: that we may
have boldness on the day of judgment, because as he is, so are we in
this world. 18 There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear;
for fear has to do with punishment, and whoever fears has not reached
perfection in love. 19 We love because he first loved us. 20 Those who
say, "I love God," and hate their brothers or sisters, are liars; for those
who do not love a brother or sister whom they have seen, cannot love
God whom they have not seen. 21 The commandment we have from
him is this: those who love God must love their brothers and sisters
also.
[1 John 5]
Concluding appeal to keep the true faith
1 Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ has been born of God,
and everyone who loves the parent loves the child. 2 By this we know
that we love the children of God, when we love God and obey his
commandments. 3 For the love of God is this, that we obey his
commandments. And his commandments are not burdensome, 4 for
whatever is born of God conquers the world. And this is the victory
that conquers the world, our faith. 5 Who is it that conquers the world
but the one who believes that Jesus is the Son of God?
6 This is the one who came by water and blood, Jesus Christ, not with
the water only but with the water and the blood. And the Spirit is the
one that testifies, for the Spirit is the truth. 7 There are three that
testify: 8 the Spirit and the water and the blood, and these three
agree. 9 If we receive human testimony, the testimony of God is

528

1 JOHN 529

greater; for this is the testimony of God that he has testified to his Son.
10 Those who believe in the Son of God have the testimony in their
hearts. Those who do not believe in God have made him a liar by not
believing in the testimony that God has given concerning his Son. 11
And this is the testimony: God gave us eternal life, and this life is in his
Son. 12 Whoever has the Son has life; whoever does not have the Son
of God does not have life.
13 I write these things to you who believe in the name of the Son of
God, so that you may know that you have eternal life.
Epilogue. Sin and forgiveness in the community
14 And this is the boldness we have in him, that if we ask anything
according to his will, he hears us. 15 And if we know that he hears us in
whatever we ask, we know that we have obtained the requests made
of him. 16 If you see your brother or sister committing what is not a
mortal sin, you will ask, and God will give life to such a one — to those
whose sin is not mortal. There is sin that is mortal; I do not say that you
should pray about that. 17 All wrongdoing is sin, but there is sin that is
not mortal.
18 We know that those who are born of God do not sin, but the one
who was born of God protects them, and the evil one does not touch
them. 19 We know that we are God's children, and that the whole
world lies under the power of the evil one. 20 And we know that the
Son of God has come and has given us understanding so that we may
know him who is true; and we are in him who is true, in his Son Jesus
Christ. He is the true God and eternal life.
21 Little children, keep yourselves from idols.

529

2 JOHN 530

2 JOHN
Introduction
Second John follows the structural conventions of an ancient letter:
designation of sender and recipient (v. 1a); greeting formula,
somewhat expanded (vv. 1b-3); wish or thanksgiving for well-being of
recipient (v. 4); body of letter vv. 5-11); concluding matters, travel plans
(v. 12), and final greeting (v. 13). However, no concrete names, places,
or details are specified. The expression "elect lady" (v. 1) may refer to
one or more of the Johannine churches in Asia Minor. The author
refers to himself as "the Elder," an expression which could indicate
that he held the office of presbyter in a house church (cf. Acts 14.23;
20.17; 1 Pet 5.1; 1 Tim 5.17) or which may be a reminder of the respect
due elders in the community (cf. 1 Pet 5.5; 1 Tim 5.2). Because the term
is not used in 1 John, some scholars conclude that 2 John was composed
by another person in the circle of the Johannine teachers. However, its
genre did not require that 1 John refer to either sender or addressee.
The similarity in language and situation makes it more likely that the
same individual composed both letters.
Use of an allusion to the love command and teaching held from the
beginning (vv. 5-6; cf. 1 John 2.24; 3.11; 5.3) to bolster warnings against
dissident teachers (v. 7; 1 John 4.3) shows that 2 John refers to the
opponents refuted in 1 John. The Elder asks the recipients to exclude
dissidents from any hospitality. To aid them would be to share in their
diabolical work (vv. 8-11). Perhaps a copy of 1 John accompanied these
instructions.

530

2 JOHN 531

[2 John]
Letter opening
1 The elder to the elect lady and her children, whom I love in the truth,
and not only I but also all who know the truth, 2 because of the truth
that abides in us and will be with us forever:
3 Grace, mercy, and peace will be with us from God the Father and
from Jesus Christ, the Father's Son, in truth and love.
Letter body
4 I was overjoyed to find some of your children walking in the truth,
just as we have been commanded by the Father. 5 But now, dear lady, I
ask you, not as though I were writing you a new commandment, but
one we have had from the beginning, let us love one another. 6 And
this is love, that we walk according to his commandments; this is the
commandment just as you have heard it from the beginning — you
must walk in it.
7 Many deceivers have gone out into the world, those who do not
confess that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh; any such person is the
deceiver and the antichrist! 8 Be on your guard, so that you do not lose
what we have worked for, but may receive a full reward. 9 Everyone
who does not abide in the teaching of Christ, but goes beyond it, does
not have God; whoever abides in the teaching has both the Father and
the Son. 10 Do not receive into the house or welcome anyone who
comes to you and does not bring this teaching; 11 for to welcome is to
participate in the evil deeds of such a person.
Letter closing
12 Although I have much to write to you, I would rather not use paper
and ink; instead I hope to come to you and talk with you face to face,
so that our joy may be complete.
13 The children of your elect sister send you their greetings.

531

3 JOHN 532

3 JOHN
Introduction
Third John has the form of a private letter from the Elder (see the
Introduction to 2 John) to a certain Gaius, who is well known for
showing hospitality to traveling missionaries (vv. 5-8). Because 3 John
does not refer to the dissidents of 1 and 2 John, some interpreters hold
that the Elder is not the same person who wrote those letters.
However, the similarity of language in the conclusions of 2 John (vv. 1213) and 3 John (vv. 13-15) makes it more likely that the same person is
writing 3 John. Demetrius, whom the Elder recommends in v. 12, may
have brought the letter to Gaius. The early Christian mission was
dependent upon hospitality (Mt 10.40-42; Acts 16.14-15; Rom 16.1-2).
However, the Elder is not writing to continue a relationship that is
already well established. Verses 9-10 speak of a letter to a church in the
region that was rejected. A certain Diotrephes not only refused
hospitality to persons associated with the Elder, he even excluded
other who did so from the church. Thus, 3 John appears to be seeking
an alternate source of support in the region.
HT

TH

Has Diotrephes given the Elder a dose of the medicine prescribed in 2
John 8-11? Perhaps, though in that case one might suppose that the
Elder would have distinguished his emissaries from dissident teachers.
In the language of ancient diplomacy, refusing hospitality to
someone's envoy implied rejecting the message he bears and the
sender as well (cf. 1 Macc 14.21-23). The Gospel of John uses similar
language about Jesus as God's emissary (John 13.20). Verses 9-10
indicate that the rift between Diotrephes and the Elder is serious, but
provide no evidence about its cause.

532

3 JOHN 533

[3 John 1]
Letter opening and health wish
1 The elder to the beloved Gaius, whom I love in truth.
Letter body
2 Beloved, I pray that all may go well with you and that you may be in
good health, just as it is well with your soul. 3 I was overjoyed when
some of the friends arrived and testified to your faithfulness to the
truth, namely how you walk in the truth. 4 I have no greater joy than
this, to hear that my children are walking in the truth.
5 Beloved, you do faithfully whatever you do for the friends, even
though they are strangers to you; 6 they have testified to your love
before the church. You will do well to send them on in a manner
worthy of God; 7 for they began their journey for the sake of Christ,
accepting no support from non-believers. 8 Therefore we ought to
support such people, so that we may become co-workers with the
truth.
9 I have written something to the church; but Diotrephes, who likes to
put himself first, does not acknowledge our authority. 10 So if I come, I
will call attention to what he is doing in spreading false charges
against us. And not content with those charges, he refuses to welcome
the friends, and even prevents those who want to do so and expels
them from the church.
11 Beloved, do not imitate what is evil but imitate what is good.
Whoever does good is from God; whoever does evil has not seen God.
12 Everyone has testified favorably about Demetrius, and so has the
truth itself. We also testify for him, and you know that our testimony is
true.

533

3 JOHN 534

Letter closing
13 I have much to write to you, but I would rather not write with pen
and ink; 14 instead I hope to see you soon, and we will talk together
face to face.
15 Peace to you. The friends send you their greetings. Greet the friends
there, each by name.

534

JUDE 535

JUDE
Introduction
Although the addressees of the Letter of Jude are rather vaguely
defined (v. 1), the emergency identified as its occasion (vv. 3-4) and the
concrete descriptions of the opponents indicate that it was a real letter
to particular recipients. The purpose of the letter is to encourage the
addressees "to contend for the faith" against those who "pervert the
grace of our God into licentiousness" (vv.3-4). The date of composition
is uncertain, except that it must be earlier than 2 Peter, which uses
Jude. The reference to "the words spoken by the apostles" (v. 17) may
indicate a period in the church when the apostles could be spoken of
as a unified group from the past. If so, this may point to a date late in
the first century CE. Others have dated Jude as early as the 50s.
Jude is the brother of James (Mt 13.55; Mk 6.3), who was the LORD's
brother (Gal 1.19) and leader of the Jerusalem church. Only this James
was prominent enough to have been sufficient identification for his
brother. Attributing the authorship of a writing to a major figure is
well attested in the Bible and in other ancient literature.
The letter is organized by an exhortation to "contend for the faith" (v.
3) and a closing exhortation to keep oneself "in the love of God" (v. 21)
and have "mercy" on other who are erring (vv. 22-23). Between these
two exhortations, a series of biblical and nonbiblical stories and
prophecies are interpreted to show the error and eventual doom of the
writer's opponents. They are an interpretation of selected judgments
from Genesis to Exodus (vv. 5-8) with a note on Michael the archangel
(vv. 9-10), an interpretation of selected errors from Genesis to Numbers
(vv. 11-13), an application of the prophecy of 1 Enoch 1.9 to the
opponents (vv. 14-16), and an application of apostolic prophecy (vv. 1719). In each case the transition from citation to interpretation is marked
by the word "these" as subject of the sentence: "these dreamers" (v.
535

JUDE 536

8); "these people" (v. 10); "these are..." (vv. 12, 16). The letter closes
with an elaborate and beautiful doxology (vv. 24-25).

[Jude 1]
Salutation
1 Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ and brother of James,
To those who are called, who are beloved in God the Father and kept
safe for Jesus Christ:
2 May mercy, peace, and love be yours in abundance.
Occasion
3 Beloved, while eagerly preparing to write to you about the salvation
we share, I find it necessary to write and appeal to you to contend for
the faith that was once for all entrusted to the saints. 4 For certain
intruders have stolen in among you, people who long ago were
designated for this condemnation as ungodly, who pervert the grace of
our God into licentiousness and deny our only Master and Lord, Jesus
Christ.
Three examples of judgment
5 Now I desire to remind you, though you are fully informed, that the
Lord, who once for all saved a people out of the land of Egypt,
afterward destroyed those who did not believe. 6 And the angels who
did not keep their own position, but left their proper dwelling, he has
kept in eternal chains in deepest darkness for the judgment of the
great day. 7 Likewise, Sodom and Gomorrah and the surrounding cities,
which, in the same manner as they, indulged in sexual immorality and
pursued unnatural lust, serve as an example by undergoing a
punishment of eternal fire.

536

JUDE 537

A further example of the impropriety of slander; three examples of
error
8 Yet in the same way these dreamers also defile the flesh, reject
authority, and slander the glorious ones. 9 But when the archangel
Michael contended with the devil and disputed about the body of
Moses, he did not dare to bring a condemnation of slander against
him, but said, "The Lord rebuke you!" 10 But these people slander
whatever they do not understand, and they are destroyed by those
things that, like irrational animals, they know by instinct. 11 Woe to
them! For they go the way of Cain, and abandon themselves to
Balaam's error for the sake of gain, and perish in Korah's rebellion. 12
These are blemishes on your love-feasts, while they feast with you
without fear, feeding themselves. They are waterless clouds carried
along by the winds; autumn trees without fruit, twice dead, uprooted;
13 wild waves of the sea, casting up the foam of their own shame;
wandering stars, for whom the deepest darkness has been reserved
forever.
A prophecy of judgment
14 It was also about these that Enoch, in the seventh generation from
Adam, prophesied, saying, "See, the Lord is coming with ten thousands
of his holy ones, 15 to execute judgment on all, and to convict everyone
of all the deeds of ungodliness that they have committed in such an
ungodly way, and of all the harsh things that ungodly sinners have
spoken against him." 16 These are grumblers and malcontents; they
indulge their own lusts; they are bombastic in speech, flattering people
to their own advantage.
An apostolic prophecy; exhortations
17 But you, beloved, must remember the predictions of the apostles of
our Lord Jesus Christ; 18 for they said to you, "In the last time there will
be scoffers, indulging their own ungodly lusts." 19 It is these worldly
people, devoid of the Spirit, who are causing divisions. 20 But you,
beloved, build yourselves up on your most holy faith; pray in the Holy
Spirit; 21 keep yourselves in the love of God; look forward to the mercy

537

JUDE 538

of our Lord Jesus Christ that leads to eternal life. 22 And have mercy on
some who are wavering; 23 save others by snatching them out of the
fire; and have mercy on still others with fear, hating even the tunic
defiled by their bodies.
Doxology
24 Now to him who is able to keep you from falling, and to make you
stand without blemish in the presence of his glory with rejoicing, 25 to
the only God our Savior, through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory,
majesty, power, and authority, before all time and now and forever.
Amen.

538

REVELATION 539

REVELATION
Introduction
The book of Revelation, also known as the Apocalypse (from the Greek
word meaning "disclosure," "unveiling," or "revelation") brings the
canon of the New Testament to a close, appropriately so in view of its
vivid visions of the consummation of God's plan of judgment and
salvation. While the book presents itself as a work of prophecy (1.3;
22.10), it has given its name to a literary genre, the "apocalypse,"
found in a range of Jewish and Christian writings that first appeared
about 250 BCE. Like other apocalyptic literature, the book of
Revelation presents God's revelation to a human recipient. Unlike
other apocalypses, which are pseudonymous, with their authors writing
in the name of some revered figure from antiquity, the author of this
book of Revelation identifies himself by his own name as John (1.1, 4, 9;
22.8). Although some ancient authorities (e.g., Justin, Dialogue with
Trypho 81.4) have suggested that this is the apostle John, the son of
Zebedee (see Mk 3.17), the internal evidence of the book itself is
inconclusive. The author's acquaintance with the Jerusalem Temple and
the rites conducted there, the depth of his knowledge of the Hebrew
Bible (of the 404 verses in Revelation, some 275 include one or more
allusions to passages in the Hebrew Bible, or to its Greek version, the
Septuagint), as well as his adoption of a literary genre that was familiar
in Palestinian Judaism, combine to suggest that John might have been
a Palestinian Jewish Christian who fled to the Diaspora as a
consequence of the First Jewish Revolt against the Romans (66-73 CE).
His self-identification to the seven churches as "your brother who share
with you in Jesus the persecution and the kingdom and the patient
endurance" (1.9) suggests that he was well known to his audience,
probably because he exercised a prophetic ministry among them (see
22.9). But he mentions the twelve apostles as figures from the past
(21.14) and does not refer to himself as one of them. The traditional

539

REVELATION 540

identification of the John of the book of Revelation with the apostle of
the same name is thus questionable.
While it is likely that the book of Revelation draws on traditional
material and on source were set in writing before the fall of Jerusalem
in 70 CE (e.g., chs 11 and 12), it is probable that the book was composed
toward the end of the reign of the emperor Domitian (81-96 CE). The
book is addressed to "the seven churches that are in Asia" (1.4),
Christian communities in the Roman pro-consular province of Asia,
located in the western portion of present-day Turkey. The book
demonstrates its author's familiarity with the specific situation of each
of the seven churches, beginning with Ephesus, the city that was the
administrative capital of the province. The seven cities were complex
and diverse in economic, social, political, and religious terms. Whether
or not Christians faced organized and widespread persecutions
sanctioned by Roman imperial authorities at the time the book was
written, Christians in Asia were suffering serious oppression, facing the
danger of being "slaughtered for the word of God and the testimony
they had given" (6.9). One such martyr is Antipas, identified by name
in the message to the church at Pergamum (2.13). John himself endured
exile on the island of Patmos "because of the word of God and the
testimony of Jesus" (1.9), and he reports that his visions took place
there. A variety of voices and viewpoints competed for the attention of
the late first-century Christians to whom the book of Revelation was
originally addressed. John exhorts them to stand firm in their
convictions, to resist "with patient endurance" (2.2, 19; 3.10) and at any
cost the overwhelming pressures to yield to accommodation and
compromise. The destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans in 70 CE gave
John ample cause to identify Rome as Babylon, recalling the
Babylonian destruction of Jerusalem in 586 BCE. The breadth and
depth of Rome's political and economic power found expression in the
widespread worship of the emperor in the book of province of Asia,
with temples to the emperor and to Rome personified as the goddess
Roma. The book of Revelation takes sides in a battle over sovereignty,
where the Roman emperor competes with God and Christ in a contest
for the allegiance of the faithful. Warning that those who worship the
emperor, symbolized by "the beast" (13.1-10), will suffer ultimate
defeat, the book urges believers to "hold fast to the faith of Jesus"

540

REVELATION 541

(14.12) and to share in the paradoxical victory of his death and
resurrection.
The book of Revelation is a work of extremes, ranging from soaring
heights of hymnody inspired by Hebrew psalms and canticles to the
gruesome language of plagues, warfare, and bloodshed. It uses the
dualistic language characteristic of the apocalyptic genre to paint vivid
portraits of the opposing sides in the eschatological conflict that will
culminate in the victory of God and the final defeat of all evil. With its
symbolic numbers and colors, animals, and angelic and demonic beings,
and replete with echoes and images drawn from the literature of the
ancient Near East, the Hebrew Bible, Greece, and Rome, the book of
Revelation is so notoriously complex that the church father Jerome
(345-420 CE) was led to remark that it contains as many mysteries as it
contains words. Origen (185-254 CE) exclaimed, "Who can read the
revelations granted to John without being amazed at the hidden
depth of the ineffable mysteries, a depth apparent even to the person
who does not understand what the text says?" (On First Principles
4.2.4). Many centuries later, the modern writer D.H. Lawrence wrote,
"When we read Revelation, we feel at once there are meaning behind
meanings.' The symbolic visions of the book are by no means selfexplanatory, and even John reports the need for the intervention of an
angelic mediator to explain the meaning of the mystery disclosed to
him (17.7). This characteristic, common in other works of the same
genre, serves to emphasize that there are transcendent levels of
meaning that must be discerned. The significance of events on earth is
to be sought above and beyond what is immediately apparent, and it is
ultimately to God that believers must turn to receive the meaning and
guidance that strengthen their perseverance in the face of adversity.
Over the centuries, the book of Revelation has been considered from a
wide variety of interpretive strategies and approaches, ranging from
literal readings of the book as predictive prophecy to readings that
recognize in its utopian language the promise of hope in the midst of
contemporary situations of suffering and oppression.
Although the structure of the book of Revelation is widely debated
among scholars, there is general agreement that it involves a series of
parallel, interconnected, and yet ever progressing sections. It begins

541

REVELATION 542

with a prologue (1.1-3), an epistolary salutation (1.4-8) and an inaugural
vision (1.9-20), which are followed by messages to each of the seven
churches (2.1-3.22). Next (4.1-5.14) we find a vision of God enthroned
and of Jesus depicted as a Lamb, who receives the seven sealed scrolls
from the hand of God. A series of sevenfold visions commences at 6.1,
beginning with the opening of each of the seven seals (6.1-8.5),
followed by the sounding of each of the seven trumpets (8.6-11.19). The
sounding of the seventh trumpet is followed by the vision of the
woman, the child, and the dragon (12.1-17), the vision of the two beasts
(13.1-18), and a threefold vision of the victory and vindication of the
faithful (14.1-20). These are followed by a final sevenfold series, the
outpouring of the bowls of divine wrath (16.1-21). 17.1-18.24 presents
the vision of the fall of Babylon, followed by the great doxology of
19.1-10 that also looks forward to the eschatological victory (19.11-21),
the defeat of Satan (20.1-10), the last judgment (20.11-15), and the vision
of the new Jerusalem (21.1-22.5). The book concludes with an epilogue
(22.6-21).

[Revelation 1]
The prologue
1 The revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave him to show his
servants what must soon take place; he made it known by sending his
angel to his servant John, 2 who testified to the word of God and to
the testimony of Jesus Christ, even to all that he saw.
3 Blessed is the one who reads aloud the words of the prophecy, and
blessed are those who hear and who keep what is written in it; for the
time is near.
Epistolary salutation
4 John to the seven churches that are in Asia:

542

REVELATION 543

Grace to you and peace from him who is and who was and who is to
come, and from the seven spirits who are before his throne, 5 and from
Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the firstborn of the dead, and the
ruler of the kings of the earth.
To him who loves us and freed us from our sins by his blood, 6 and
made us to be a kingdom, priests serving his God and Father, to him be
glory and dominion forever and ever. Amen.
7 Look! He is coming with the clouds;
every eye will see him,
even those who pierced him;
and on his account all the tribes of the earth will wail.
So it is to be. Amen.
8 "I am the Alpha and the Omega," says the Lord God, who is and who
was and who is to come, the Almighty.
Inaugural vision and commission
9 I, John, your brother who share with you in Jesus the persecution and
the kingdom and the patient endurance, was on the island called
Patmos because of the word of God and the testimony of Jesus. 10 I
was in the spirit on the LORD's day, and I heard behind me a loud voice
like a trumpet 11 saying, "Write in a book what you see and send it to
the seven churches, to Ephesus, to Smyrna, to Pergamum, to Thyatira,
to Sardis, to Philadelphia, and to Laodicea."
12 Then I turned to see whose voice it was that spoke to me, and on
turning I saw seven golden lampstands, 13 and in the midst of the
lampstands I saw one like the Son of Man, clothed with a long robe
and with a golden sash across his chest. 14 His head and his hair were
white as white wool, white as snow; his eyes were like a flame of fire,
15 his feet were like burnished bronze, refined as in a furnace, and his
voice was like the sound of many waters. 16 In his right hand he held
seven stars, and from his mouth came a sharp, two-edged sword, and
his face was like the sun shining with full force.

543

REVELATION 544

17 When I saw him, I fell at his feet as though dead. But he placed his
right hand on me, saying, "Do not be afraid; I am the first and the last,
18 and the living one. I was dead, and see, I am alive forever and ever;
and I have the keys of Death and of Hades. 19 Now write what you
have seen, what is, and what is to take place after this. 20 As for the
mystery of the seven stars that you saw in my right hand, and the seven
golden lampstands: the seven stars are the angels of the seven
churches, and the seven lampstands are the seven churches.
[Revelation 2]
The messages to the seven churches; the first message to Ephesus
1 "To the angel of the church in Ephesus write: These are the words of
him who holds the seven stars in his right hand, who walks among the
seven golden lampstands:
2 "I know your works, your toil and your patient endurance. I know
that you cannot tolerate evildoers; you have tested those who claim to
be apostles but are not, and have found them to be false. 3 I also know
that you are enduring patiently and bearing up for the sake of my
name, and that you have not grown weary. 4 But I have this against
you, that you have abandoned the love you had at first. 5 Remember
then from what you have fallen; repent, and do the works you did at
first. If not, I will come to you and remove your lampstand from its
place, unless you repent. 6 Yet this is to your credit: you hate the works
of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate. 7 Let anyone who has an ear listen
to what the Spirit is saying to the churches. To everyone who conquers,
I will give permission to eat from the tree of life that is in the paradise
of God.
The second message to Smyrna
8 "And to the angel of the church in Smyrna write: These are the
words of the first and the last, who was dead and came to life:
9 "I know your affliction and your poverty, even though you are rich. I
know the slander on the part of those who say that they are Jews and
are not, but are a synagogue of Satan. 10 Do not fear what you are

544

REVELATION 545

about to suffer. Beware, the devil is about to throw some of you into
prison so that you may be tested, and for ten days you will have
affliction. Be faithful until death, and I will give you the crown of life.
11 Let anyone who has an ear listen to what the Spirit is saying to the
churches. Whoever conquers will not be harmed by the second death.
The third message to Pergamum
12 "And to the angel of the church in Pergamum write: These are the
words of him who has the sharp two-edged sword:
13 "I know where you are living, where Satan's throne is. Yet you are
holding fast to my name, and you did not deny your faith in me even
in the days of Antipas my witness, my faithful one, who was killed
among you, where Satan lives. 14 But I have a few things against you:
you have some there who hold to the teaching of Balaam, who taught
Balak to put a stumbling block before the people of Israel, so that they
would eat food sacrificed to idols and practice fornication. 15 So you
also have some who hold to the teaching of the Nicolaitans. 16 Repent
then. If not, I will come to you soon and make war against them with
the sword of my mouth. 17 Let anyone who has an ear listen to what
the Spirit is saying to the churches. To everyone who conquers I will
give some of the hidden manna, and I will give a white stone, and on
the white stone is written a new name that no one knows except the
one who receives it.
The fourth message to Thyatira
18 "And to the angel of the church in Thyatira write: These are the
words of the Son of God, who has eyes like a flame of fire, and whose
feet are like burnished bronze:
19 "I know your works — your love, faith, service, and patient
endurance. I know that your last works are greater than the first. 20
But I have this against you: you tolerate that woman Jezebel, who calls
herself a prophet and is teaching and beguiling my servants to practice
fornication and to eat food sacrificed to idols. 21 I gave her time to
repent, but she refuses to repent of her fornication. 22 Beware, I am

545

REVELATION 546

throwing her on a bed, and those who commit adultery with her I am
throwing into great distress, unless they repent of her doings; 23 and I
will strike her children dead. And all the churches will know that I am
the one who searches minds and hearts, and I will give to each of you
as your works deserve. 24 But to the rest of you in Thyatira, who do not
hold this teaching, who have not learned what some call 'the deep
things of Satan,' to you I say, I do not lay on you any other burden; 25
only hold fast to what you have until I come. 26 To everyone who
conquers and continues to do my works to the end,
I will give authority over the nations;
27 to rule them with an iron rod,
as when clay pots are shattered —
28 even as I also received authority from my Father. To the one who
conquers I will also give the morning star. 29 Let anyone who has an
ear listen to what the Spirit is saying to the churches.
[Revelation 3]
The fifth message to Sardis
1 "And to the angel of the church in Sardis write: These are the words
of him who has the seven spirits of God and the seven stars:
"I know your works; you have a name of being alive, but you are dead.
2 Wake up, and strengthen what remains and is on the point of death,
for I have not found your works perfect in the sight of my God. 3
Remember then what you received and heard; obey it, and repent. If
you do not wake up, I will come like a thief, and you will not know at
what hour I will come to you. 4 Yet you have still a few persons in
Sardis who have not soiled their clothes; they will walk with me,
dressed in white, for they are worthy. 5 If you conquer, you will be
clothed like them in white robes, and I will not blot your name out of
the book of life; I will confess your name before my Father and before
his angels. 6 Let anyone who has an ear listen to what the Spirit is
saying to the churches.

546

REVELATION 547

The sixth message to Philadelphia
7 "And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write:
These are the words of the holy one, the true one,
who has the key of David,
who opens and no one will shut,
who shuts and no one opens:
8 "I know your works. Look, I have set before you an open door, which
no one is able to shut. I know that you have but little power, and yet
you have kept my word and have not denied my name. 9 I will make
those of the synagogue of Satan who say that they are Jews and are
not, but are lying — I will make them come and bow down before your
feet, and they will learn that I have loved you. 10 Because you have
kept my word of patient endurance, I will keep you from the hour of
trial that is coming on the whole world to test the inhabitants of the
earth. 11 I am coming soon; hold fast to what you have, so that no one
may seize your crown. 12 If you conquer, I will make you a pillar in the
temple of my God; you will never go out of it. I will write on you the
name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, the new
Jerusalem that comes down from my God out of heaven, and my own
new name. 13 Let anyone who has an ear listen to what the Spirit is
saying to the churches.
The seventh message to Laodicea
14 "And to the angel of the church in Laodicea write: The words of the
Amen, the faithful and true witness, the origin of God's creation:
15 "I know your works; you are neither cold nor hot. I wish that you
were either cold or hot. 16 So, because you are lukewarm, and neither
cold nor hot, I am about to spit you out of my mouth. 17 For you say, 'I
am rich, I have prospered, and I need nothing.' You do not realize that
you are wretched, pitiable, poor, blind, and naked. 18 Therefore I
counsel you to buy from me gold refined by fire so that you may be
rich; and white robes to clothe you and to keep the shame of your
nakedness from being seen; and salve to anoint your eyes so that you
may see. 19 I reprove and discipline those whom I love. Be earnest,

547

REVELATION 548

therefore, and repent. 20 Listen! I am standing at the door, knocking;
if you hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to you and eat
with you, and you with me. 21 To the one who conquers I will give a
place with me on my throne, just as I myself conquered and sat down
with my Father on his throne. 22 Let anyone who has an ear listen to
what the Spirit is saying to the churches."
[Revelation 4]
Vision of God enthroned and of the Lamb
1 After this I looked, and there in heaven a door stood open! And the
first voice, which I had heard speaking to me like a trumpet, said,
"Come up here, and I will show you what must take place after this." 2
At once I was in the spirit, and there in heaven stood a throne, with
one seated on the throne! 3 And the one seated there looks like jasper
and carnelian, and around the throne is a rainbow that looks like an
emerald. 4 Around the throne are twenty-four thrones, and seated on
the thrones are twenty-four elders, dressed in white robes, with golden
crowns on their heads. 5 Coming from the throne are flashes of
lightning, and rumblings and peals of thunder, and in front of the
throne burn seven flaming torches, which are the seven spirits of God;
6 and in front of the throne there is something like a sea of glass, like
crystal.
Around the throne, and on each side of the throne, are four living
creatures, full of eyes in front and behind: 7 the first living creature like
a lion, the second living creature like an ox, the third living creature
with a face like a human face, and the fourth living creature like a
flying eagle. 8 And the four living creatures, each of them with six
wings, are full of eyes all around and inside. Day and night without
ceasing they sing,
"Holy, holy, holy,
the Lord God the Almighty,
who was and is and is to come."
9 And whenever the living creatures give glory and honor and thanks
to the one who is seated on the throne, who lives forever and ever, 10
the twenty-four elders fall before the one who is seated on the throne

548

REVELATION 549

and worship the one who lives forever and ever; they cast their crowns
before the throne, singing,
11 "You are worthy, our Lord and God,
to receive glory and honor and power,
for you created all things,
and by your will they existed and were created."
[Revelation 5]
1 Then I saw in the right hand of the one seated on the throne a scroll
written on the inside and on the back, sealed with seven seals; 2 and I
saw a mighty angel proclaiming with a loud voice, "Who is worthy to
open the scroll and break its seals?" 3 And no one in heaven or on
earth or under the earth was able to open the scroll or to look into it. 4
And I began to weep bitterly because no one was found worthy to
open the scroll or to look into it. 5 Then one of the elders said to me,
"Do not weep. See, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David,
has conquered, so that he can open the scroll and its seven seals."
6 Then I saw between the throne and the four living creatures and
among the elders a Lamb standing as if it had been slaughtered,
having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God
sent out into all the earth. 7 He went and took the scroll from the right
hand of the one who was seated on the throne. 8 When he had taken
the scroll, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell
before the Lamb, each holding a harp and golden bowls full of incense,
which are the prayers of the saints. 9 They sing a new song:
"You are worthy to take the scroll and to open its seals,
for you were slaughtered and by your blood you
ransomed for God saints from every tribe and language
and people and nation;
10 you have made them to be a kingdom and priests serving our God,
and they will reign on earth."
11 Then I looked, and I heard the voice of many angels surrounding the
throne and the living creatures and the elders; they numbered myriads
of myriads and thousands of thousands, 12 singing with full voice,

549

REVELATION 550

"Worthy is the Lamb that was slaughtered
to receive power and wealth and wisdom and might
and honor and glory and blessing!"
13 Then I heard every creature in heaven and on earth and under the
earth and in the sea, and all that is in them, singing,
"To the one seated on the throne and to the Lamb
be blessing and honor and glory and might forever and ever!"
14 And the four living creatures said, "Amen!" And the elders fell
down and worshiped.
[Revelation 6]
The opening of the first six seals; four seals of destruction
1 Then I saw the Lamb open one of the seven seals, and I heard one of
the four living creatures call out, as with a voice of thunder, "Come!" 2
I looked, and there was a white horse! Its rider had a bow; a crown was
given to him, and he came out conquering and to conquer.
3 When he opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature
call out, "Come!" 4 And out came another horse, bright red; its rider
was permitted to take peace from the earth, so that people would
slaughter one another; and he was given a great sword.
5 When he opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature call
out, "Come!" I looked, and there was a black horse! Its rider held a
pair of scales in his hand, 6 and I heard what seemed to be a voice in
the midst of the four living creatures saying, "A quart of wheat for a
day's pay, and three quarts of barley for a day's pay, but do not
damage the olive oil and the wine!"
7 When he opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth
living creature call out, "Come!" 8 I looked and there was a pale green
horse! Its rider's name was Death, and Hades followed with him; they
were given authority over a fourth of the earth, to kill with sword,
famine, and pestilence, and by the wild animals of the earth.

550

REVELATION 551

Three seals of judgment; the fifth seal
9 When he opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of
those who had been slaughtered for the word of God and for the
testimony they had given; 10 they cried out with a loud voice,
"Sovereign Lord, holy and true, how long will it be before you judge
and avenge our blood on the inhabitants of the earth?" 11 They were
each given a white robe and told to rest a little longer, until the
number would be complete both of their fellow servants and of their
brothers and sisters, who were soon to be killed as they themselves had
been killed.
The opening of the sixth seal
12 When he opened the sixth seal, I looked, and there came a great
earthquake; the sun became black as sackcloth, the full moon became
like blood, 13 and the stars of the sky fell to the earth as the fig tree
drops its winter fruit when shaken by a gale. 14 The sky vanished like a
scroll rolling itself up, and every mountain and island was removed
from its place. 15 Then the kings of the earth and the magnates and
the generals and the rich and the powerful, and everyone, slave and
free, hid in the caves and among the rocks of the mountains, 16 calling
to the mountains and rocks, "Fall on us and hide us from the face of
the one seated on the throne and from the wrath of the Lamb; 17 for
the great day of their wrath has come, and who is able to stand?"
[Revelation 7]
An interlude
1 After this I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the earth,
holding back the four winds of the earth so that no wind could blow
on earth or sea or against any tree. 2 I saw another angel ascending
from the rising of the sun, having the seal of the living God, and he
called with a loud voice to the four angels who had been given power
to damage earth and sea, 3 saying, "Do not damage the earth or the
sea or the trees, until we have marked the servants of our God with a
seal on their foreheads."

551

REVELATION 552

4 And I heard the number of those who were sealed, one hundred
forty-four thousand, sealed out of every tribe of the people of Israel:
5

From the tribe of Judah twelve thousand sealed,
from the tribe of Reuben twelve thousand,
from the tribe of Gad twelve thousand,

6

from the tribe of Asher twelve thousand,
from the tribe of Naphtali twelve thousand,
from the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousand,
from the tribe of Simeon twelve thousand,
from the tribe of Levi twelve thousand,
from the tribe of Issachar twelve thousand,

7

8

from the tribe of Zebulun twelve thousand,
from the tribe of Joseph twelve thousand,
from the tribe of Benjamin twelve thousand sealed.

9 After this I looked, and there was a great multitude that no one
could count, from every nation, from all tribes and peoples and
languages, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, robed in
white, with palm branches in their hands. 10 They cried out in a loud
voice, saying,
"Salvation belongs to our God who is seated on the throne, and
to the Lamb!"
11 And all the angels stood around the throne and around the elders
and the four living creatures, and they fell on their faces before the
throne and worshiped God, 12 singing,
"Amen! Blessing and glory and wisdom
and thanksgiving and honor
and power and might
be to our God forever and ever! Amen."
13 Then one of the elders addressed me, saying, "Who are these, robed
in white, and where have they come from?" 14 I said to him, "Sir, you
are the one that knows." Then he said to me, "These are they who
have come out of the great ordeal; they have washed their robes and
made them white in the blood of the Lamb.

552

REVELATION 553

15 For this reason they are before the throne of God,
and worship him day and night within his temple,
and the one who is seated on the throne will shelter them.
16 They will hunger no more, and thirst no more;
the sun will not strike them,
nor any scorching heat;
17 for the Lamb at the center of the throne will be their shepherd,
and he will guide them to springs of the water of life,
and God will wipe away every tear from their eyes."
[Revelation 8]
The seventh seal
1 When the Lamb opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven
for about half an hour. 2 And I saw the seven angels who stand before
God, and seven trumpets were given to them.
3 Another angel with a golden censer came and stood at the altar; he
was given a great quantity of incense to offer with the prayers of all
the saints on the golden altar that is before the throne. 4 And the
smoke of the incense, with the prayers of the saints, rose before God
from the hand of the angel. 5 Then the angel took the censer and
filled it with fire from the altar and threw it on the earth; and there
were peals of thunder, rumblings, flashes of lightning, and an
earthquake.
The first six trumpets; four trumpets of destruction
6 Now the seven angels who had the seven trumpets made ready to
blow them.
7 The first angel blew his trumpet, and there came hail and fire, mixed
with blood, and they were hurled to the earth; and a third of the earth
was burned up, and a third of the trees were burned up, and all green
grass was burned up.

553

REVELATION 554

8 The second angel blew his trumpet, and something like a great
mountain, burning with fire, was thrown into the sea. 9 A third of the
sea became blood, a third of the living creatures in the sea died, and a
third of the ships were destroyed.
10 The third angel blew his trumpet, and a great star fell from heaven,
blazing like a torch, and it fell on a third of the rivers and on the
springs of water. 11 The name of the star is Wormwood. A third of the
waters became wormwood, and many died from the water, because it
was made bitter.
12 The fourth angel blew his trumpet, and a third of the sun was struck,
and a third of the moon, and a third of the stars, so that a third of
their light was darkened; a third of the day was kept from shining, and
likewise the night.
13 Then I looked, and I heard an eagle crying with a loud voice as it
flew in midheaven, "Woe, woe, woe to the inhabitants of the earth, at
the blasts of the other trumpets that the three angels are about to
blow!"
[Revelation 9]
Three trumpets of woe; the plague of monstrous locusts
1 And the fifth angel blew his trumpet, and I saw a star that had fallen
from heaven to earth, and he was given the key to the shaft of the
bottomless pit; 2 he opened the shaft of the bottomless pit, and from
the shaft rose smoke like the smoke of a great furnace, and the sun
and the air were darkened with the smoke from the shaft. 3 Then from
the smoke came locusts on the earth, and they were given authority
like the authority of scorpions of the earth. 4 They were told not to
damage the grass of the earth or any green growth or any tree, but
only those people who do not have the seal of God on their foreheads.
5 They were allowed to torture them for five months, but not to kill
them, and their torture was like the torture of a scorpion when it
stings someone. 6 And in those days people will seek death but will not
find it; they will long to die, but death will flee from them.

554

REVELATION 555

7 In appearance the locusts were like horses equipped for battle. On
their heads were what looked like crowns of gold; their faces were like
human faces, 8 their hair like women's hair, and their teeth like lions'
teeth; 9 they had scales like iron breastplates, and the noise of their
wings was like the noise of many chariots with horses rushing into
battle. 10 They have tails like scorpions, with stingers, and in their tails
is their power to harm people for five months. 11 They have as king
over them the angel of the bottomless pit; his name in Hebrew is
Abaddon, and in Greek he is called Apollyon.
12 The first woe has passed. There are still two woes to come.
The plague of monstrous cavalry
13 Then the sixth angel blew his trumpet, and I heard a voice from the
four horns of the golden altar before God, 14 saying to the sixth angel
who had the trumpet, "Release the four angels who are bound at the
great river Euphrates." 15 So the four angels were released, who had
been held ready for the hour, the day, the month, and the year, to kill
a third of humankind. 16 The number of the troops of cavalry was two
hundred million; I heard their number. 17 And this was how I saw the
horses in my vision: the riders wore breastplates the color of fire and of
sapphire and of sulfur; the heads of the horses were like lions' heads,
and fire and smoke and sulfur came out of their mouths. 18 By these
three plagues a third of humankind was killed, by the fire and smoke
and sulfur coming out of their mouths. 19 For the power of the horses
is in their mouths and in their tails; their tails are like serpents, having
heads; and with them they inflict harm.
20 The rest of humankind, who were not killed by these plagues, did
not repent of the works of their hands or give up worshiping demons
and idols of gold and silver and bronze and stone and wood, which
cannot see or hear or walk. 21 And they did not repent of their murders
or their sorceries or their fornication or their thefts.

555

REVELATION 556

[Revelation 10]
An interlude; the commission renewed
1 And I saw another mighty angel coming down from heaven, wrapped
in a cloud, with a rainbow over his head; his face was like the sun, and
his legs like pillars of fire. 2 He held a little scroll open in his hand.
Setting his right foot on the sea and his left foot on the land, 3 he gave
a great shout, like a lion roaring. And when he shouted, the seven
thunders sounded. 4 And when the seven thunders had sounded, I was
about to write, but I heard a voice from heaven saying, "Seal up what
the seven thunders have said, and do not write it down." 5 Then the
angel whom I saw standing on the sea and the land
raised his right hand to heaven
6
and swore by him who lives forever and ever,
who created heaven and what is in it, the earth and what is in it, and
the sea and what is in it: "There will be no more delay, 7 but in the
days when the seventh angel is to blow his trumpet, the mystery of
God will be fulfilled, as he announced to his servants the prophets."
8 Then the voice that I had heard from heaven spoke to me again,
saying, "Go, take the scroll that is open in the hand of the angel who is
standing on the sea and on the land." 9 So I went to the angel and told
him to give me the little scroll; and he said to me, "Take it, and eat; it
will be bitter to your stomach, but sweet as honey in your mouth." 10
So I took the little scroll from the hand of the angel and ate it; it was
sweet as honey in my mouth, but when I had eaten it, my stomach was
made bitter.
11 Then they said to me, "You must prophesy again about many
peoples and nations and languages and kings."
[Revelation 11]
The measuring of the temple and the two witnesses
1 Then I was given a measuring rod like a staff, and I was told, "Come
and measure the temple of God and the altar and those who worship
there, 2 but do not measure the court outside the temple; leave that
out, for it is given over to the nations, and they will trample over the

556

REVELATION 557

holy city for forty-two months. 3 And I will grant my two witnesses
authority to prophesy for one thousand two hundred sixty days,
wearing sackcloth."
4 These are the two olive trees and the two lampstands that stand
before the Lord of the earth. 5 And if anyone wants to harm them, fire
pours from their mouth and consumes their foes; anyone who wants to
harm them must be killed in this manner. 6 They have authority to shut
the sky, so that no rain may fall during the days of their prophesying,
and they have authority over the waters to turn them into blood, and
to strike the earth with every kind of plague, as often as they desire.
7 When they have finished their testimony, the beast that comes up
from the bottomless pit will make war on them and conquer them and
kill them, 8 and their dead bodies will lie in the street of the great city
that is prophetically called Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was
crucified. 9 For three and a half days members of the peoples and
tribes and languages and nations will gaze at their dead bodies and
refuse to let them be placed in a tomb; 10 and the inhabitants of the
earth will gloat over them and celebrate and exchange presents,
because these two prophets had been a torment to the inhabitants of
the earth.
11 But after the three and a half days, the breath of life from God
entered them, and they stood on their feet, and those who saw them
were terrified. 12 Then they heard a loud voice from heaven saying to
them, "Come up here!" And they went up to heaven in a cloud while
their enemies watched them. 13 At that moment there was a great
earthquake, and a tenth of the city fell; seven thousand people were
killed in the earthquake, and the rest were terrified and gave glory to
the God of heaven.
The seventh trumpet
14 The second woe has passed. The third woe is coming very soon.
15 Then the seventh angel blew his trumpet, and there were loud
voices in heaven, saying,

557

REVELATION 558

"The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord
and of his Messiah,
and he will reign forever and ever."
16 Then the twenty-four elders who sit on their thrones before God fell
on their faces and worshiped God, 17 singing,
"We give you thanks, Lord God Almighty,
who are and who were,
for you have taken your great power
and begun to reign.
18 The nations raged,
but your wrath has come,
and the time for judging the dead,
for rewarding your servants, the prophets
and saints and all who fear your name,
both small and great,
and for destroying those who destroy the earth."
19 Then God's temple in heaven was opened, and the ark of his
covenant was seen within his temple; and there were flashes of
lightning, rumblings, peals of thunder, an earthquake, and heavy hail.
[Revelation 12]
The vision of the woman, the child, and the dragon
1 A great portent appeared in heaven: a woman clothed with the sun,
with the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve
stars. 2 She was pregnant and was crying out in birth pangs, in the
agony of giving birth. 3 Then another portent appeared in heaven: a
great red dragon, with seven heads and ten horns, and seven diadems
on his heads. 4 His tail swept down a third of the stars of heaven and
threw them to the earth. Then the dragon stood before the woman
who was about to bear a child, so that he might devour her child as
soon as it was born. 5 And she gave birth to a son, a male child, who is
to rule all the nations with a rod of iron. But her child was snatched
away and taken to God and to his throne; 6 and the woman fled into
the wilderness, where she has a place prepared by God, so that there
she can be nourished for one thousand two hundred sixty days.

558

REVELATION 559

7 And war broke out in heaven; Michael and his angels fought against
the dragon. The dragon and his angels fought back, 8 but they were
defeated, and there was no longer any place for them in heaven. 9 The
great dragon was thrown down, that ancient serpent, who is called the
Devil and Satan, the deceiver of the whole world — he was thrown
down to the earth, and his angels were thrown down with him.
10 Then I heard a loud voice in heaven, proclaiming,
"Now have come the salvation and the power
and the kingdom of our God
and the authority of his Messiah,
for the accuser of our comrades has been thrown down,
who accuses them day and night before our God.
11 But they have conquered him by the blood of the Lamb
and by the word of their testimony,
for they did not cling to life even in the face of death.
12 Rejoice then, you heavens
and those who dwell in them!
But woe to the earth and the sea,
for the devil has come down to you
with great wrath,
because he knows that his time is short!"
13 So when the dragon saw that he had been thrown down to the
earth, he pursued the woman who had given birth to the male child. 14
But the woman was given the two wings of the great eagle, so that she
could fly from the serpent into the wilderness, to her place where she
is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time. 15 Then from his
mouth the serpent poured water like a river after the woman, to
sweep her away with the flood. 16 But the earth came to the help of
the woman; it opened its mouth and swallowed the river that the
dragon had poured from his mouth. 17 Then the dragon was angry
with the woman, and went off to make war on the rest of her children,
those who keep the commandments of God and hold the testimony of
Jesus.

559

REVELATION 560

The two beasts
18 Then the dragon took his stand on the sand of the seashore.
[Revelation 13] 1 And I saw a beast rising out of the sea, having ten
horns and seven heads; and on its horns were ten diadems, and on its
heads were blasphemous names. 2 And the beast that I saw was like a
leopard, its feet were like a bear's, and its mouth was like a lion's
mouth. And the dragon gave it his power and his throne and great
authority. 3 One of its heads seemed to have received a death-blow,
but its mortal wound had been healed. In amazement the whole earth
followed the beast. 4 They worshiped the dragon, for he had given his
authority to the beast, and they worshiped the beast, saying, "Who is
like the beast, and who can fight against it?"
5 The beast was given a mouth uttering haughty and blasphemous
words, and it was allowed to exercise authority for forty-two months. 6
It opened its mouth to utter blasphemies against God, blaspheming his
name and his dwelling, that is, those who dwell in heaven. 7 Also it
was allowed to make war on the saints and to conquer them. It was
given authority over every tribe and people and language and nation,
8 and all the inhabitants of the earth will worship it, everyone whose
name has not been written from the foundation of the world in the
book of life of the Lamb that was slaughtered.
9 Let anyone who has an ear listen:
10 If you are to be taken captive,
into captivity you go;
if you kill with the sword,
with the sword you must be killed.
Here is a call for the endurance and faith of the saints.
11 Then I saw another beast that rose out of the earth; it had two horns
like a lamb and it spoke like a dragon. 12 It exercises all the authority of
the first beast on its behalf, and it makes the earth and its inhabitants
worship the first beast, whose mortal wound had been healed. 13 It
performs great signs, even making fire come down from heaven to
earth in the sight of all; 14 and by the signs that it is allowed to
perform on behalf of the beast, it deceives the inhabitants of earth,

560

REVELATION 561

telling them to make an image for the beast that had been wounded
by the sword and yet lived; 15 and it was allowed to give breath to the
image of the beast so that the image of the beast could even speak
and cause those who would not worship the image of the beast to be
killed. 16 Also it causes all, both small and great, both rich and poor,
both free and slave, to be marked on the right hand or the forehead,
17 so that no one can buy or sell who does not have the mark, that is,
the name of the beast or the number of its name. 18 This calls for
wisdom: let anyone with understanding calculate the number of the
beast, for it is the number of a person. Its number is six hundred sixtysix.
[Revelation 14]
A series of three visions
1 Then I looked, and there was the Lamb, standing on Mount Zion! And
with him were one hundred forty-four thousand who had his name
and his Father's name written on their foreheads. 2 And I heard a voice
from heaven like the sound of many waters and like the sound of loud
thunder; the voice I heard was like the sound of harpists playing on
their harps, 3 and they sing a new song before the throne and before
the four living creatures and before the elders. No one could learn that
song except the one hundred forty-four thousand who have been
redeemed from the earth. 4 It is these who have not defiled themselves
with women, for they are virgins; these follow the Lamb wherever he
goes. They have been redeemed from humankind as first fruits for God
and the Lamb, 5 and in their mouth no lie was found; they are
blameless.
6 Then I saw another angel flying in midheaven, with an eternal gospel
to proclaim to those who live on the earth — to every nation and tribe
and language and people. 7 He said in a loud voice, "Fear God and give
him glory, for the hour of his judgment has come; and worship him
who made heaven and earth, the sea and the springs of water."
8 Then another angel, a second, followed, saying, "Fallen, fallen is
Babylon the great! She has made all nations drink of the wine of the
wrath of her fornication."

561

REVELATION 562

9 Then another angel, a third, followed them, crying with a loud voice,
"Those who worship the beast and its image, and receive a mark on
their foreheads or on their hands, 10 they will also drink the wine of
God's wrath, poured unmixed into the cup of his anger, and they will
be tormented with fire and sulfur in the presence of the holy angels
and in the presence of the Lamb. 11 And the smoke of their torment
goes up forever and ever. There is no rest day or night for those who
worship the beast and its image and for anyone who receives the mark
of its name."
12 Here is a call for the endurance of the saints, those who keep the
commandments of God and hold fast to the faith of Jesus.
13 And I heard a voice from heaven saying, "Write this: Blessed are the
dead who from now on die in the Lord." "Yes," says the Spirit, "they
will rest from their labors, for their deeds follow them."
14 Then I looked, and there was a white cloud, and seated on the cloud
was one like the Son of Man, with a golden crown on his head, and a
sharp sickle in his hand! 15 Another angel came out of the temple,
calling with a loud voice to the one who sat on the cloud, "Use your
sickle and reap, for the hour to reap has come, because the harvest of
the earth is fully ripe." 16 So the one who sat on the cloud swung his
sickle over the earth, and the earth was reaped.
17 Then another angel came out of the temple in heaven, and he too
had a sharp sickle. 18 Then another angel came out from the altar, the
angel who has authority over fire, and he called with a loud voice to
him who had the sharp sickle, "Use your sharp sickle and gather the
clusters of the vine of the earth, for its grapes are ripe." 19 So the angel
swung his sickle over the earth and gathered the vintage of the earth,
and he threw it into the great wine press of the wrath of God. 20 And
the wine press was trodden outside the city, and blood flowed from
the wine press, as high as a horse's bridle, for a distance of about two
hundred miles.

562

REVELATION 563

[Revelation 15]
The seven bowls of the wrath of God; the preparation for judgment
1 Then I saw another portent in heaven, great and amazing: seven
angels with seven plagues, which are the last, for with them the wrath
of God is ended.
2 And I saw what appeared to be a sea of glass mixed with fire, and
those who had conquered the beast and its image and the number of
its name, standing beside the sea of glass with harps of God in their
hands. 3 And they sing the song of Moses, the servant of God, and the
song of the Lamb:
"Great and amazing are your deeds,
Lord God the Almighty!
Just and true are your ways,
King of the nations!
4 Lord, who will not fear
and glorify your name?
For you alone are holy.
All nations will come
and worship before you,
for your judgments have been revealed."
5 After this I looked, and the temple of the tent of witness in heaven
was opened, 6 and out of the temple came the seven angels with the
seven plagues, robed in pure bright linen, with golden sashes across
their chests. 7 Then one of the four living creatures gave the seven
angels seven golden bowls full of the wrath of God, who lives forever
and ever; 8 and the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of
God and from his power, and no one could enter the temple until the
seven plagues of the seven angels were ended.
[Revelation 16]
The pouring of the bowls
1 Then I heard a loud voice from the temple telling the seven angels,
"Go and pour out on the earth the seven bowls of the wrath of God."

563

REVELATION 564

2 So the first angel went and poured his bowl on the earth, and a foul
and painful sore came on those who had the mark of the beast and
who worshiped its image.
3 The second angel poured his bowl into the sea, and it became like
the blood of a corpse, and every living thing in the sea died.
4 The third angel poured his bowl into the rivers and the springs of
water, and they became blood. 5 And I heard the angel of the waters
say,
"You are just, O Holy One, who are and were,
for you have judged these things;
6 because they shed the blood of saints and prophets,
you have given them blood to drink.
It is what they deserve!"
7 And I heard the altar respond,
"Yes, O Lord God, the Almighty,
your judgments are true and just!"
8 The fourth angel poured his bowl on the sun, and it was allowed to
scorch people with fire; 9 they were scorched by the fierce heat, but
they cursed the name of God, who had authority over these plagues,
and they did not repent and give him glory.
10 The fifth angel poured his bowl on the throne of the beast, and its
kingdom was plunged into darkness; people gnawed their tongues in
agony, 11 and cursed the God of heaven because of their pains and
sores, and they did not repent of their deeds.
12 The sixth angel poured his bowl on the great river Euphrates, and its
water was dried up in order to prepare the way for the kings from the
east. 13 And I saw three foul spirits like frogs coming from the mouth
of the dragon, from the mouth of the beast, and from the mouth of
the false prophet. 14 These are demonic spirits, performing signs, who
go abroad to the kings of the whole world, to assemble them for
battle on the great day of God the Almighty. 15 ("See, I am coming like
a thief! Blessed is the one who stays awake and is clothed, not going

564

REVELATION 565

about naked and exposed to shame.") 16 And they assembled them at
the place that in Hebrew is called Harmagedon.
17 The seventh angel poured his bowl into the air, and a loud voice
came out of the temple, from the throne, saying, "It is done!" 18 And
there came flashes of lightning, rumblings, peals of thunder, and a
violent earthquake, such as had not occurred since people were upon
the earth, so violent was that earthquake. 19 The great city was split
into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell. God remembered
great Babylon and gave her the wine-cup of the fury of his wrath. 20
And every island fled away, and no mountains were to be found; 21
and huge hailstones, each weighing about a hundred pounds, dropped
from heaven on people, until they cursed God for the plague of the
hail, so fearful was that plague.
[Revelation 17]
The fall of Babylon, which is Rome; the vision of the woman
1 Then one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came and said
to me, "Come, I will show you the judgment of the great whore who is
seated on many waters, 2 with whom the kings of the earth have
committed fornication, and with the wine of whose fornication the
inhabitants of the earth have become drunk." 3 So he carried me away
in the spirit into a wilderness, and I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet
beast that was full of blasphemous names, and it had seven heads and
ten horns. 4 The woman was clothed in purple and scarlet, and
adorned with gold and jewels and pearls, holding in her hand a golden
cup full of abominations and the impurities of her fornication; 5 and
on her forehead was written a name, a mystery: "Babylon the great,
mother of whores and of earth's abominations." 6 And I saw that the
woman was drunk with the blood of the saints and the blood of the
witnesses to Jesus.
When I saw her, I was greatly amazed. 7 But the angel said to me,
"Why are you so amazed? I will tell you the mystery of the woman, and
of the beast with seven heads and ten horns that carries her. 8 The
beast that you saw was, and is not, and is about to ascend from the
bottomless pit and go to destruction. And the inhabitants of the earth,

565

REVELATION 566

whose names have not been written in the book of life from the
foundation of the world, will be amazed when they see the beast,
because it was and is not and is to come.
9 "This calls for a mind that has wisdom: the seven heads are seven
mountains on which the woman is seated; also, they are seven kings, 10
of whom five have fallen, one is living, and the other has not yet come;
and when he comes, he must remain only a little while. 11 As for the
beast that was and is not, it is an eighth but it belongs to the seven,
and it goes to destruction. 12 And the ten horns that you saw are ten
kings who have not yet received a kingdom, but they are to receive
authority as kings for one hour, together with the beast. 13 These are
united in yielding their power and authority to the beast; 14 they will
make war on the Lamb, and the Lamb will conquer them, for he is Lord
of lords and King of kings, and those with him are called and chosen
and faithful."
15 And he said to me, "The waters that you saw, where the whore is
seated, are peoples and multitudes and nations and languages. 16 And
the ten horns that you saw, they and the beast will hate the whore;
they will make her desolate and naked; they will devour her flesh and
burn her up with fire. 17 For God has put it into their hearts to carry
out his purpose by agreeing to give their kingdom to the beast, until
the words of God will be fulfilled. 18 The woman you saw is the great
city that rules over the kings of the earth."
[Revelation 18]
Dirge over the fallen city
1 After this I saw another angel coming down from heaven, having
great authority; and the earth was made bright with his splendor. 2 He
called out with a mighty voice,
"Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great!
It has become a dwelling place of demons,
a haunt of every foul spirit,
a haunt of every foul bird,
a haunt of every foul and hateful beast.

566

REVELATION 567

3 For all the nations have drunk
of the wine of the wrath of her fornication,
and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her,
and the merchants of the earth have grown rich from the power
of her luxury."
4 Then I heard another voice from heaven saying,
"Come out of her, my people,
so that you do not take part in her sins,
and so that you do not share in her plagues;
5 for her sins are heaped high as heaven,
and God has remembered her iniquities.
6 Render to her as she herself has rendered,
and repay her double for her deeds;
mix a double draught for her in the cup she mixed.
7 As she glorified herself and lived luxuriously,
so give her a like measure of torment and grief.
Since in her heart she says,
'I rule as a queen;
I am no widow,
and I will never see grief,'
8 therefore her plagues will come in a single day —
pestilence and mourning and famine —
and she will be burned with fire;
for mighty is the Lord God who judges her."
9 And the kings of the earth, who committed fornication and lived in
luxury with her, will weep and wail over her when they see the smoke
of her burning; 10 they will stand far off, in fear of her torment, and
say,
"Alas, alas, the great city,
Babylon, the mighty city!
For in one hour your judgment has come."
11 And the merchants of the earth weep and mourn for her, since no
one buys their cargo anymore, 12 cargo of gold, silver, jewels and
pearls, fine linen, purple, silk and scarlet, all kinds of scented wood, all
articles of ivory, all articles of costly wood, bronze, iron, and marble, 13
cinnamon, spice, incense, myrrh, frankincense, wine, olive oil, choice

567

REVELATION 568

flour and wheat, cattle and sheep, horses and chariots, slaves — and
human lives.
14 "The fruit for which your soul longed
has gone from you,
and all your dainties and your splendor
are lost to you,
never to be found again!"
15 The merchants of these wares, who gained wealth from her, will
stand far off, in fear of her torment, weeping and mourning aloud,
16 "Alas, alas, the great city,
clothed in fine linen,
in purple and scarlet,
adorned with gold,
with jewels, and with pearls!
17 For in one hour all this wealth has been laid waste!"
And all shipmasters and seafarers, sailors and all whose trade is on the
sea, stood far off 18 and cried out as they saw the smoke of her
burning,
"What city was like the great city?"
19 And they threw dust on their heads, as they wept and mourned,
crying out,
"Alas, alas, the great city,
where all who had ships at sea
grew rich by her wealth!
For in one hour she has been laid waste."
20 Rejoice over her, O heaven, you saints and apostles and prophets!
For God has given judgment for you against her.
21 Then a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone and
threw it into the sea, saying,
"With such violence Babylon the great city
will be thrown down,
and will be found no more;

568

REVELATION 569

22 and the sound of harpists and minstrels and of flutists and
trumpeters will be heard in you no more;
and an artisan of any trade
will be found in you no more;
and the sound of the millstone
will be heard in you no more;
23 and the light of a lamp
will shine in you no more;
and the voice of bridegroom and bride
will be heard in you no more;
for your merchants were the magnates of the earth,
and all nations were deceived by your sorcery.
24 And in you was found the blood of prophets and of saints,
and of all who have been slaughtered on earth."
[Revelation 19]
Doxology
1 After this I heard what seemed to be the loud voice of a great
multitude in heaven, saying,
"Hallelujah!
Salvation and glory and power to our God,
2
for his judgments are true and just;
he has judged the great whore
who corrupted the earth with her fornication,
and he has avenged on her the blood of his servants."
3 Once more they said,
"Hallelujah!
The smoke goes up from her forever and ever."
4 And the twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down
and worshiped God who is seated on the throne, saying,
"Amen. Hallelujah!"
5 And from the throne came a voice saying,
"Praise our God,
all you his servants,
and all who fear him,
small and great."

569

REVELATION 570

6 Then I heard what seemed to be the voice of a great multitude, like
the sound of many waters and like the sound of mighty thunderpeals,
crying out,
"Hallelujah!
For the Lord our God
the Almighty reigns.
7 Let us rejoice and exult
and give him the glory,
for the marriage of the Lamb has come,
and his bride has made herself ready;
8 to her it has been granted to be clothed
with fine linen, bright and pure" —
for the fine linen is the righteous deeds of the saints.
9 And the angel said to me, "Write this: Blessed are those who are
invited to the marriage supper of the Lamb." And he said to me,
"These are true words of God." 10 Then I fell down at his feet to
worship him, but he said to me, "You must not do that! I am a fellow
servant with you and your comrades who hold the testimony of Jesus.
Worship God! For the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy."
The victory of Christ and the heavenly armies
11 Then I saw heaven opened, and there was a white horse! Its rider is
called Faithful and True, and in righteousness he judges and makes
war. 12 His eyes are like a flame of fire, and on his head are many
diadems; and he has a name inscribed that no one knows but himself.
13 He is clothed in a robe dipped in blood, and his name is called The
Word of God. 14 And the armies of heaven, wearing fine linen, white
and pure, were following him on white horses. 15 From his mouth
comes a sharp sword with which to strike down the nations, and he
will rule them with a rod of iron; he will tread the wine press of the
fury of the wrath of God the Almighty. 16 On his robe and on his thigh
he has a name inscribed, "King of kings and Lord of lords."
17 Then I saw an angel standing in the sun, and with a loud voice he
called to all the birds that fly in midheaven, "Come, gather for the
great supper of God, 18 to eat the flesh of kings, the flesh of captains,

570

REVELATION 571

the flesh of the mighty, the flesh of horses and their riders — flesh of
all, both free and slave, both small and great." 19 Then I saw the beast
and the kings of the earth with their armies gathered to make war
against the rider on the horse and against his army. 20 And the beast
was captured, and with it the false prophet who had performed in its
presence the signs by which he deceived those who had received the
mark of the beast and those who worshiped its image. These two were
thrown alive into the lake of fire that burns with sulfur. 21 And the rest
were killed by the sword of the rider on the horse, the sword that
came from his mouth; and all the birds were gorged with their flesh.
[Revelation 20]
The defeat of Satan; the temporary imprisonment of Satan and the
reign of Christ and the martyrs
1 Then I saw an angel coming down from heaven, holding in his hand
the key to the bottomless pit and a great chain. 2 He seized the
dragon, that ancient serpent, who is the Devil and Satan, and bound
him for a thousand years, 3 and threw him into the pit, and locked and
sealed it over him, so that he would deceive the nations no more, until
the thousand years were ended. After that he must be let out for a
little while.
4 Then I saw thrones, and those seated on them were given authority
to judge. I also saw the souls of those who had been beheaded for
their testimony to Jesus and for the word of God. They had not
worshiped the beast or its image and had not received its mark on
their foreheads or their hands. They came to life and reigned with
Christ a thousand years. 5 (The rest of the dead did not come to life
until the thousand years were ended.) This is the first resurrection. 6
Blessed and holy are those who share in the first resurrection. Over
these the second death has no power, but they will be priests of God
and of Christ, and they will reign with him a thousand years.
The release of Satan and the final conflict
7 When the thousand years are ended, Satan will be released from his
prison 8 and will come out to deceive the nations at the four corners of

571

REVELATION 572

the earth, Gog and Magog, in order to gather them for battle; they are
as numerous as the sands of the sea. 9 They marched up over the
breadth of the earth and surrounded the camp of the saints and the
beloved city. And fire came down from heaven and consumed them. 10
And the devil who had deceived them was thrown into the lake of fire
and sulfur, where the beast and the false prophet were, and they will
be tormented day and night forever and ever.
The last judgment
11 Then I saw a great white throne and the one who sat on it; the earth
and the heaven fled from his presence, and no place was found for
them. 12 And I saw the dead, great and small, standing before the
throne, and books were opened. Also another book was opened, the
book of life. And the dead were judged according to their works, as
recorded in the books. 13 And the sea gave up the dead that were in it,
Death and Hades gave up the dead that were in them, and all were
judged according to what they had done. 14 Then Death and Hades
were thrown into the lake of fire. This is the second death, the lake of
fire; 15 and anyone whose name was not found written in the book of
life was thrown into the lake of fire.
[Revelation 21]
Vision of the new Jerusalem; the renewal of creation
1 Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and
the first earth had passed away, and the sea was no more. 2 And I saw
the holy city, the new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from
God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. 3 And I heard a
loud voice from the throne saying,
"See, the home of God is among mortals.
He will dwell with them;
they will be his peoples,
and God himself will be with them;
4
he will wipe every tear from their eyes.
Death will be no more;
mourning and crying and pain will be no more,
for the first things have passed away."

572

REVELATION 573

5 And the one who was seated on the throne said, "See, I am making
all things new." Also he said, "Write this, for these words are
trustworthy and true." 6 Then he said to me, "It is done! I am the
Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end. To the thirsty I will
give water as a gift from the spring of the water of life. 7 Those who
conquer will inherit these things, and I will be their God and they will
be my children. 8 But as for the cowardly, the faithless, the polluted,
the murderers, the fornicators, the sorcerers, the idolaters, and all liars,
their place will be in the lake that burns with fire and sulfur, which is
the second death."
The measuring of the city
9 Then one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls full of the
seven last plagues came and said to me, "Come, I will show you the
bride, the wife of the Lamb." 10 And in the spirit he carried me away
to a great, high mountain and showed me the holy city Jerusalem
coming down out of heaven from God. 11 It has the glory of God and a
radiance like a very rare jewel, like jasper, clear as crystal. 12 It has a
great, high wall with twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and
on the gates are inscribed the names of the twelve tribes of the
Israelites; 13 on the east three gates, on the north three gates, on the
south three gates, and on the west three gates. 14 And the wall of the
city has twelve foundations, and on them are the twelve names of the
twelve apostles of the Lamb.
15 The angel who talked to me had a measuring rod of gold to
measure the city and its gates and walls. 16 The city lies foursquare, its
length the same as its width; and he measured the city with his rod,
fifteen hundred miles; its length and width and height are equal. 17 He
also measured its wall, one hundred forty-four cubits by human
measurement, which the angel was using. 18 The wall is built of jasper,
while the city is pure gold, clear as glass. 19 The foundations of the wall
of the city are adorned with every jewel; the first was jasper, the
second sapphire, the third agate, the fourth emerald, 20 the fifth onyx,
the sixth carnelian, the seventh chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth
topaz, the tenth chrysoprase, the eleventh jacinth, the twelfth
amethyst. 21 And the twelve gates are twelve pearls, each of the gates

573

REVELATION 574

is a single pearl, and the street of the city is pure gold, transparent as
glass.
22 I saw no temple in the city, for its temple is the Lord God the
Almighty and the Lamb. 23 And the city has no need of sun or moon to
shine on it, for the glory of God is its light, and its lamp is the Lamb. 24
The nations will walk by its light, and the kings of the earth will bring
their glory into it. 25 Its gates will never be shut by day — and there
will be no night there. 26 People will bring into it the glory and the
honor of the nations. 27 But nothing unclean will enter it, nor anyone
who practices abomination or falsehood, but only those who are
written in the Lamb's book of life.
[Revelation 22]
The river and the tree of life
1 Then the angel showed me the river of the water of life, bright as
crystal, flowing from the throne of God and of the Lamb 2 through the
middle of the street of the city. On either side of the river is the tree of
life with its twelve kinds of fruit, producing its fruit each month; and
the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations. 3 Nothing
accursed will be found there any more. But the throne of God and of
the Lamb will be in it, and his servants will worship him; 4 they will see
his face, and his name will be on their foreheads. 5 And there will be
no more night; they need no light of lamp or sun, for the Lord God will
be their light, and they will reign forever and ever.
Epilogue
6 And he said to me, "These words are trustworthy and true, for the
Lord, the God of the spirits of the prophets, has sent his angel to show
his servants what must soon take place."
7 "See, I am coming soon! Blessed is the one who keeps the words of
the prophecy of this book."

574

REVELATION 575

8 I, John, am the one who heard and saw these things. And when I
heard and saw them, I fell down to worship at the feet of the angel
who showed them to me; 9 but he said to me, "You must not do that! I
am a fellow servant with you and your comrades the prophets, and
with those who keep the words of this book. Worship God!"
10 And he said to me, "Do not seal up the words of the prophecy of
this book, for the time is near. 11 Let the evildoer still do evil, and the
filthy still be filthy, and the righteous still do right, and the holy still be
holy."
12 "See, I am coming soon; my reward is with me, to repay according to
everyone's work. 13 I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the
last, the beginning and the end."
14 Blessed are those who wash their robes, so that they will have the
right to the tree of life and may enter the city by the gates. 15 Outside
are the dogs and sorcerers and fornicators and murderers and
idolaters, and everyone who loves and practices falsehood.
16 "It is I, Jesus, who sent my angel to you with this testimony for the
churches. I am the root and the descendant of David, the bright
morning star."
17 The Spirit and the bride say, "Come."
And let everyone who hears say, "Come."
And let everyone who is thirsty come.
Let anyone who wishes take the water of life as a gift.
18 I warn everyone who hears the words of the prophecy of this book:
if anyone adds to them, God will add to that person the plagues
described in this book; 19 if anyone takes away from the words of the
book of this prophecy, God will take away that person's share in the
tree of life and in the holy city, which are described in this book.

575

REVELATION 576

20 The one who testifies to these things says, "Surely I am coming
soon."
Amen. Come, Lord Jesus!
21 The grace of the Lord Jesus be with all the saints. Amen.

Copyright ©1989, Division of Christian Education of the National Council of the Churches of Christ in
the United States of America. Used by permission. All rights reserved.

576

